The Project Gutenberg eBook, The Hollow Land, by William Morris


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net





Title: The Hollow Land


Author: William Morris

Release Date: May 31, 2005  [eBook #15948]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HOLLOW LAND***


This eBook was prepared by Andy Robertson.




                           The Hollow Land

                            William Morris

   "We find in ancient story wonders many told,
   Of heroes in great glory, with spirit free and bold;
   Of joyances and high-tides, of weeping and of woe,
   Of noble reckon striving, mote ye now wonders know."
     - Niebelungen Lied (see Carlylefs Miscellanies)


STRUGGLING IN THE WORLD.

Do you know where it is -- the Hollow Land?

I have been looking for it now so long, trying to find it again the
Hollow Land for there I saw my love first.

I wish to tell you how I found it first of all; but I am old, my
memory fails me: you must wait and let me think if I perchance can
tell you how it happened. Yea, in my ears is a confused noise of
trumpet-blasts singing over desolate moors, in my ears and eyes a
clashing and clanging of horse-hoofs, a ringing and glittering of
steel; drawn-back lips, set teeth, shouts, shrieks, and curses.

How was it that no one of us ever found it till that day? for it is
near our country: but what time have we to look for it, or any good
thing; with such biting carking cares hemming us in on every
side-cares about great things-mighty things: mighty things, 0 my
brothers! or rather little things enough, if we only knew it. Lives
passed in turmoil, in making one another unhappy; in bitterest
misunderstanding of our brothers' hearts, making those sad whom God
has not made sad, alas, alas! What chance for any of us to find the
Hollow Land? What time even to look for it?

Yet who has not dreamed of it? Who, half miserable yet the while, for
that he knows it is but a dream, has not felt the cool waves round his
feet, the roses crowning him, and through the leaves of beech and lime
the many whispering winds of the Hollow Land?

Now, my name was Florian, and my house was the house of the Lilies;
and of that house was my father lord, and after him my eldest brother
Amald; and me they called Florian de Liliis.

Moreover, when my father was dead, there arose a feud between the
Lilies' house and Red Harald; and this that follows is the history of
it.

Lady Swanhilda, Red Harald's mother, was a widow, with one son. Red
Harald; and when she had been in widowhood two years, being of
princely blood, and besides comely and fierce. King Urrayne sent to
demand her in marriage. And I remember seeing the procession leaving
the town, when I was quite a child; and many young knights and squires
attended the Lady Swanhilda as pages, and amongst them, Amald, my
eldest brother.

And as I gazed out of the window, I saw him walking by the side of her
horse, dressed in white and gold very delicately; but as he went it
chanced that he stumbled. Now he was one of those that held a golden
canopy over the lady's head, so that it now sunk into wrinkles, and
the lady had to bow her head full low, and even then the gold brocade
caught in one of the long slim gold flowers that were wrought round
about the crown she wore. She flushed up in her rage, and her smooth
face went suddenly into the carven wrinkles of a wooden water-spout,
and she caught at the brocade with her left hand, and pulled it away
furiously, so that the warp and woof were twisted out of their place,
and many gold threads were left dangling about the crown; but
Swanhilda stared about when she rose, then smote my brother across the
mouth with her gilded sceptre, and the red blood flowed all about his
garments; yet he only turned exceeding pale, and dared say no word,
though he was heir to the house of the Lilies: but my small heart
swelled with rage, and I vowed revenge, and, as it seems, he did too.

So when Swanhilda had been queen three years, she suborned many of
King Urrayne's knights and lords, and slew her husband as he slept,
and reigned in his stead. And her son, Harald, grew up to manhood, and
was counted a strong knight, and well spoken of, by then I first put
on my armour.

Then, one night, as I lay dreaming, I felt a hand laid on my face, and
starting up saw Arnald before me fully armed. He said, "Florian, rise
and arm."

I did so, all but my helm, as he was.

He kissed me on the forehead; his lips felt hot and dry; and when they
bought torches, and I could see his face plainly, I saw he was very
pale. He said: "Do you remember, Florian, this day sixteen years ago?
It is a long time, but I shall never forget it unless this night blots
out its memory."

I knew what he meant, and because my heart was wicked, I rejoiced
exceedingly at the thought of vengeance, so that I could not speak,
but only laid my palm across his lips.

"Good; you have a good memory, Florian. See now, I waited long and
long: I said at first, I forgive her; but when the news came
concerning the death of the king, and how that she was shameless, I
said I will take it as a sign, if God does not punish her within
certain years, that he means me to do so; and I have been watching and
watching now these two years for an opportunity, and behold it is come
at last; and I think God has certainly given her into OUR hands, for
she rests this night, this very Christmas eve, at a small walled town
on the frontier, not two hours' gallop from this; they keep little
ward there, and the night is wild: moreover, the prior of a certain
house of monks, just without the walls, is my fast friend in this
matter, for she has done him some great injury. In the courtyard below
a hundred and fifty knights and squires, all faithful and true, are
waiting for us: one moment and we shall be gone."

Then we both knelt down, and prayed God to give her into our hands: we
put on our helms, and went down into the courtyard.

It was the first time I expected to use a sharp sword in anger, and I
was full of joy as the muffled thunder of our horse-hoofs rolled
through the bitter winter night.

In about an hour and a half we had crossed the frontier, and in half
an hour more the greater part bad halted in a wood near the Abbey,
while I and a few others went up to the Abbey gates, and knocked
loudly four times with my sword-hilt, stamping on the ground meantime.
A long, low whistle answered me from within, which I in my turn
answered: then the wicket opened, and a monk came out, holding a
lantern. He seemed yet in the prime of life, and was a tall, powerful
man. He held the lantern to my face, then smiled, and said, "The
banners hang low." I gave the countersign, "The crest is lopped off."
"Good my son," said he; "the ladders are within here. I dare not trust
any of the brethren to carry them for you, though they love not the
witch either, but are timorsome."

"No matter," I said, "I have men here." So they entered and began to
shoulder the tall ladders: the prior was very busy. "You will find
them just the right length, my son, trust me for that." He seemed
quite a jolly, pleasant man, I could not understand his nursing
furious revenge; but his face darkened strangely whenever he happened
to mention her name.

As we were starting he came and stood outside the gate, and putting
his lantern down that the light of it might not confuse his sight,
looked earnestly into the night, then said: "The wind has fallen, the
snow flakes get thinner and smaller every moment, in an hour it will
be freezing hard, and will be quite clear; everything depends'upon the
surprise being complete; stop a few minutes yet, my son." He went away
chuckling, and returned presently with two more sturdy monks carrying
something: they threw their burdens down before my feet, they
consisted of all the white albs in the abbey: "There, trust an old
man, who has seen more than one stricken fight in his carnal days; let
the men who scale the walls put these over their arms, and they will
not be seen in the least. God make your sword sharp, my son."

So we departed, and when I met Amald again, he said that what the
prior had done was well thought of; so we agreed that I should take
thirty men, an old squire of our house, well skilled in war, along
with them, scale the walls as quietly as possible, and open the gates
to the rest.

I set off accordingly, after that with low laughing we had put the
albs all over us, wrapping the ladders also in white. Then we crept
very warily and slowly up to the wall; the moat was frozen over, and
on the ice the snow lay quite thick; we all thought that the guards
must be careless enough, when they did not even take the trouble to
break the ice in the moat So we listened- there was no sound at all,
the Christmas midnight mass had long ago been over, it was nearly
three o'clock, and the moon began to clear, there was scarce any snow
falling now, only a flake or two from some low hurrying cloud or
other: the wind sighed gently about the round towers there, but it was
bitter cold, for it had begun to freeze again; we listened for some
minutes, about a quarter of an hour I think, then at a sign from me,
they raised the ladders carefully, muffled as they were at the top
with swathings of wool. I mounted first, old Squire Hugh followed
last; noiselessly we ascended, and soon stood altogether on the walls;
then we carefully lowered the ladders again with long ropes; we got
our swords and axes from out of the folds of our priests' raiments,
and set forward, till we reached the first tower along the wall; the
door was open, in the chamber at the top there was a fire slowly
smouldering, nothing else; we passed through it, and began to go down
the spiral staircase, I first, with my axe shortened in my hand.-"What
if we were surprised there," I thought, and I longed to be out in the
air again;-"What if the door were fast at the bottom."

As we passed the second chamber, we heard some one within snoring
loudly: I looked in quietly, and saw a big man with long black hair,
that fell off his pillow and swept the ground, lying snoring, with his
nose turned up and his mouth open, but he seemed so sound asleep that
we did not stop to slay him. Praise be! The door was open, without even
a whispered word, without a pause, we went on along the streets, on
the side that the drift had been on, because our garments were white,
for the wind being very strong all that day, the houses on that side
had caught in their cornices and carvings, and on the rough stone and
wood of them, so much snow, that except here and there where the black
walls grinned out, they were quite white; no man saw us as we stole
along, noiselessly because of the snow, till we stood within 100 yards
of the gates and their house of guard. And we stood because we heard
the voice of some one singing:

  "Queen Mary's crown was gold,
  King Joseph's crown was red,
  But Jesus' crown was diamond
  That lit up all the bed
  Mariae Virginis"

So they had some guards after all; this was clearly the sentinel that
sang to keep the ghosts off;-Now for a fight.-We drew nearer, a few
yards nearer, then stopped to free ourselves from our monks' clothes.

  "Ships sail through the Heaven
  With red banners dress'd,
  Carrying the planets seven
  To see the white breast
  Mariae Virginis"

Thereat he must have seen the waving of some alb or other as it
shivered down to the ground, for his spear fell with a thud, and he
seemed to be standing open-mouthed, thinking something about ghosts;
then, plucking up heart of grace, he roared out like ten bull-calves,
and dashed into the guard-house.

We followed smartly, but without hurry, and came up to the door of it
just as some dozen half-armed men came tumbling out under our axes:
thereupon, while our men slew them, I blew a great blast upon my horn,
and Hugh with some others drew bolt and bar and swung the gates wide
open.

Then the men in the guard-house understood they were taken in a trap,
and began to stir with great confusion; so lest they should get quite
waked and armed, I left Hugh at the gates with ten men, and myself led
the rest into that house. There while we slew all those that yielded
not, came Arnald with the others, bringing our horses with them; then
all the enemy threw their arms down. And we counted our prisoners and
found them over fourscore; therefore, not knowing what to do with them
(for they were too many to guard, and it seemed unknightly to slay
them all), we sent up some bowmen to the walls, and turning our
prisoners out of gates, bid them run for their lives, which they did
fast enough, not knowing our numbers, and our men sent a few flights
of arrows among them that they might not be undeceived.

Then the one or two prisoners that we had left, told us, when we had
crossed our axes over their heads, that the people of the good town
would not willingly fight us, in that they hated the queen; that she
was guarded at the palace by some fifty knights, and that beside,
there were no others to oppose us in the town; so we set out for the
palace, spear in hand.

We had not gone far, before we heard some knights coming, and soon, in
a turn of the long street, we saw them riding towards us; when they
caught sight of us they seemed astonished, drew rein, and stood in
some confusion.

We did not slacken our pace for an instant, but rode right at them
with a yell, to which I lent myself with all my heart.

After all they did not run away, but waited for us with their spears
held out; I missed the man I had marked, or hit him rather just on the
top of the helm; he bent back, and the spear slipped over his head,
but my horse still kept on, and I felt presently such a crash that I
reeled in my saddle, and felt mad. He had lashed out at me with his
sword as I came on, hitting me in the ribs (for my arm was raised),
but only flatlings.

I was quite wild with rage, I turned, almost fell upon him, caught him
by the neck with both hands, and threw him under the horse-hoofs,
sighing with fury: I heard Arnald's voice close to me, "Well fought,
Florian": and I saw his great stern face bare among the iron, for he
had made a vow in remembrance of that blow always to fight unhelmed; I
saw his great sword swinging, in wide gyres, and hissing as it started
up, just as if it were alive and liked it.

So joy filled all my soul, and I fought with my heart, till the big
axe I swung felt like nothing but a little hammer in my hand, except
for its bitterness: and as for the enemy, they went down like grass,
so that we destroyed them utterly, for those knights would neither
yield nor fly, but died as they stood, so that some fifteen of our men
also died there.

Then at last we came to the palace, where some grooms and such like
kept the gates armed, but some ran, and some we took prisoners, one of
whom died for sheer terror in our hands, being stricken by no wound;
for he thought we would eat him.

These prisoners we questioned concerning the queen, and so entered the
great hall. There Arnald sat down in the throne on the dais, and laid
his naked sword before him on the table: and on each side of him sat
such knights as there was room for, and the others stood round about,
while I took ten men, and went to look for Swanhilda.

I found her soon, sitting by herself in a gorgeous chamber. I almost
pitied her when I saw her looking so utterly desolate and despairing;
her beauty too had faded, deep lines cut through her face. But when I
entered she knew who I was, and her look of intense hatred was so
fiend-like, that it changed my pity into horror of her.

"Knight", she said "who are you, and what do you want, thus
discourteously entering my chamber?"

"I am Florian de Liliis, and I am to conduct you to judgment."

She sprang up, "Curse you and your whole house, you I hate worse than
any -- girl's face -- guards! guards!" and she stamped on the ground,
her veins on the forehead swelled, her eyes grew round and flamed out,
as she kept crying for her guards, stamping the while, for she seemed
quite mad.

Then at last she remembered that she was in the power of her enemies,
she sat down, and lay with her face between her hands, and wept
passionately.

"Witch," I said between my closed teeth, "will you come, or must we
carry you down to the great hall?"

Neither would she come, but sat there, clutching at her dress and
tearing her hair.

Then I said, "Bind her, and carry her down." And they did so.

I watched Arnald as we came in, there was no triumph on his stern
white face, but resolution enough, he had made up his mind.

They placed her on a seat in the midst of the hall over against the
dais. He said, "Unbind her, Florian." They did so, she raised her
face, and glared defiance at us all, as though she would die queenly
after all.

Then rose up Arnald and said, "Queen Swanhilda, we judge you guilty of
death, and because you are a queen and of a noble house, you shall be
slain by my knightly sword, and I will even take the reproach of
slaying a woman, for no other hand than mine shall deal the blow."

Then she said, "0 false knight, show your warrant from God, man, or
devil."

"This warrant from God, Swanhilda," he said, holding up his sword,
"listen!  Fifteen years ago, when I was just winning my spurs, you
struck me, disgracing me before all the people; you cursed me, and
mean that curse well enough. Men of the house of the Lilies, what
sentence for that?"

"Death!" they said.

"Listen!  Afterwards you slew my cousin, your husband, treacherously, in
the most cursed way, stabbing him in the throat, as the stars in the
canopy above him looked down on the shut eyes of him. Men of the house
of Lily, what sentence for that?"

"Death!" they said.

"Do you hear them. Queen? There is warrant from man; for the devil, I
do not reverence him enough to take warrant from him, but, as I look
at that face of yours, I think that even he has left you."

And indeed just then all her pride seemed to leave her, she fell from
the chair, and wallowed on the ground moaning, she wept like a child,
so that the tears lay on the oak floor; she prayed for another month
of life; she came to me and kneeled, and kissed my feet, and prayed
piteously, so that water ran out of her mouth.

But I shuddered, and drew away; it was like hav ing an adder about
one; I cou'd have pitied her had she died bravely, but for one like
her to whine and whine!  Pah!

Then from the dais rang Amald's voice terrible, much changed. "Let
there be an end of all this." And he took his sword and strode through
the hall towards her; she rose from the ground and stood up, stooping
a little, her head sunk between her shoulders, her black eyes turned
up and gloaming, like a tigress about to spring. When he came within
some six paces of her something in his eye daunted her, or perhaps the
flashing of his terrible sword in the torch-light; she threw her arms
up with a great shriek, and dashed screaming about the hall. Amald's
lip never once curled with any scorn, no line in his face changed: he
said, "Bring her here and bind her."

But when one came up to her to lay hold on her she first of all ran at
him, hitting with her head in the belly. Then while he stood doubled
up for want of breath, and staring with his head up, she caught his
sword from the girdle, and cut him across the shoulders, and many
others she wounded sorely before they took her. Then Arnald stood by
the chair to which she was bound, and poised his sword, and there was
a great silence.

Then he said, "Men of the House of the Lilies, do you justify me in
this, shall she die?" Straightway rang a great shout through the hall,
but before it died away the sword had swept round, and therewithal was
there no such thing as Swanhilda left upon the earth, for in no
battle-field had Arnald struck truer blow.

Then he turned to the few servants of the palace and said, "Go now,
bury this accursed woman, for she is a king's daughter." Then to us
all, "Now knights, to horse and away, that we may reach the good town
by about dawn." So we mounted and rode off.

What a strange Christmas-day that was, for there, about nine o'clock
in the morning, rode Red Harald into the good town to demand
vengeance; he went at once to the king, and the king promised that
before nightfall that very day the matter should be judged; albeit the
king feared somewhat, because every third man you met in the streets
had a blue cross on his shoulder, and some likeness of a lily, cut out
or painted, stuck in his hat; and this blue cross and lily were the
bearings of our house, called "De Liliis." Now we had seen Red Harald
pass through the streets, with a white banner borne before him, to
show that he came peaceably as for this time; but I know he was
thinking of other things than peace.

And he was called Red Harald first at this time, because over all his
arms he wore a great scarlet cloth, that fell in heavy folds about his
horse and all about him. Then, as he passed our house, some one
pointed it out to him, rising there with its carving and its barred
marble, but stronger than many a castle on the hill-tops, and its
great overhanging battlement cast a mighty shadow down the wall and
across the street; and above all rose the great tower, or banner
floating proudly from the top, whereon was emblazoned on a white
ground a blue cross, and on a blue ground four white lilies. And now
faces were gazing from all the windows, and all the battlements were
thronged; so Harald turned, and rising in his stirrups, shook his
clenched fist at our house; natheless, as he did so, the east wind,
coming down the street, caught up the corner of that scarlet cloth and
drove it over his face, and therewithal disordering his long black
hair, well nigh choked him, so that he bit both his hair and that
cloth.

So from base to cope rose a mighty shout of triumph and defiance, and
he passed on.

Then Arnald caused it to be cried, that all those who loved the good
House of the Lilies should go to mass that morning in Saint Mary's
Church, hard by our house. Now this church belonged to us, and the
abbey that served it, and always we appointed the abbot of it on
condition that our trumpets should sound all together when on high
masses they sing the "Gloria in Excelsis." It was the largest and most
beautiful of all the churches in the town, and had two exceeding high
towers, which you could see from far off, even when you saw not the
town or any of its other towers: and in one of these towers were
twelve great bells, named after the twelve Apostles, one name being
written on each one of them; as Peter, Matthew, and so on; and in the
other tower was one great bell only, much larger than any of the
others, and which was called Mary. Now this bell was never rung but
when our house was in great danger, and it had this legend on it,
"When Mary rings the earth shakes;" and indeed from this we took our
war cry, which was, "Mary rings;" somewhat justifiable indeed, for the
last time that Mary rang, on that day before nightfall there were four
thousand bodies to be buried, which bodies wore neither cross nor
lily.

So Arnald gave me in charge to tell the abbot to cause Mary to be
tolled for an hour before mass that day.

The abbot leaned on my shoulder as I stood within the tower and looked
at the twelve monks laying their hands to the ropes. Far up in the
dimness I saw the wheel before it began to swing round about; then it
moved a little; the twelve men bent down to the earth and a roar rose
that shook the tower from base to spirevane: backwards and forwards
swept the wheel, as Mary now looked downwards towards earth, now
looked up at the shadowy cone of the spire, shot across by bars of
light from the dormers.

And the thunder of Mary was caught up by the wind and carried through
all the country; and when the good man heard it, he said goodbye to
wife and child, slung his shield behind his back, and set forward with
his spear sloped over his shoulder, and many a time, as he walked
toward the good town, he tightened the belt that went about his waist,
that he might stride the faster, so long and furiously did Mary toll.

And before the great bell, Mary, had ceased ringing, all the ways were
full of armed men.

But at each door of the church of Saint Mary stood a row of men armed
with axes, and when any came, meaning to go into the church, the two
first of these would hold their axes (whose helves were about four
feet long) over his head, and would ask him, "Who went over the moon
last night?" then if he answered nothing or at random they would bid
him turn back, which he for the more part would be ready enough to do;
but some, striving to get through that row of men, were slain
outright; but if he were one of those that were friends to the House
of the Lilies he would answer to that question, "Mary and John."

By the time the mass began the whole church was full, and in the nave
and transept thereof were three thousand men, all of our house and all
armed. But Arnald and myself, and Squire Hugh, and some others sat
under a gold-fringed canopy near the choir; and the abbot said mass,
having his mitre on his head. Yet, as I watched him, it seemed to me
that he must have something on beneath his priest's vestments, for he
looked much fatter than usual, being really a tall lithe man.

Now, as they sung the "Kyrie," some one shouted from the other end of
the church, "My lord Arnld, they are slaying our people without;" for,
indeed, all the square about the church was full of our people, who
for the press had not been able to enter, and were standing there in
no small dread of what might come to pass.

Then the abbot turned round from the altar, and began to fidget with
the fastenings of his rich robes. And they made a lane for us up to
the west door; then I put on my helm and we began to go up the nave,
then suddenly the singing of the monks and all stopped. I heard a
clinking and a buzz of voices in the choir. I turned, and saw that the
bright noon sun was shining on the gold of the priest's vestments, as
they lay on the floor, and on the mail that the priests carried.

So we stopped, the choir gates swung open, and the abbot marched out
at the head of his men, all fully armed, and began to strike up the
psalm "Exsurgat Deus."

When we got to the west door, there was indeed a tumult, but as yet no
slaying; the square was all a-flicker with steel, and we beheld a
great body of knights, at the head of them Red Harald and the king,
standing over against us; but our people, pressed against the houses,
and into the comers of the square, were, some striving to enter the
doors, some beside themselves with rage, shouting out to the others to
charge; withal, some were pale and some were red with the blood that
had gathered to the wrathful faces of them.

Then said Arnald to those about him, "Lift me up." So they laid a
great shield on two lances, and these four men carried, and thereon
stood Arnald, and gazed about him.

Now the king was unhelmed, and his white hair (for he was an old man)
flowed down behind him on to his saddle; but Amaid's hair was cut
short, and was red.

And all the bells rang.

Then the king said, "0 Arnald of the Lilies, will you settle this
quarrel by the judgment of God?" And Amaid thrust up his chin, and
said, "Yea." "How then," said the king, "and where?" "Will it please
you try now?" said Arnald.

Then the king understood what he meant, and took in his hand from
behind tresses of his long white hair, twisting them round his hand in
his wrath, but yet said no word, till I suppose his hair put him in
mind of something, and he raised it in both his hands above his head,
and shouted out aloud, "0 knights, hearken to this traitor." Whereat,
indeed, the lances began to move ominously. But Arnald spoke.

"0 you king and lords, what have we to do with you? Were we not free
in the old time, up among the hills there? Wherefore give way, and we
will go to the hills again; and if any man try to stop us, his blood
be on his own head; wherefore now," (and he turned) "all you House of
the Lily, both soldiers and monks, let us go forth together fearing
nothing, for I think there is not bone enough or muscle enough in
these fellows here that have a king that they should stop us withal,
but only skin and fat."

And truly, no man dared to stop us, and we went.


FAILING IN THE WORLD

Now at that time we drove cattle in Red Harald's land. And we took no
hoof but from the Lords and rich men, but of these we had a mighty
drove, both oxen and sheep, and horses, and besides, even hawks and
hounds, and huntsman or two to take care of them.

And, about noon, we drew away from the cornlands that lay beyond the
pastures, and mingled with them, and reached a wide moor, which was
called "Goliath's Land." I scarce know why, except that it belonged
neither to Red Harald or us, but was debatable.

And the cattle began to go slowly, and our horses were tired, and the
sun struck down very hot upon us, for there was no shadow, and the day
was cloudless.

All about the edge of the moor, except on the sidefrom which we had
come was a rim of hills, not very high, but very rocky and steep,
otherwise the moor itself was flat; and through these hills was one
pass, guarded by our men, which pass led to the Hill castle of the
Lilies.

It was not wonderful, that of this moor many wild stories were told,
being such a strange lonely place, some of them one knew, alas to be
over true. In the old time, before we went to the good town, this moor
had been the mustering place of our people, and our house had done
deeds enough of blood and horror to turn our white lilies red, and our
blue cross to a fiery one. But some of those wild tales I never
believed; they had to do mostly with men losing their way without any
apparent cause, (for there were plenty of landmarks,) finding some
well-known spot, and then, just beyond it, a place they had never even
dreamed of.

"Florian! FIorian!" said Arnald, "for God's sake stop! as every one
else is stopping to look at the hills yonder; I always thought there
was a curse upon us. What does God mean by shutting us up here? Look
at the cattle; 0 Christ, they have found it out too! See, some of them
are turning to run back again towards Harald's land. Oh! unhappy,
unhappy, from that day forward!"

He leaned forward, rested his head on his horse's neck, and wept like
a child. I felt so irritated with him, that I could almost have slain
him then and there. Was he mad? had these wild doings of ours turned
his strong wise head?

"Are you my brother Arnald, that I used to think such a grand man when
I was a boy?" I said, "or are you changed too, like everybody, and
everything else? What do you mean?"

"Look! look!" he said, grinding his teeth in agony. I raised my eyes:
where was the one pass between the rim of stern rocks? Nothing: the
enemy behind us- that grim wall in front: what wonder that each man
looked in his fellow's face for help, and found it not. Yet I refused
to believe that there was any troth either in the wild stories that I
had heard when I was a boy, or in this story told me so clearly by my
eyes now.

I called out cheerily, "Hugh, come here!" He came. "What do you think
of this? Some mere dodge on Harald's part? Are we cut off?" "Think!
Sir Florian? God forgive me for ever thinking at all; I have given up
that long and long ago, because thirty years ago I thought this, that
the House of Lilies would deserve anything in the way of bad fortune
that God would send them: so I gave up thinking, and took to fighting.
But if you think that Harald had anything to do with this, why-why-in
God's name, I wish I could think so!"

I felt a dull weight on my heart. Had our house been the devil's
servants all along? I thought we were God's servants.

The day was very still, but what little wind there was, was at our
backs. I watched Hugh's face, not being able to answer him. He was the
cleverest man at war that I have known, either before or since that
day; sharper than any hound in ear and scent, clearer sighted than any
eagle; he was listening now intently. I saw a slight smile cross his
face; heard him mutter, "Yes! I think so: verily that is better, a
great deal better." Then he stood up in his stirrups, and shouted,
"Hurrah for the Lilies! Mary rings!" "Mary rings!" I shouted, though I
did not know the reason for his exultation: my brother lifted his
head, and smiled too, grimly. Then as I listened I heard clearly the
sound of a trumpet, and enemy's trumpet too.

"After all, it was only mist, or some such thing," I said, for the
pass between the hills was clear enough now.

"Hurrah! only mist," said Amald, quite elated; "Mary rings!" and we
all began to think of fighting: for after all what joy is equal to
that?

There were five hundred of us; two hundred spears, the rest archers;
and both archers and men at arms were picked men.

"How many of them are we to expect?" said I. "Not under a thousand,
certainly, probably more, Sir Florian." (My brother Arnald, by the
way, had knighted me before we left the good town, and Hugh liked to
give me the handle to my name. How was it, by the way, that no one had
ever made him a knight?)

"Let every one look to his arms and horse, and come away from these
silly cows' sons!" shouted Arnald.

Hugh said, "They will be here in an hour, fair Sir."

So we got clear of the cattle, and dismounted, and both ourselves took
food and drink, and our horses; afterwards we tightened our
saddle-girths, shook our great pots of helmets on, except Amald, whose
rustyred hair had been his only head-piece in battle for years and
years, and stood with our spears close by our horses, leaving room for
the archers to retreat between our ranks; and they got their arrows
ready, and planted their stakes before a little peat moss: and there
we waited, and saw their pennons at last floating high above the corn
of the fertile land, then heard their many horse-hoofs ring upon the
hard-parched moor, and the archers began to shoot.

It had been a strange battle; we had never fought better, and yet
withal it had ended in a retreat; indeed all along every man but
Arnald and myself, even Hugh, had been trying at least to get the
enemy between him and the way toward the pass; and now we were all
drifting that way, the enemy trying to cut us off, but never able to
stop us, because he could only throw small bodies of men in our way,
whom we scattered and put to flight in their turn.

I never cared less for my life than then; indeed, in spite of all my
boasting and hardness of belief, I should have been happy to have
died, such a strange weight of apprehension was on me; and yet I got
no scratch even. I had soon put off my great helm, and was fighting in
my mail-coif only: and here I swear that three knights together
charged me, aiming at my bare face, yet never touched me. For, as for
one, I put his lance aside with my sword, and the other two in some
most wonderful manner got their spears locked in each other's armour,
and so had to submit to be knocked off their horses.

And we still neared the pass, and began to see distinctly the ferns
that grew on the rocks, and the fair country between the rift in them,
spreading out there, blue-shadowed. Whereupon came a great rush of men
of both sides, striking side blows at each other, spitting, cursing,
and shrieking, as they tore away like a herd of wild hogs. So, being
careless of lfe, as I said, I drew rein, and turning my horse, waited
quietly for them. And I knotted the reins, and laid them on the
horse's neck, and stroked him, that he whinnied, then got both my
hands to my sword.

Then, as they came on, I noted hurriedly that the first man was one of
Arnald's men, and one of our men behind him leaned forward to prod him
with his spear, but could not reach so far, till he himself was run
through the eye with a spear, and throwing his arms up fell dead with
a shriek. Also I noted concerning this first man that the laces of his
helmet were loose, and when he saw me he lifted his left hand to his
head, took off his helm and cast it at me, and still tore on; the
helmet flew over my head, and I sitting still there, swung out,
hitting him on the neck; his head flew right off, for the mail no more
held than a piece of silk. "Mary rings," and my horse whinnied again,
and we both of us went at it, and fairly stopped that rout, so that
there was a knot of quite close and desperate fighting, wherein we had
the best of that fight and slew most of them, albeit my horse was
slain and my mail-coif cut through. Then I bade a squire fetch me
another horse, and began meanwhile to upbraid those knights for
running in such a strange disorderly race, instead of standing and
fighting cleverly. Moreover we had drifted even in this successful
fight still nearer to the pass, so that the conies who dwelt there
were beginning to consider whether they should not run into their
holes.

But one of those knights said: "Be not angry with me. Sir Florian, but
do you think you will go to Heaven?"

"The saints! I hope so," I said, but one who stood near him whispered
to him to hold his peace, so I cried out: "0 friend! I hold this world
and all therein so cheap now, that I see not anything in it but shame
which can any longer anger me; wherefore speak: out."

"Then, Sir Florian, men say that at your christening some fiend took
on him the likeness of a priest and strove to baptize you in the
Devil's name, but God had mercy on you so that the fiend could not
choose but baptize you in the name of the most holy Trinity: and yet
men say that you hardly believe any doctrine such as other men do, and
will at the end only go to Heaven round about as it were, not at all
by the intercession of our Lady; they say too that you can see no
ghosts or other wonders, whatever happens to other Christian men."

I smiled.  "Well, friend, I scarcely call this a disadvantage,
moreover what has it to do with the matter in hand?"

How was this in Heaven's name? We had been quite still, resting while
this talk was going on, but we could hear the hawks chattering from
the rocks, we were so close now.

And my heart sunk within me, there was no reason why this should not
be true; there was no reason why anything should not be true.

"This, Sir Florian," said the knight again, "how would you feel
inclined to fight if you thought that everything about you was mere
glamour; this earth here, the rocks, the sun, the sky? I do not know
where I am for certain, I do not know that it is not midnight instead
of undem: I do not know if I have been fighting men or only simulacra
but I think, we all think, that we have been led into some devil's
trap or other, and- and may God forgive me my sins! I wish I had never
been born."

There now! he was weeping - they all wept - how strange it was to see
those rough, bearded men blubbering there, and snivelling till the
tears ran over their armour and mingled with the blood, so that it
dropped down to the earth in a dim, dull, red rain.

My eyes indeed were dry, but then so was my heart; I felt far worse
than weeping came to, but nevertheless I spoke cheerily.

"Dear friends, where are your old men's hearts gone to now? See now!
This is a punishment for our sins, is it? Well, for our forefathers'
sins or our own? If the first, 0 brothers, be very sure that if we
bear it manfully God will have something very good in store for us
hereafter; but if for our sins, is it not certain that He cares for us
yet, for note that He suffers the wicked to go their own ways pretty
much; moreover brave men, brothers, ought to be the masters of
simulacra come, is it so hard to die once for all?"

Still no answer came from them, they sighed heavily only. I heard the
sound of more than one or two swords as they rattled back to the
scabbards: nay, one knight, stripping himself of surcoat and hauberk,
and drawing his dagger, looked at me with a grim smile, and said, "Sir
Florian, do so!" Then he drew the dagger across his throat and he fell
back dead.

They shuddered, those brave men, and crossed themselves. And I had no
heart to say a word more, but mounted the horse which had been brought
to me and rode away slowly for a few yards; then I became aware that
there was a great silence over the whole field.

So I lifted my eyes and looked, and behold no man struck at another.

Then from out of a band of horsemen came Harald, and he was covered
all over with a great scarlet cloth as before, put on over the head,
and flowing all about his horse, but rent with the fight. He put off
his helm and drew back his mail-coif, then took a trumpet from the
hand of a herald and blew strongly.

And in the midst of his blast I heard a voice call out: "0 Florian!
come and speak to me for the last time!"

So when I turned I beheld Arnald standing by himself, but near him
stood Hugh and ten others with drawn swords.

Then I wept, and so went to him weeping; and he said, "Thou seest,
brother, that we must die, and I think by some horrible and unheard-of
death, and the House of the Lilies is just dying too; and now I repent
me of Swanhilda's death; now I know that it was a poor cowardly piece
of revenge, instead of a brave act of justice; thus has God shown us
the right.

"0 Florian! curse me! So will it be straighter; truly thy mother when
she bore thee did not think of this; rather saw thee in the tourney at
this time, in her fond hopes, glittering with gold and doing knightly;
or else mingling thy brown locks with the golden hair of some maiden
weeping for the love of thee. God forgive me! God forgive me!"

"What harm, brother?" I said, "this is only failing in the world; what
if we had not failed, in a little while it would have made no
difference; truly just now I felt very miserable, but now it has
passed away, and I am happy."

"0 brave heart!" he said, "yet we shall part just now, Florian,
farewell."

"The road is long," I said, "farewell."

Then we kissed each other, and Hugh and the others wept.

Now all this time the trumpets had been ringing, ringing, great
doleful peals, then they ceased, and above all sounded Red Harald's
voice.

(So I looked round towards that pass, and when I looked I no longer
doubted any of those wild tales of glamour concerning Goliath's Land;
and for though the rocks were the same, and though the conies still
stood gazing at the doors of their dwellings, though the hawks still
cried out shrilly, though the fern still shook in the wind, yet
beyond, oh such a land! not to be described by any because of its
great beauty, lying, a great hollow land, the rocks going down on this
side in precipices, then reaches and reaches of loveliest country,
trees and flowers, and corn, then the hills, green and blue, and
purple, till their ledges reached the white snowy mountains at last.
Then with all manner of strange feelings, "my heart in the midst of my
body was even like melting wax.")

"0 you House of the Lily! you are conquered yet I will take vengeance
only on a few, therefore let all those who wish to live come and pile
their swords, and shields, and helms behind me in three great heaps,
and swear fealty afterwards to me; yes, all but the false knights
Arnald and Florian."

We were holding each other's hands and gazing, and we saw all our
knights, yea, all but Squire Hugh and his ten heroes, pass over the
field singly, or in groups of three or four, with their heads hanging
down in shame, and they cast down their notched swords and dinted,
lilied shields, and brave-crested helms into three great heaps, behind
Red Herald, then stood behind, no man speaking to his fellow, or
touching him.

Then dolefully the great trumpets sang over the dying House of the
Lily, and Red Harald led his men forward, but slowly: on they came,
spear and mail glittering in the sunlight; and I turned and looked at
that good land, and a shuddering delight seized my soul.

But I felt my brother's hand leave mine, and saw him turn his horse's
head and ride swiftly toward the pass; that was a strange pass now.

And at the edge he stopped, turned round and called out aloud, "I pray
thee, Harald, forgive mel now farewell all!"

Then the horse gave one bound forward, and we heard the poor
creature's scream when he felt that he must die, and we heard
afterwards (for we were near enough for that even) a clang and a
crash.

So I turned me about to Hugh, and he understood me though I could not
speak.

We shouted all together, "Mary rings," then laid our bridles on the
necks of our horses, spurred forward, and in five minutes they were
all slain, and I was down among the horse-hoofs.

Not slain though, not wounded. Red Harald smiled grimly when he saw me
rise and lash out again; he and some ten others dismounted, and
holding their long spears out, I went back -- back, back, I saw what
it meant, and sheathed my sword, and their laughter rolled all about
me, and I too smiled.

Presently they all stopped, and I felt the last foot of turf giving
under my feet; I looked down and saw the crack there widening; then in
a moment I fell, and a cloud of dust and earth rolled after me; then
again their mirth rose into thunder-peals of laughter. But through it
all I heard Red Harald shout, "Silence! Evil dogs!"

For as I fell I stretched out my arms, and caughl a tuft of yellow
broom some three feet from the brow, and hung there by the hands, my
feet being loose in the air.

Then Red Harald came and stood on the precipice above me, his great
axe over his shoulder; and he looked down on me not ferociously,
almost kindly, while the wind from the Hollow Land blew about his red
raiment, tattered and dusty now.

And I felt happy, though it pained me to hold straining by the broom,
yet I said, "I will hold out to the last"

It was not long, the plant itself gave way and I fell, and as I fell I
fainted.

I had thought when I fell that I should never wake again; but I woke
at last: for a long time I was quite dizzied and could see nothing at
all: horrible doubts came creeping over me; I half expected to see
presently great half-formed shapes come rolling up to me to crush me;
some thing fiery, not strange, too utterly horrible to be strange, but
utterly vile and ugly, the sight of which would have killed me when I
was upon the earth, come rolling up to torment me. In fact I doubted
if I were in hell.

I knew I deserved to be, but I prayed, and then it came into my mind
that I could not pray if I were in hell.

Also there seemed to be a cool green light all about me, which was
sweet. Then presently I heard a glorious voice ring outclear, close to
me

  "Christ keep the Hollow Land
  Through the sweet spring-tide,
  When the apple-blossoms bless
  The lowly bent hill side."

Thereat my eyes were slowly unsealed, and I saw the blessedest sight I
have ever seen before or since: for I saw my Love.

She sat about five yards from me on a great grey stone that had much
moss on it, one of the many scattered along the side of the stream by
which I lay; she was clad in loose white raiment close to her hands
and throat; her feet were bare, her hair hung loose a long way down,
but some of it lay on her knees: I said "white" raiment, but long
spikes of light scarlet went down from the throat, lost here and there
in the shadows of the folds, and growing smaller and smaller, died
before they reached her feet.

I was lying with my head resting on soft moss that some one had
gathered and placed under me. She, when she saw me moving and awake,
came and stood over me with a gracious smile.  She was so lovely and
tender to look at, and so kind, yet withal no one, man or woman, had
ever frightened me half so much.

She was not fair in white and red, like many beautiful women are,
being rather pale, but like ivory for smoothness, and her hair was
quite golden, not light yellow, but dusky golden.

I tried to get up on my feet, but was too weak, and sank back again.
She said: "No, not just yet, do not trouble yourself or try to
remember anything just at present."

There withal she kneeled down, and hung over me closer.

"To-morrow you may, perhaps, have something hard to do or bear, I
know, but now you must be as happy as you can be, quietly happy. Why
did you start and turn pale when I came to you? Do you not know who I
am? Nay, but you do, I see; and I have been waiting here so long for
you; so you must have expected to see me. You cannot be frightened of
me, are you?"

But I could not answer a word, but all the time strange knowledge,
strange feelings were filling my brain and my heart, she said: "You
are tired; rest, and dream happily."

So she sat by me, and sang to lull me to sleep, while I turned on my
elbow, and watched the waving of her throat: and the singing of all
the poets I had ever heard, and of many others too, not born till
years long after I was dead, floated all about me as she sang, and I
did indeed dream happily.

When I awoke it was the time of the cold dawn, and the colours were
gathering themselves together, whereat in fatherly approving fashion
the sun sent all across the east long bars of scarlet and orange that
after faded through yellow to green and blue. And she sat by me still;
I think she had been sitting there and singing all the time; all
through hot yesterday, for I had been sleeping day-long and
night-long, all through the falling evening under moonlight and
starlight the night through.

And now it was dawn, and I think too that neither of us had moved at
all; for the last thing I remembered before I went to sleep was the
tips of her fingers brushing my cheek, as she knelt over me with
downdrooping arm, and still now I felt them there. Moreover she was
just finishing some fainting measure that died before it had time to
get painful in its passion.

Dear Lord! how I loved her! Yet did I not dare to touch her, or even
speak to her. She smiled with delight when she saw I was awake again,
and slid down her hand on to mine, but some shuddering dread made me
draw it away again hurriedly; then I saw the smile leave her face:
what would I not have given for courage to hold her body quite tight
to mine? But I was so weak.

She said:

"Have you been very happy?"

"Yea," I said.

It was the first word I had spoken there, and my voice sounded
strange.

"Ah!" she said, "you will talk more when you get used to the air of
the Hollow Land. Have you been thinking of your past life at all? If
not, try to think of it. What thing in Heaven or Earth do you Wish for
most?"

Still I said no word; but she said in a wearied way: "Well now, I
think you will be strong enough to get to your feet and walk; take my
hand and try." Therewith she held it out: I strove hard to be brave
enough to take it, but could not; I only turned away shuddering, sick,
and grieved to the heart's core of me; then struggling hard with hand
and knee and elbow, I scarce rose, and stood up totteringly; while she
watched me sadly, still holding out her hand.

But as I rose, in my swinging to and fro the steel sheath of my sword
struck her on the hand so that the blood flowed from it, which she
stood looking at for a while, then dropped it downwards, and turned to
look at me, for I was going.

Then as I walked she followed me, so I stopped and turned and said
almost fiercely: "I am going alone to look for my brother."

The vehemence with which I spoke, or something else, burst some
blood-vessel within my throat, and we both stood there with the blood
running from us on to the grass and summer flowers.

She said: "If you find him, wait with him till I come."

"Yea," and I turned and left her, following the course of the stream
upwards, and as I went I heard her low singing that almost broke my
heart for its sadness.

And I went painfully because of my weakness, and because also of the
great stones; and sometimes I went along a spot of earth where the
river had been used to flow in flood-time, and which was now bare of
everything but stones; and the sun, now risen high, poured down on
everything a great flood of fierce light and scorching heat, and burnt
me sorely, so that I almost fainted.

But about noontide I entered a wood close by the stream, a beech-wood,
intending to rest myself; the herbage was thin and scattered there,
sprouting up from amid the leaf-sheaths and nuts of the beeches, which
had fallen year after year on that same spot; the outside boughs swept
low down, the air itself seemed green when you entered within the
shadow of the branches, they over-roofed the place so with tender
green, only here and there showing spots of blue.

But what lay at the foot of a great beech tree but some dead knight in
armour, only the helmet off? A wolf was prowling round about it, who
ran away snarling when he saw me coming.

So I went up to that dead knight, and fell on my knees before him,
laying my head on his breast, for it was Arnald. He was quite cold,
but had not been dead for very long; I would not believe him dead, but
went down to the stream and brought him water, tried to make him
drink-what would you? He was as dead as Swanhilda: neither came there
any answer to my cries that afternoon but the moaning of the wood
doves in the beeches. So then I sat down and took his head on my
knees, and closed the eyes, and wept quietly while the sun sank lower.

But a little after sunset I heard a rustle through the leaves, that
was not the wind, and looking up my eyes met the pitying eyes of that
maiden.

Something stirred rebelliously within me; I ceased weeping, and said:
"It is unjust, unfair: What right had Swanhilda to live? Did not God
give her up to us? How much better was he than ten Swanhildas?

And look you -- See!  He is DEAD."

Now this I shrieked out, being mad; and though I trembled when I saw
some stormy wrath that vexed her very heart and loving lips, gathering
on her face, I yet sat there looking at her and screaming, screaming,
till all the place rang.

But when growing hoarse and breathless I ceased; she said, with
straitened brow and scornful mouth: "So! Bravely done! Must I then,
though I am a woman, call you a liar, for saying God is unjust? You to
punish her, had not God then punished her already? How many times when
she woke in the dead night do you suppose she missed seeing King
Urrayne's pale face and hacked head lying on the pillow by her side?
Whether by night or day, what things but screams did she hear when the
wind blew loud round about the Palace corners? And did not that face
too, often come before her, pale and bleeding as it was long ago, and
gaze at her from unhappy eyes! Poor eyesi With changed purpose in
them- no more hope of converting the world when that blow was once
struck, truly it was very wicked-no more dreams, but only fierce
struggles with the Devil for very life, no more dreams but failure at
last, and death, happier so in the Hollow Land."

She grew so pitying as she gazed at his dead face that I began to weep
again unreasonably, while she saw not that I was weeping, but looked
only on Arnald's face, but after turned on me frowning. "Unjust! Yes,
truly unjust enough to take away life and all hope from her; you have
done a base cowardly act, you and your brother here, disguise it as
you may; you deserve all God's judgment - you"

But I turned my eyes and wet face to her, and said: "Do not curse me
there - do not look like Swanhilda: for see now, you said at first
that you have been waiting long for me, give me your hand now, for I
love you so."

Then she came and knelt by where I sat, and I caught her in my arms
and she prayed to be forgiven.

"0, Florian! I have indeed waited long for you, and when I saw you my
heart was filled with joy, but you would neither touch me nor speak to
me, so that I became almost mad, forgive me, we will be so happy now.
0! do you know this is what I have been waiting for all these years;
it made me glad, I know, when I was a little baby in my mother's arms
to think I was born for this; and afterwards, as I grew up, I used to
watch every breath of wind through the beech-boughs, every turn of the
silver poplar leaves, thinking it might be you or some news of you."

Then I rose and drew her up with me; but she knelt again by my
brother's side, and kissed him, and said:

"0 brother! The Hollow Land is only second best of the places God has
made, for Heaven also is the work of His hand."

Afterwards we dug a deep grave among the beechroots and there we
buried Amald de Liliis.

And I have never seen him since, scarcely even in dreams; surely God
has had mercy on him, for he was very leal and true and brave; he
loved many men, and was kind and gentle to his friends, neither did he
hate any but Swanhilda.

But as for us two, Margaret and me, I cannot tell you concerning our
happiness, such things cannot be told; only this I know, that we abode
continually in the Hollow Land until I lost it.

Moreover this I can tell you. Margaret was walking with me, as she
often walked near the place where I had first seen her; presently we
came upon a woman sitting, dressed in scarlet and gold raiment, with
her head laid down on her knees; likewise we heard her sobbing.

"Margaret, who is she?" I said: "I knew not that any dwelt in the
Hollow Land but us two only."

She said, "I know not who she is, only sometimes; these many years, I
have seen her scarlet robe flaming from far away, amid the quiet green
grass: but I was never so near her as this.

Florian, I am afraid: let us come away."


FYTTE THE SECOND

Such a horrible grey November day it was, the fog-smell all about, the
fog creeping into our very bones.

And I sat there, trying to recollect, at any rate something, under
those fir-trees that I ought to have known so well.

Just think now; I had lost my best years some- where; for I was past
the prime of life, my hair and beard were scattered with white, my
body was growing weaker, my memory of all things was very faint

My raiment, purple and scarlet and blue once, was so stained that you
could scarce call it any colour, was so tattered that it scarce
covered my body, though it seemed once to have fallen in heavy folds
to my feet, and still, when I rose to walk, though the miserable
November mist lay in great drops upon my bare breast, yet was I
obliged to wind my raiment over my arm, it dragged so (wretched,
slimy, textureless thing! ) in the brown mud.

On my head was a light morion, which pressed on my brow and pained me;
so I put my hand up to take it ofi; but when I touched it I stood
still in my walk shuddering; I nearly fell to the earth with shame and
sick horror; for I laid my hand on a lump of Slimy earth with worms
coiled up in it I could scarce forbear from shrieking, but breathing
such a prayer as I could think of, I raised my hand again and seized
it firmly. Worse horror stilll The rust had eaten it into holes, and I
gripped my own hair as well as the rotting steel, the sharp edge of
which cut into my fingers; but setting my teeth, gave a great wrench,
for I knew that if I let go of it then, no power on the earth or under
it could make me touch it again. God be praised! I tore it off and
cast it far from me; I saw the earth, and the worms and green weeds
and sun- begotten slime, whirling out from it radiatingly, as it spun
round about.

I was girt with a sword too, the leathern belt of which had shrunk and
squeezed my waist: dead leaves had gathered in knots about the buckles
of it, the gilded handle was encrusted with clay in many parts, the
velvet sheath miserably worn.

But, verily, when I took hold of the hilt, and pent in my hand; lo!
then, I drew out my own true blade and shook it flawless from hilt to
point, gleaming white in that mist.

Therefore it sent a thrill of joy to my heart, to know that there was
one friend left me yet: I sheathed it again carefully, and undoing it
from my waist, hung it about my neck.

Then catching up my rags in my arms, I drew them up till my legs and
feet were altogether clear from them, afterwards folded my arms over
my breast, gave a long leap and ran, looking downward, but not giving
heed to my way.

Once or twice I fell over stumps of trees, and such- like, for it was
a cut-down wood that I was in, but I rose always, though bleeding and
confused, and went on still; sometimes tearing madly through briars
and gorse bushes, so that my blood dropped on the dead leaves as I
went.

I ran in this way for about an hour; then I heard a gurgling and
splashing of waters; I gave a great shout and leapt strongly, with
shut eyes, and the black water closed over me.

When I rose again, I saw near me a boat with a man in it; but the
shore was far off; I struck out toward the boat, but my clothes which
I had knotted and folded about me, weighed me down terribly.

The man looked at me, and began to paddle toward me with the oar he
held in his left hand, having in his right a long, slender spear,
barbed like a fish-hook; perhaps, I thought, it is some fishing spear;
moreover his raiment was of scarlet, with upright stripes of yellow
and black all over it.

When my eye caught his, a smile widened his mouth as if some one had
made a joke; but I was beginning to sink, and indeed my head was
almost under water just as he came and stood above me, but before it
went quite under, I saw his spear gleam, then felt it in my shoulder,
and for the present, felt nothing else.

When I woke I was on the bank of that river; the flooded waters went
hurrying past me; no boat on them now; from the river the ground went
up in gentle slopes till it grew a great hill, and there, on that
hill-top, Yes, I might forget many things, almost everything, but not
that, not the old castle of my fathers up among the hills, its towers
blackened now and shattered, yet still no enemy's banner waved from
it.

So I said I would go and die there? and at this thought I drew my
sword, which yet hung about my neck, and shook it in the air till the
true steel quivered, then began to pace towards the castle. I was
quite naked, no rag about me; I took no heed of that only thanking God
that my sword was left, and so toiled up the hill. I entered the
castle soon by the outer court; I knew the way so well, that I did not
lift my eyes from the groimd, but walked on over the lowered
drawbridge through the unguarded gates, and stood in the great hall at
lastmy father's hall as bare of everything but my sword as when I came
into the world fifty years before: I had as little clothes, as little
wealth, less memory and thought, I verily believe, than then.

So I lifted up my eyes and gazed; no glass in the windows, no hangings
on the walls; the vaulting yet held good throughout, but seemed to be
going; the mortar had fallen out from between the stones, and grass
and fern grew in the joints; the marble pavement was in some places
gone, and water stood about in puddles, though one scarce knew how it
had got there.

No hangings on the walls- no; yet, strange to say, instead of them,
the walls blazed from end to end with scarlet paintings, only striped
across with green damp-marks in many places, some falling bodily from
the wall, the plaster hanging down with the fading colour on it.

In all of them, except for the shadows and the faces of the figures,
there was scarce any colour but scarlet and yellow. Here and there it
seemed the painter, whoever it was, had tried to make his trees or his
grass green, but it would not do; some ghastly thoughts must have
filled his head, for all the green went presently into yellow,
out-sweeping through the picture dismally. But the faces were painted
to the very life, or it seemed so; there were only five of them,
however, that were very marked or came much in the foreground; and
four of these I knew well, though I did not then remember the names of
those that had borne them. They were Red Harald, Swanhilda, Amald, and
myself. The fifth I did not know; it was a woman's and very beautiful.

Then I saw that in some parts a small penthouse roof had been built
over the paintings, to keep them from the weather. Near one of these
stood a man painting, clothed in red, with stripes of yellow and
black: Then I knew that it was the same man who had saved me from
drowning by spearing me through the shoulder; so I went up to him, and
saw furthermore that he was girt with a heavy sword. He turned round
when he saw me coming, and asked me fiercely what I did there. I asked
why he was painting in my castle.

Thereupon, with that same grim smile widening his mouth as heretofore,
he said, "I paint God's judgments."

And as he spoke, he rattled the sword in his scabbard; but I said,

"Well, then, you paint them very badly. Listen; I know God's judgments
much better than you do. See now; I will teach you God's judgments,
and you shall teach me painting."

While I spoke he still rattled his sword, and when I had done, shut
his right eye tight, screwing his nose on one side; then said:

"You have got no clothes on, and may go to the devil! What do you know
about God's judgments?"

"Well, they are not all yellow and red, at all events; you ought to
know better."

He screamed out, "0 you fool! Yellow and red! Gold and blood, what do
they make?"

"Well," I said; "what?"

"HELL!" And, coming close up to me, he struck me with his open hand in
the face, so that the colour with which his hand was smeared was
dabbed about my face. The blow almost threw me down; and, while I
staggered, he rushed at me furiously with his sword. Perhaps it was
good for me that I had got no clothes on; for, being utterly
unencumbered, I leapt this way and that, and avoided his fierce, eager
strokes till I could collect myself somewhat; while he had a heavy
scarlet cloak on that trailed on the ground, and which he often trod
on, so that he stumbled.

He very nearly slew me during the first few minutes, for it was not
strange that, together with other matters, I should have forgotten the
art of fence: but yet, as I went on, and sometimes bounded about the
hall under the whizzing of his sword, as he rested sometimes, leaning
on it, as the point sometimes touched my head and made my eyes start
out, I remembered the old joy that I used to have, and the swy, swy,
of the sharp edge, as one gazed between one's horse's ears; moreover,
at last, one fierce swift stroke, just touching me below the throat,
tore up the skin all down my body, and fell heavy on my thigh, so that
I drew my breath in and turned white; then first, as I swung my sword
round my head, our blades met, oh! to hear that tchink again! and I
felt the notch my sword made in his, and swung out at him; but he
guarded it and returned on me; I guarded right and left, and grew
warm, and opened my mouth to shout, but knew not what to say; and our
sword points fell on the floor together: then, when we had panted
awhile, I wiped from my face the blood that had been dashed over it,
shook my sword and cut at him, then we spun round and round in a mad
waltz to the measured music of our meeting swords, and sometimes
either wounded the other somewhat but not much, till I beat down his
sword on to his head, that he fell grovelling, but not cut through.
Verily, thereupon my lips opened mightily with "Mary rings."

Then, when he had gotten to his feet, I went at him again, he
staggering back, guarding wildly; I cut at his head; he put his sword
up confusedly, so I fitted both hands to my hilt, and smote him
mightily under the arm: then his shriek mingled with my shout, made a
strange sound together; he rolled over and over, dead, as I thought.

I walked about the hall in great exultation at first, striking my
sword point on the floor every now and then, till I grew faint with
loss of blood; then I went to my enemy and stripped off some of his
clothes to bind up my wounds withal; afterwards I found in a corner
bread and wine, and I eat and drank thereof.

Then I went back to him, and looked, and a thought struck me, and I
took some of his paints and brushes, and kneeling down, painted his
face thus, with stripes of yellow and red, crossing each other at
right angles; and in each of the squares so made I put a spot of
black, after the manner of the painted letters in the prayer-books and
romances when they are ornamented.

So I stood back as painters use, folded my arms, and admired my own
handiwork. Yet there struck me as being something so utterly doleful
in the man's white face, and the blood running all about him, and
washing off the stains of paint from his face and hands, and splashed
clothes, that my heart mis- gave me, and I hoped that he was not dead;
I took some water from a vessel he had been using for his painting,
and, kneeling, washed his face.

Was it some resemblance to my father's dead face, which I had seen
when I was young, that made me pity him? I laid my hand upon his
heart, and felt it beating feebly; so I lifted him up gently, and
carried him towards a heap of straw that he seemed used to lie upon;
there I stripped him and looked to his wounds, and used leech-craft,
the memory of which God gave me for this purpose, I suppose, and
within seven days I found that he would not die.

Afterwards, as I wandered about the castle, I came to a room in one of
the upper storeys, that had still the roof on, and windows in it with
painted glass, and there I found green raiment and swords and armour,
and I clothed myself.

So when he got well I asked him what his name was, and he me, and we
both of us said, "Truly I know not." Then said I, "but we must call
each other some name, even as men call days."

"Call me Swerker," he said, "some priest I knew once had that name."

"And me Wulf," said I, "though wherefore I know not."

Then I tried to learn painting till I thought I should die, but at
last learned it through very much pain and grief.

And, as the years went on and we grew old and grey, we painted purple
pictures and green ones instead of the scarlet and yellow, so that the
walls looked altered, and always we painted God's judgments.

And we would sit in the sunset and watch them with the golden light
changing them, as we yet hoped God would change both us and our works.
Often too we would sit outside the walls and look at the trees and
sky, and the ways of the few men and women we saw; therefrom sometimes
befell adventures.

Once there went past a great funeral of some king going to his own
country, not as he had hoped to go, but stiff and colourless, spices
filling up the place of his heart.

And first went by very many knights, with long bright hauberks on,
that fell down before their knees as they rode, and they all had
tilting-helms on with the same crest, so that their faces were quite
hidden: and this crest was two hands clasped together tightly as
though they were the hands of one praying forgiveness from the one he
loves best; and the crest was wrought in gold.

Moreover, they had on over their hauberks surcoats which were half
scarlet and half purple, strewn about with golden stars.

Also long lances, that had forked knights'-pennons, half purple and
half scarlet, strewn with golden stars.

And these went by with no sound but the fall of their horse-hoofs.

And they went slowly, so slowly that we counted them all, five
thousand five hundred and fifty-five. Then went by many fair maidens
whose hair was loose and yellow, and who were all clad in green
raiment ungirded, and shod with golden shoes. These also we counted,
being five hundred; moreover some of the outermost of them, viz., one
maiden to every twenty, had long silver trumpets, which they swung out
to right and left, blowing them, and their sound was very sad.

Then many priests, and bishops, and abbots, who wore white albs and
golden copes over them; and they all sang together mournfully,
"Propter amnen Babylonis;" and these were three hundred.

After that came a great knot of the Lords, who were tilting helmets
and surcoats emblazoned with each one his own device; only each had in
his hand a small staff two feet long whereon was a pennon of scarlet
and purple. These also were three hundred.

And in the midst of these was a great car hung down to the ground with
purple, drawn by grey horses whose trappings were half scarlet, half
purple. And on this car lay the King, whose head and hands were bare;
and he had on him a surcoat, half purple and half scarlet, strewn with
golden stars. And his head rested on a tilting helmet, whose crest was
the hands of one praying passionately for forgiveness.

But his own hands lay by his side as if he had just fallen asleep.

And all about the car were little banners, half purple and half
scarlet, strewn with golden stars. Then the King, who counted but as
one, went by also.

And after him came again many maidens clad in ungirt white raiment
strewn with scarlet flowers, and their hair was loose and yellow and
their feet bare: and, except for the falling of their feet and the
rustle of the wind through their raiment, they went past quite
silently. These also were five hundred.

Then lastly came many young knights with long bright hauberks falling
over their knees as they rode, and surcoats, half scarlet and half
purple, strewn with golden stars; they bore long lances with forked
pen- nons which were half purple, half scarlet, strewn with golden
stars; their heads and their hands were bare, but they bore shields,
each one of them, which were of bright steel wrought cunningly in the
midst with that bearing of the two hands of one who prays for
forgiveness; which was done in gold. These were but five hundred.

Then they all went by winding up and up the hill roads, and, when the
last of them had departed out of our sight, we put down our heads and
wept, and I said, "Sing us one of the songs of the Hollow Land." Then
he whom I had called Swerker put his hand into his bosom, and slowly
drew out a long, long tress of black hair, and laid it on his knee and
smoothed it, weeping on it: So then I left him there and went and
armed myself, and brought armour for him.

And then came back to him and threw the armour down so that it
clanged, and said:

"O Harald, let us go!"

He did not seem surprised that I called him by the right name, but
rose and armed himself, and then be looked a good knight; so we set
forth. And in a turn of the long road we came suddenly upon a most
fair woman, clothed in scarlet, who sat and sobbed, holding her face
between her bands, and her hair was very black.

And when Harald saw her, he stood and gazed at her for long through
the bars of bis helmet, then suddenly turned, and said:

"Florian, I must stop here; do you go on to the Hollow Land.
Farewell."

"Farewell." And then I went on, never turning back, and him I never
saw more.

And so I went on, quite lonely, but happy, till I had reached the
Hollow Land.

Into which I let myself down most carefully, by the jutting rocks and
bushes and strange trailing flowers, and there lay down and fell
asleep.

FYTTE THE THIRD

And I was waked by some one singing; I felt very happy; I felt young
again; I had fair delicate raiment on, my sword was gone, and my
armour; I tried to think where I was, and could not for my happiness;
I tried to listen to the words of the song. Nothing, only an old echo
in my ears, only all manner of strange scenes from my wretched past
life before my eyes in a dim, far-off manner: then at last, slowly,
without effort, I heard what she sang.

   "Christ keep the Hollow Land
   All the summer-tide;
   Still we cannot understand
   Where the waters glide;

   Only dimly seeing them
   Coldly slipping through
   Many green-lipp'd cavern mouths.
   Where the hills are blue."

"Then," she said, "come now and look for it, love, a hollow city in
the Hollow Land."

I kissed Margaret, and we went.

Through the golden streets under the purple shadows of the houses we
went, and the slow fanning backward and forward of the many-coloured
banners cooled us: we two alone: there was no one with us. No soul
will ever be able to tell what we said, how we looked.

At last we came to a fair palace, cloistered off in the old time,
before the city grew golden from the din and hubbub of traffic; those
who dwelt there in the old ungolden times had had their own joys,
their own sorrows, apart from the joys and sorrows of the multitude:
so, in like manner, was it now cloistered off from the eager leaning
and brotherhood of the golden dwellings: so now it had its own gaiety,
its own solemnity, apart from theirs; unchanged, and changeable, were
its marble walls, whatever else changed about it.

We stopped before the gates and trembled, and clasped each other
closer; for there among the marble leafage and tendrils that were
round and under and over the archway that held the golden valves were
wrought two figures of a man and woman winged and garlanded, whose
raiment flashed with stars; and their faces were like faces we had
seen or half seen in some dream long and long and long ago so that we
trembled with awe and delight; and turned, and seeing Margaret, saw
that her face was that face seen or half seen long and long and long
ago; and in the shining of her eyes I saw that other face, seen in
that way and no other long and long and long ago - my face.

And then we walked together toward the golden gates, and opened them,
and no man gainsaid us.

And before us lay a great space of flowers.




***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HOLLOW LAND***


******* This file should be named 15948.txt or 15948.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/1/5/9/4/15948



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.net/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
