The Project Gutenberg eBook, The Mabinogion Vol. 2 (of 3), Edited by Owen
M. Edwards, Translated by Charlotte Guest


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: The Mabinogion Vol. 2 (of 3)


Editor: Owen M. Edwards

Release Date: November 29, 2006  [eBook #19973]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MABINOGION VOL. 2 (OF 3)***






Transcribed from the 1902 Fisher Unwin edition by David Price, email
ccx074@pglaf.org





THE MABINOGION


TRANSLATED FROM THE RED BOOK OF HERGEST BY LADY CHARLOTTE GUEST
VOL. II.  LONDON
T. FISHER UNWIN
11 PATERNOSTER
BUILDINGS.  MXCII

{The salmon of Llyn Llyw.  "And they heard a great wailing and lamenting
from the dungeon.": p0.jpg}




INTRODUCTION.


In this second volume, as in the first, I have given Lady Charlotte
Guest's translation exactly as she wrote it.  It would have been easy to
make it a more faithful reproduction of the Welsh by occasionally
changing a word, or by making a phrase more simple in diction.  But the
reader would not have forgiven me for placing before him a translation
that was not Lady Charlotte Guest's.  I have again ventured, however,
after a careful comparison of the translation with the original, to put
in the form of footnotes a more accurate or more literal rendering of
passages which Lady Charlotte Guest did not read aright, passages which
she has omitted, and passages the real meaning of which she seems to me
to have failed to grasp.

The first two tales in this volume make up, with "The Dream of Rhonabwy,"
the second volume of the original edition.  "The Dream of Rhonabwy" was
placed in my first volume, with "The Lady of the Fountain" and
"Peredur"--the two tales that form the first volume of the original
edition.  The oldest of the tales--the Mabinogion proper--will all be
included in the third volume.

OWEN EDWARDS.

LLANUWCHLLYN,
_June_ 1902.




GERAINT THE SON OF ERBIN.


{Picture: p7.jpg}

Arthur was accustomed to hold his Court at Caerlleon upon Usk.  And there
he held it seven Easters, {7a} and five Christmases.  And once upon a
time he held his Court there at Whitsuntide.  For Caerlleon was the place
most easy of access in his dominions, both by sea and by land.  And there
were assembled {7b} nine crowned kings, who were his tributaries, and
likewise earls and barons.  For they were his invited guests at all the
high festivals, unless they were prevented by any great hindrance.  And
when he was at Caerlleon, holding his Court, thirteen churches were set
apart for mass.  And thus were they appointed: one church for Arthur, and
his kings, and his guests; and the second for Gwenhwyvar and her ladies;
and the third for the Steward of the Household and the Suitors; and the
fourth for the Franks, and the other officers; and the other nine
churches were for the nine Masters of the Household, and chiefly for
Gwalchmai; for he, from the eminence of his warlike fame, and from the
nobleness of his birth, was the most exalted of the nine.  And there was
no other arrangement respecting the churches than that which we have
mentioned above.

Glewlwyd Gavaelvawr was the chief porter; but he did not himself perform
the office, except at one of the three high festivals, for he had seven
men to serve him; and they divided the year amongst them.  They were
Grynn, and Pen Pighon, and Llaes Cymyn, and Gogyfwlch, and Gwrdnei with
Cat's eyes, who could see as well by night as by day, and Drem the son of
Dremhitid, and Clust the son of Clustveinyd; and these were Arthur's
guards.  And on Whit Tuesday, as the King sat at the banquet, lo! there
entered a tall, fair-headed youth, clad in a coat and a surcoat of
diapred satin, and a golden-hilted sword about his neck, and low shoes of
leather upon his feet.  And he came, and stood before Arthur.  "Hail to
thee, Lord!" said he.  "Heaven prosper thee," he answered, "and be thou
welcome.  Dost thou bring any new tidings?"  "I do, Lord," he said.  "I
know thee not," said Arthur.  "It is a marvel to me that thou dost not
know me.  I am one of thy foresters, Lord, in the Forest of Dean, and my
name is Madawc, the son of Twrgadarn."  "Tell me thine errand," said
Arthur.  "I will do so, Lord," said he.  "In the Forest I saw a stag, the
like of which beheld I never yet."  "What is there about him," asked
Arthur, "that thou never yet didst see his like?"  "He is of pure white,
Lord, and he does not herd with any other animal through stateliness and
pride, so royal is his bearing.  And I come to seek thy counsel, Lord,
and to know thy will concerning him."  "It seems best to me," said
Arthur, "to go and hunt him to-morrow at break of day; and to cause
general notice thereof to be given to-night in all quarters of the
Court."  And Arryfuerys was Arthur's chief huntsman, and Arelivri was his
chief page.  And all received notice; and thus it was arranged.  And they
sent the youth before them.  Then Gwenhwyvar said to Arthur, "Wilt thou
permit me, Lord," said she, "to go to-morrow to see and hear the hunt of
the stag of which the young man spoke?"  "I will, gladly," said Arthur.
"Then will I go," said she.  And Gwalchmai said to Arthur, "Lord, if it
seem well to thee, permit that into whose hunt soever the stag shall
come, that one, be he a knight or one on foot, may cut off his head, and
give it to whom he pleases, whether to his own ladylove, or to the lady
of his friend."  "I grant it gladly," said Arthur, "and let the Steward
of the Household be chastised if all are not ready to-morrow for the
chase."

And they passed the night with songs, and diversions, and discourse, and
ample entertainment.  And when it was time for them all to go to sleep,
they went.  And when the next day came, they arose; and Arthur called the
attendants, who guarded his couch.  And these were four pages, whose
names were Cadyrnerth the son of Porthawr Gandwy, and Ambreu the son of
Bedwor, and Amhar, the son of Arthur, and Goreu the son of Custennin.  And
these men came to Arthur, and saluted him, and arrayed him in his
garments.  And Arthur wondered that Gwenhwyvar did not awake, and did not
move in her bed: and the attendants wished to awaken her.  "Disturb her
not," said Arthur, "for she had rather sleep than go to see the hunting."

Then Arthur went forth, and he heard two horns sounding, one from near
the lodging of the chief huntsman, and the other from near that of the
chief page.  And the whole assembly of the multitudes came to Arthur, and
they took the road to the Forest.

And after Arthur had gone forth from the palace, Gwenhwyvar awoke, and
called to her maidens, and apparelled herself.  "Maidens," said she, "I
had leave last night to go and see the hunt.  Go one of you to the
stable, and order hither a horse such as a woman may ride."  And one of
them went, and she found but two horses in the stable, and Gwenhwyvar and
one of her maidens mounted them, and went through the Usk, and followed
the track of the men and the horses.  And as they rode thus, they heard a
loud and rushing sound; and they looked behind them, and beheld a knight
upon a {10} hunter foal of mighty size; and the rider was a fair haired
youth, bare-legged, and of princely mien, and a golden-hilted sword was
at his side, and a robe and a surcoat of satin were upon him, and two low
shoes of leather upon his feet; and around him was a scarf of blue
purple, at each corner of which was a golden apple.  And his horse
stepped stately, and swift, and proud; and he overtook Gwenhwyvar, and
saluted her.  "Heaven prosper thee, Geraint," said she, "I knew thee when
first I saw thee just now.  And the welcome of heaven be unto thee.  And
why didst thou not go with thy Lord to hunt?"  "Because I knew not when
he went," said he.  "I marvel too," said she, "how he could go unknown to
me."  "Indeed, lady," said he.  "I was fast asleep, and knew not when he
went; but thou, O young man, art the most agreeable companion I could
have in the whole kingdom; and it may be that I shall be more amused with
the hunting than they; {11} for we shall hear the horns when they sound,
and we shall hear the dogs when they are let loose, and begin to cry."  So
they went to the edge of the Forest, and there they stood.  "From this
place," said she, "we shall hear when the dogs are let loose."  And
thereupon they heard a loud noise, and they looked towards the spot
whence it came, and they beheld a dwarf riding upon a horse, stately, and
foaming, and prancing, and strong, and spirited.  And in the hand of the
dwarf was a whip.  And near the dwarf they saw a lady upon a beautiful
white horse, of steady and stately pace; and she was clothed in a garment
of gold brocade.  And near her was a knight upon a war-horse of large
size, with heavy and bright armour both upon himself and upon his horse.
And truly they never before saw a knight, or a horse, or armour, of such
remarkable size.  And they were all near to each other.

"Geraint," said Gwenhwyvar, "knowest thou the name of that tall knight
yonder?"  "I know him not," said he, "and the strange armour that he
wears prevents my either seeing his face or his features."  "Go, maiden,"
said Gwenhwyvar, "and ask the dwarf who that knight is."  Then the maiden
went up to the dwarf; and the dwarf waited for the maiden, when he saw
her coming towards him.  And the maiden enquired of the dwarf who the
knight was.  "I will not tell thee," he answered.  "Since thou art so
churlish as not to tell me," said she, "I will ask him himself."  "Thou
shall not ask him, by my faith," said he.  "Wherefore?" said she.
"Because thou art not of honour sufficient to befit thee to speak to my
Lord."  Then the maiden turned her horse's head towards the knight, upon
which the dwarf struck her with the whip that was in his hand across the
face and the eyes, until the blood flowed forth.  And the maiden, through
the hurt she received from the blow, returned to Gwenhwyvar, complaining
of the pain.  "Very rudely has the dwarf treated thee," said Geraint.  "I
will go myself to know who the knight is."  "Go," said Gwenhwyvar.  And
Geraint went up to the dwarf.  "Who is yonder knight?" said Geraint.  "I
will not tell thee," said the dwarf.  "Then will I ask him himself," said
he.  "That wilt thou not, by my faith," said the dwarf; "thou art not
honourable enough to speak with my Lord."  Said Geraint, "I have spoken
with men of equal rank with him."  And he turned his horse's head towards
the knight, but the dwarf overtook him and struck him as he had done the
maiden, so that the blood coloured the scarf that Geraint wore.  Then
Geraint put his hand upon the hilt of his sword, but he took counsel with
himself, and considered that it would be no vengeance for him to slay the
dwarf, and to be attacked unarmed by the armed knight, so he returned to
where Gwenhwyvar was.

"Thou hast acted wisely and discreetly," said she.  "Lady," said he, "I
will follow him yet, with thy permission; and at last he will come to
some inhabited place, where I may have arms either as a loan or for a
pledge, so that I may encounter the knight."  "Go," said she, "and do not
attack him until thou hast good arms, and I shall be very anxious
concerning thee, until I hear tidings of thee."  "If I am alive," said
he, "thou shall hear tidings of me by to-morrow afternoon;" and with that
he departed.

And the road they took was below the palace of Caerlleon, and across the
ford of the Usk; and they went along a fair, and even, and lofty ridge of
ground, until they came to a town, and at the extremity of the town they
saw a Fortress and a Castle.  And they came to the extremity of the town.
And as the knight passed through it, all the people arose, and saluted
him, and bade him welcome.  And when Geraint came into the town, he
looked at every house, to see if he knew any of those whom he saw.  But
he knew none, and none knew him to do him the kindness to let him have
arms either as a loan or for a pledge.  And every house he saw was full
of men, and arms, and horses.  And they were polishing shields, and
burnishing swords, and washing armour, and shoeing horses.  And the
knight, and the lady, and the dwarf, rode up to the Castle that was in
the town, and every one was glad in the Castle.  And from the battlements
and the gates they risked their necks, through their eagerness to greet
them, and to show their joy.

Geraint stood there to see whether the knight would remain in the Castle;
and when he was certain that he would do so, he looked around him; and at
a little distance from the town he saw an old palace in ruins, wherein
was a hall that was falling to decay.  And as he knew not any one in the
town, he went towards the old palace; and when he came near to the
palace, he saw but one chamber, and a bridge of marble-stone leading to
it.  And upon the bridge he saw sitting a hoary-headed man, upon whom
were tattered garments.  And Geraint gazed steadfastly upon him for a
long time.  Then the hoary-headed man spoke to him.  "Young man," he
said, "wherefore art thou thoughtful?"  "I am thoughtful," said he,
"because I know not where to go to-night."  "Wilt thou come forward this
way, chieftain?" said he, "and thou shalt have of the best that can be
procured for thee."  So Geraint went forward.  And the hoary-headed man
preceded him into the hall.  And in the hall he dismounted, and he left
there his horse.  Then he went on to the upper chamber with the hoary-
headed man.  And in the chamber he beheld an old decrepit woman, sitting
on a cushion, with old tattered garments of satin upon her; and it seemed
to him that he had never seen a woman fairer than she must have been when
in the fulness of youth.  And beside her was a maiden, upon whom were a
vest and a veil, that were old, and beginning to be worn out.  And truly
he never saw a maiden more full of comeliness, and grace, and beauty,
than she.  And the hoary-headed man said to the maiden, "There is no
attendant for the horse of this youth but thyself."  "I will render the
best service I am able," said she, "both to him and to his horse."  And
the maiden disarrayed the youth, and then she furnished his horse with
straw and with corn.  And she went to the hall as before, and then she
returned to the chamber.  And the hoary-headed man said to the maiden,
"Go to the town," said he, "and bring hither the best that thou canst
find both of food and of liquor."  "I will, gladly, Lord," said she.  And
to the town went the maiden.  And they conversed together, while the
maiden was at the town.  And, behold! the maiden came back, and a youth
with her, bearing on his back a costrel full of good purchased mead and a
quarter of a young bullock.  And in the hands of the maiden was a
quantity of white bread, and she had some manchet bread in her veil, and
she came into the chamber.  "I could not obtain better than this," said
she, "nor with better should I have been trusted."  "It is good enough,"
said Geraint.  And they caused the meat to be boiled; and when their food
was ready, they sat down.  And it was in this wise; Geraint sat between
the hoary-headed man and his wife, and the maiden served them.  And they
ate and drank.

And when they had finished eating, Geraint talked with the hoary-headed
man, and he asked him in the first place, to whom belonged the Palace
that he was in.  "Truly," said he, "it was I that built it, and to me
also belonged the city and the castle which thou sawest."  "Alas!" said
Geraint, "how is it that thou hast lost them now?"  "I lost a great
Earldom as well as these," said he, "and this is how I lost them.  I had
a nephew, the son of my brother, and I took his possessions to myself;
and when he came to his strength, he demanded of me his property, but I
withheld it from him.  So he made war upon me, and wrested from me all
that I possessed."  "Good, Sir," {15} said Geraint, "wilt thou tell me
wherefore came the knight, and the lady, and the dwarf, just now into the
town, and what is the preparation which I saw, and the putting of arms in
order."  "I will do so," said he.  "The preparations are for the game
that is to be held to-morrow by the young Earl, which will be on this
wise.  In the midst of a meadow which is here, two forks will be set up,
and upon the two forks a silver rod, and upon the silver rod a Sparrow-
Hawk, and for the Sparrow-Hawk there will be a tournament.  And to the
tournament will go all the array thou didst see in the city, of men, and
of horses, and of arms.  And with each man will go the lady he loves
best; and no man can joust for the Sparrow-Hawk, except the lady he loves
best be with him.  And the knight that thou sawest has gained the Sparrow-
Hawk these two years; and if he gains it the third year, they will, from
that time, send it every year to him, and he himself will come here no
more.  And he will be called the knight of the Sparrow-Hawk from that
time forth."  "Sir," said Geraint, "what is thy counsel to me concerning
this knight, on account of the insult which I received from the dwarf,
and that which was received by the maiden of Gwenhwyvar, the wife of
Arthur?"  And Geraint told the hoary-headed man what the insult was that
he had received.  "It is not easy to counsel thee, inasmuch as thou hast
neither dame nor maiden belonging to thee, for whom thou canst joust.
Yet, I have arms here, which thou couldest have; and there is my horse
also, if he seem to thee better than thine own."  "Ah!  Sir," said he,
"Heaven reward thee.  But my own horse, to which I am accustomed,
together with thine arms, will suffice me.  And if, when the appointed
time shall come to-morrow, thou wilt permit me, Sir, to challenge for
yonder maiden that is thy daughter, I will engage, if I escape from the
tournament, to love the maiden as long as I live, and if I do not escape,
she will remain unsullied as before."  "Gladly will I permit thee," said
the hoary-headed man, "and since thou dost thus resolve, it is necessary
that thy horse and arms should be ready to-morrow at break of day.  For
then, the knight of the Sparrow-Hawk will make proclamation, and ask the
lady he loves best to take the Sparrow-Hawk.  'For,' will he say to her,
'thou art the fairest of women, and thou didst possess it last year, and
the year previous; and if any deny it thee to-day, by force will I defend
it for thee.'  And therefore," said the hoary-headed man, "it is needful
for thee to be there at daybreak; and we three will be with thee," and
thus was it settled.

And at night, lo! {17} they went to sleep; and before the dawn they
arose, and arrayed themselves; and by the time that it was day, they were
all four in the meadow.  And there was the knight of the Sparrow-Hawk
making the proclamation, and asking his ladylove to fetch the Sparrow-
Hawk.  "Fetch it not," said Geraint, "for there is here a maiden, who is
fairer, and more noble, and more comely, and who has a better claim to it
than thou."  "If thou maintainest the Sparrow-Hawk to be due to her, come
forward, and do battle with me."  And Geraint went forward to the top of
the meadow, having upon himself and upon his horse armour which was
heavy, and rusty, and worthless, and of uncouth shape.  Then they
encountered each other, and they broke a set of lances, and they broke a
second set, and a third.  And thus they did at every onset, and they
broke as many lances as were brought to them.  And when the Earl and his
company saw the knight of the Sparrow-Hawk gaining the mastery, there was
shouting, and joy, and mirth amongst them.  And the hoary-headed man, and
his wife, and his daughter, were sorrowful.  And the hoary-headed man
served Geraint lances as often as he broke them, and the dwarf served the
knight of the Sparrow-Hawk.  Then the hoary-headed man came to Geraint.
"Oh! chieftain," said he, "since no other will hold with thee, behold,
here is the lance which was in my hand on the day when I received the
honour of knighthood; and from that time to this I never broke it.  And
it has an excellent point."  Then Geraint took the lance, thanking the
hoary-headed man.  And thereupon the dwarf also brought a lance to his
lord.  "Behold here is a lance for thee, not less good than his," said
the dwarf.  "And bethink thee, that no knight ever withstood thee before
so long as this one has done."  "I declare to Heaven," said Geraint,
"that unless death takes me quickly hence, he shall fare never the better
for thy service."  And Geraint pricked his horse towards him from afar,
and warning him, he rushed upon him, and gave him a blow so severe, and
furious, and fierce, upon the face of his shield, that he cleft it in
two, and broke his armour, and burst his girths, so that both he and his
saddle were borne to the ground over the horse's crupper.  And Geraint
dismounted quickly.  And he was wroth, and he drew his sword, and rushed
fiercely upon him.  Then the knight also arose, and drew his sword
against Geraint.  And they fought on foot with their swords until their
aims struck sparks of fire like stars from one another; and thus they
continued fighting until the blood and sweat obscured the light from
their eyes.  And when Geraint prevailed, the hoary-headed man, and his
wife, and his daughter were glad; and when the knight prevailed, it
rejoiced the Earl and his party.  Then the hoary-headed man saw Geraint
receive a severe stroke, and he went up to him quickly, and said to him,
"Oh, chieftain, remember the treatment which thou hadst from the dwarf;
and wilt thou not seek vengeance for the insult to thyself, and for the
insult to Gwenhwyvar the wife of Arthur!"  And Geraint was roused by what
he said to him, {19} and he called to him all his strength, and lifted up
his sword, and struck the knight upon the crown of his head, so that he
broke all his head armour, and cut through all the flesh and the skin,
even to the skull, until he wounded the bone.

{Picture: p18.jpg}

Then the knight fell upon his knees, and cast his sword from his hand,
and besought mercy of Geraint.  "Of a truth," said he, "I relinquish my
overdaring and my pride in craving thy mercy; and unless I have time to
commit myself to Heaven for my sins, and to talk with a priest, thy mercy
will avail me little."  "I will grant thee grace upon this condition,"
said Geraint, "that thou wilt go to Gwenhwyvar, the wife of Arthur, to do
her satisfaction for the insult which her maiden received from thy dwarf.
As to myself, for the insult which I received from thee and thy dwarf, I
am content with that which I have done unto thee.  Dismount not from the
time thou goest hence until thou comest into the presence of Gwenhwyvar,
to make her what atonement shall be adjudged at the Court of Arthur."
"This will I do gladly.  And who art thou?" said he.  "I am Geraint the
son of Erbin.  And declare thou also who thou art."  "I am Edeyrn the son
of Nudd."  Then he threw himself upon his horse, and went forward to
Arthur's Court, and the lady he loved best went before him and the dwarf,
with much lamentation.  And thus far this story up to that time.

* * * * *

Then came the little Earl and his hosts to Geraint, and saluted him, and
bade him to his castle.  "I may not go," said Geraint, "but where I was
last night, there will I be to-night also."  "Since thou wilt none of my
inviting, thou shall have abundance of all that I can command for thee,
in the place thou wast last night.  And I will order ointment for thee,
to recover thee from thy fatigues, and from the weariness that is upon
thee."  "Heaven reward thee," said Geraint, "and I will go to my
lodging."  And thus went Geraint, and Earl Ynywl, and his wife, and his
daughter.  And when they reached the chamber, the household servants and
attendants of the young Earl had arrived at the Court, and they arranged
all the houses, dressing them with straw and with fire; and in a short
time the ointment was ready, and Geraint came there, and they washed his
head.  Then came the young Earl, with forty honourable knights from among
his attendants, and those who were bidden to the tournament.  And Geraint
came from the anointing.  And the Earl asked him to go to the hall to
eat.  "Where is the Earl Ynywl," said Geraint, "and his wife, and his
daughter?"  "They are in the chamber yonder," said the Earl's
chamberlain, "arraying themselves in garments which the Earl has caused
to be brought for them."  "Let not the damsel array herself," said he,
"except in her vest and her veil, until she come to the Court of Arthur,
to be clad by Gwenhwyvar, in such garments as she may choose."  So the
maiden did not array herself.

Then they all entered the hall, and they washed, and went, and sat down
to meat.  And thus were they seated.  On one side of Geraint sat the
young Earl, and Earl Ynywl beyond him; and on the other side of Geraint
was the maiden and her mother.  And after these all sat according to
their precedence in honour.  And they ate.  And they were served
abundantly, and they received a profusion of divers kind of gifts.  Then
they conversed together.  And the young Earl invited Geraint to visit him
next day.  "I will not, by Heaven," said Geraint.  "To the Court of
Arthur will I go with this maiden to-morrow.  And it is enough for me, as
long as Earl Ynywl is in poverty and trouble; and I go chiefly to seek to
add to his maintenance."  "Ah, chieftain," said the young Earl, "it is
not by my fault that Earl Ynywl is without his possessions."  "By my
faith," said Geraint, "he shall not remain without them, unless death
quickly takes me hence."  "Oh, chieftain," said he, "with regard to the
disagreement between me and Ynywl, I will gladly abide by thy counsel,
and agree to what thou mayest judge right between us." {22}  "I but ask
thee," said Geraint, "to restore to him what is his, and what he should
have received from the time he lost his possessions, even until this
day."  "That will I do gladly, for thee," answered he.  "Then," said
Geraint, "whosoever is here who owes homage to Ynywl, let him come
forward, and perform it on the spot."  And all the men did so.  And by
that treaty they abided.  And his castle, and his town, and all his
possessions, were restored to Ynywl.  And he received back all that he
had lost, even to the smallest jewel.

Then spoke Earl Ynywl to Geraint.  "Chieftain," said he "behold the
maiden for whom thou didst challenge at the tournament, I bestow her upon
thee."  "She shall go with me," said Geraint, "to the Court of Arthur;
and Arthur and Gwenhwyvar, they shall dispose of her as they will."  And
the next day they proceeded to Arthur's Court.  So far concerning
Geraint.

* * * * *

Now, this is how Arthur hunted the stag.  The men and the dogs were
divided into hunting parties, and the dogs were let loose upon the stag.
And the last dog that was let loose was the favourite dog of Arthur.
Cavall was his name.  And he left all the other dogs behind him, and
turned the stag.  And at the second turn, the stag came towards the
hunting party of Arthur.  And Arthur set upon him.  And before he could
be slain by any other, Arthur cut off his head.  Then they sounded the
death horn for slaying, and they all gathered round.

Then came Kadyrieith to Arthur, and spoke to him.  "Lord," said he,
"behold yonder is Gwenhwyvar, and none with her save only one maiden."
"Command Gildas the son of Caw, and all the scholars of the Court," said
Arthur, "to attend Gwenhwyvar to the palace."  And they did so.

Then they all set forth, holding converse together concerning the head of
the stag, to whom it should be given.  One wished that it should be given
to the lady best beloved by him, and another to the lady whom he loved
best.  And all they of the household and the knights disputed sharply
concerning the head.  And with that they came to the palace.  And when
Arthur and Gwenhwyvar heard them disputing about the head of the stag,
Gwenhwyvar said to Arthur, "My lord, this is my counsel concerning the
stag's head; let it not be given away until Geraint the son of Erbin
shall return from the errand he is upon."  And Gwenhwyvar told Arthur
what that errand was.  "Right gladly shall it be so," said Arthur.  And
thus it was settled.  And the next day Gwenhwyvar caused a watch to be
set upon the ramparts for Geraint's coming.  And after mid-day they
beheld an unshapely little man upon a horse, and after him, as they
supposed, a dame or a damsel, also on horseback, and after her a knight
of large stature, bowed down, and hanging his head low and sorrowfully,
and clad in broken and worthless armour.

And before they came near to the gate, one of the watch went to
Gwenhwyvar, and told her what kind of people they saw, and what aspect
they bore.  "I know not who they are," said he.  "But I know," said
Gwenhwyvar, "this is the knight whom Geraint pursued, and methinks that
he comes not here by his own free will.  But Geraint has overtaken him,
and avenged the insult to the maiden to the uttermost."  And thereupon,
behold a porter came to the spot where Gwenhwyvar was.  "Lady," said he,
"at the gate there is a knight, and I saw never a man of so pitiful an
aspect to look upon as he.  Miserable and broken is the armour that he
wears, and the hue of blood is more conspicuous upon it than its own
colour."  "Knowest thou his name?" said she.  "I do," said he, "he tells
me that he is Edeyrn the son of Nudd."  Then she replied, "I know him
not."

So Gwenhwyvar went to the gate to meet him, and he entered.  And
Gwenhwyvar was sorry when she saw the condition he was in, even though he
was accompanied by the churlish dwarf.  Then Edeyrn saluted Gwenhwyvar.
"Heaven protect thee," said she.  "Lady," said he, "Geraint the son of
Erbin, thy best and most valiant servant, greets thee."  "Did he meet
with thee?" she asked.  "Yes," said he, "and it was not to my advantage;
and that was not his fault, but mine, Lady.  And Geraint greets thee
well; and in greeting thee he compelled me to come hither to do thy
pleasure for the insult which thy maiden received from the dwarf.  He
forgives the insult to himself, in consideration of his having put me in
peril of my life.  And he imposed on me a condition, manly, and
honourable, and warrior-like, which was to do thee justice, Lady."  "Now,
where did he overtake thee?"  "At the place where we were jousting, and
contending for the Sparrow-Hawk, in the town which is now called Cardiff.
And there were none with him, save three persons, of a mean and tattered
condition.  And these were an aged, hoary-headed man and a woman advanced
in years, and a fair young maiden, clad in worn-out garments.  And it was
for the avouchment of the love of that maiden that Geraint jousted for
the Sparrow-Hawk at the tournament; for he said that that maiden was
better entitled to the Sparrow-Hawk than this maiden who was with me.  And
thereupon we encountered each other, and he left me, Lady, as thou
seest."  "Sir," said she, "when thinkest thou that Geraint will be here?"
"To-morrow, Lady, I think he will be here with the maiden."

Then Arthur came to him, and he saluted Arthur, and Arthur gazed a long
time upon him, and was amazed to see him thus.  And thinking that he knew
him, he enquired of him, "Art thou Edeyrn the son of Nudd?"  "I am,
Lord," said he, "and I have met with much trouble, and received wounds
unsupportable."  Then he told Arthur all his adventure.

"Well," said Arthur, "from what I hear, it behoves Gwenhwyvar to be
merciful towards thee."  "The mercy which thou desirest, Lord," said she,
"will I grant to him, since it is as insulting to thee that an insult
should be offered to me as to thyself."  "Thus will it be best to do,"
said Arthur, "let this man have medical care until it be known whether he
may live.  And if he live, he shall do such satisfaction as shall be
judged best by the men of the Court; and take thou sureties to that
effect.  And it he die, too much will be the death of such a youth as
Edeyrn for an insult to a maiden."  "This pleases me," said Gwenhwyvar.
And Arthur became surety for Edeyrn, and Caradawc the son of Llyr,
Gwallawg the son of Llenawg, and Owain the son of Nudd, and Gwalchmai,
and many others with them.  And Arthur caused Morgan Tud to be called to
him.  He was the chief physician.  "Take with thee Edeyrn the son of
Nudd, and cause a chamber to be prepared for him, and let him have the
aid of medicine as thou wouldest do unto myself if I were wounded, and
let none into his chamber to molest him, but thyself and thy disciples,
to administer to him remedies."  "I will do so, gladly, Lord," said
Morgan Tud.  Then said the steward of the household, "Whither is it
right, Lord, to order the maiden?"  "To Gwenhwyvar and her and maidens,"
said he.  And the Steward of the Household so ordered her.  Thus far
concerning them.

* * * * *

The next day came Geraint towards the Court, and there was a watch set on
the ramparts by Gwenhwyvar, lest he should arrive unawares.  And one of
the watch came to the place where Gwenhwyvar was.  "Lady," said he,
"methinks that I see Geraint, and the maiden with him.  He is on
horseback, but he has his walking gear upon him, and the maiden appears
to be in white, seeming to be clad in a garment of linen."  "Assemble all
the women," said Gwenhwyvar, "and come to meet Geraint, to welcome him,
and wish him joy."  And Gwenhwyvar went to meet Geraint and the maiden.
And when Geraint came to the place where Gwenhwyvar was, he saluted her.
"Heaven prosper thee," said she, "and welcome to thee.  And thy career
has been successful, and fortunate, and resistless, and glorious.  And
Heaven reward thee, that thou hast so proudly caused me to have
retribution."  "Lady," said he, "I earnestly desired to obtain thee
satisfaction according to thy will; and, behold, here is the maiden
through whom thou hadst thy revenge."  "Verily," said Gwenhwyvar, "the
welcome of Heaven be unto her; and it is fitting that we should receive
her joyfully."  Then they went in, and dismounted.  And Geraint came to
where Arthur was, and saluted him.  "Heaven protect thee," said Arthur,
"and the welcome of Heaven be unto thee.  And since {27} Edeyrn the son
of Nudd has received his overthrow and wounds from thy hands, thou hadst
had a prosperous career."  "Not upon me be the blame," said Geraint, "it
was through the arrogance of Edeyrn the son of Nudd himself that we were
not friends.  I would not quit him until I knew who he was, and until the
one had vanquished the other."  "Now," said Arthur, "where is the maiden
for whom I heard thou didst give challenge?"  "She is gone with
Gwenhwyvar to her chamber."  Then went Arthur to see the maiden.  And
Arthur, and all his companions, and his whole Court, were glad concerning
the maiden.  And certain were they all, that had her array been suitable
to her beauty, they had never seen a maid fairer than she.  And Arthur
gave away the maiden to Geraint.  And the usual bond made between two
persons was made between Geraint and the maiden, and the choicest of all
Gwenhwyvar's apparel was given to the maiden; and thus arrayed, she
appeared comely and graceful to all who beheld her.  And that day and
that night were spent in abundance of minstrelsy, and ample gifts of
liquor, and a multitude of games.  And when it was time for them to go to
sleep, they went.  And in the chamber where the couch of Arthur and
Gwenhwyvar was, the couch of Geraint and Enid was prepared.  And from
that time she became his bride.  And the next day Arthur satisfied all
the claimants upon Geraint with bountiful gifts.  And the maiden took up
her abode in the palace, and she had many companions, both men and women,
and there was no maiden more esteemed than she in the Island of Britain.

Then spake Gwenhwyvar.  "Rightly did I judge," said she, "concerning the
head of the stag, that it should not be given to any until Geraint's
return; and, behold, here is a fit occasion for bestowing it.  Let it be
given to Enid, the daughter of Ynywl, the most illustrious maiden.  And I
do not believe that any will begrudge it her, for between her and every
one here there exists nothing but love and friendship."  Much applauded
was this by them all, and by Arthur also.  And the head of the stag was
given to Enid.  And thereupon her fame increased, and her friends
thenceforward became more in number than before.  And Geraint from that
time forth loved the stag, and the tournament, and hard encounters; and
he came victorious from them all.  And a year, and a second, and a third,
he proceeded thus, until his fame had flown over the face of the kingdom.

And once upon a time, Arthur was holding his Court at Caerlleon upon Usk,
at Whitsuntide.  And, behold, there came to him ambassadors, wise and
prudent, full of knowledge, and eloquent of speech, and they saluted
Arthur.  "Heaven prosper you," said Arthur, "and the welcome of Heaven be
unto you.  And whence do you come?"  "We come, Lord," said they, "from
Cornwall; and we are ambassadors from Erbin the son of Custennin, thy
uncle, and our mission is unto thee.  And he greets thee well, as an
uncle should greet his nephew, and as a vassal should greet his lord.  And
he represents unto thee that he waxes heavy and feeble, and is advancing
in years.  And the neighbouring chiefs knowing this, grow insolent
towards him, and covet his land and possessions.  And he earnestly
beseeches thee, Lord, to permit Geraint his son to return to him, to
protect his possessions, and to become acquainted with his boundaries.
And unto him he represents that it were better for him to spend the
flower of his youth, and the prime of his age, in preserving his own
boundaries, than in tournaments, which are productive of no profit,
although he obtains glory in them."

"Well," said Arthur, "go, and divest yourselves of your accoutrements,
and take food, and refresh yourselves after your fatigues; and before you
go forth hence you shall have an answer."  And they went to eat.  And
Arthur considered that it would go hard with him to let Geraint depart
from him and from his Court; neither did he think it fair that his cousin
should be restrained from going to protect his dominions and his
boundaries, seeing that his father was unable to do so.  No less was the
grief and regret of Gwenhwyvar, and all her women, and all her damsels,
through fear that the maiden would leave them.  And that day and that
night were spent in abundance of feasting.  And Arthur showed Geraint the
cause of the mission, and of the coming of the ambassadors to him out of
Cornwall.  "Truly," said Geraint, "be it to my advantage or disadvantage,
Lord, I will do according to thy will concerning this embassy."  "Behold,"
said Arthur, "though it grieves me to part with thee, it is my counsel
that thou go to dwell in thine own dominions, and to defend thy
boundaries, and to take with thee to accompany thee as many as thou wilt
of those thou lovest best among my faithful ones, and among thy friends,
and among thy companions in arms."  "Heaven reward thee; and this will I
do," said Geraint.  "What discourse," said Gwenhwyvar, "do I hear between
you?  Is it of those who are to conduct Geraint to his country?"  "It
is," said Arthur.  "Then is it needful for me to consider," said she,
"concerning companions and a provision for the lady that is with me?"
"Thou wilt do well," said Arthur.

And that night they went to sleep.  And the next day the ambassadors were
permitted to depart, and they were told that Geraint should follow them.
And on the third day Geraint set forth, and many went with him.  Gwalchmai
the son of Gwyar, and Riogonedd the son of the king of Ireland, and
Ondyaw the son of the duke of Burgandy, Gwilim the son of the ruler of
the Franks, Howel the son of Emyr of Brittany, Elivry, and Nawkyrd, Gwynn
the son of Tringad, Goreu the son of Custennin, Gweir Gwrhyd Vawr,
Garannaw the son of Golithmer, Peredur the son of Evrawc, Gwynnllogell,
Gwyr a judge in the Court of Arthur, Dyvyr the son of Alun of Dyved,
Gwrei Gwalstawd Ieithoedd, Bedwyr the son of Bedrawd, Hadwry the son of
Gwryon, Kai the son of Kynyr, Odyar the Frank, the Steward of Arthur's
Court, and Edeyrn the son of Nudd.  Said Geraint, "I think that I shall
have enough of knighthood with me."  "Yes," said Arthur, "but it will not
be fitting for thee to take Edeyrn with thee, although he is well, until
peace shall be made between him and Gwenhwyvar."  "Gwenhwyvar can permit
him to go with me, if he gives sureties."  "If she please, she can let
him go without sureties, for enough of pain and affliction has he
suffered for the insult which the maiden received from the dwarf."
"Truly," said Gwenhwyvar, "since it seems well to thee and to Geraint, I
will do this gladly, Lord."  Then she permitted Edeyrn freely to depart.
And many there were who accompanied Geraint, and they set forth; and
never was there seen a fairer host journeying towards the Severn.  And on
the other side of the Severn were the nobles of Erbin the son of
Custennin, and his foster father at their head, to welcome Geraint with
gladness; and many of the women of the Court, with his mother, came to
receive Enid the daughter of Ynywl, his wife.  And there was great
rejoicing and gladness throughout the whole Court, and throughout all the
country, concerning Geraint, because of the greatness of their love
towards him, and of the greatness of the fame which he had gained since
he went from amongst them, and because he was come to take possession of
his dominions, and to preserve his boundaries.  And they came to the
Court.  And in the Court they had ample entertainment, and a multitude of
gifts, and abundance of liquor, and a sufficiency of service, and a
variety of minstrelsy and of games.  And to do honour to Geraint, all the
chief men of the country were invited that night to visit him.  And they
passed that day and that night in the utmost enjoyment.  And at dawn next
day Erbin arose, and summoned to him Geraint, and the noble persons who
had borne him company.  And he said to Geraint, "I am a feeble and an
aged man, and whilst I was able to maintain the dominion for thee and for
myself, I did so.  But thou art young, and in the flower of thy vigour
and of thy youth: henceforth do thou preserve thy possessions."  "Truly,"
said Geraint, "with my consent thou shalt not give the power over thy
dominions at this time into my hands, and thou shall not take me from
Arthur's Court."  "Into thy hands will I give them," said Erbin, "and
this day also shalt thou receive the homage of thy subjects."

Then said Gwalchmai, "It were better for thee to satisfy those who have
boons to ask, to-day, and to-morrow thou canst receive the homage of thy
dominions."  So all that had boons to ask were summoned into one place.
And Kadyrieith came to them, to know what were their requests.  And every
one asked that which he desired.  And the followers of Arthur began to
make gifts and immediately the men of Cornwall came, and gave also.  And
they were not long in giving, so eager was every one to bestow gifts.  And
of those who came to ask gifts, none departed unsatisfied.  And that day
and that night were spent in the utmost enjoyment.

And the next day, at dawn, Erbin desired Geraint to send messengers to
the men, to ask them whether it was displeasing to them that he should
come to receive their homage, and whether they had anything to object to
him.  Then Geraint sent ambassadors to the men of Cornwall, to ask them
this.  And they all said that it would be the fulness of joy and honour
to them for Geraint to come and receive their homage.  So he received the
homage of such as were there.  And they remained with him till the third
night.  And the day after the followers of Arthur intended to go away.
"It is too soon for you to go away yet," said he, "stay with me until I
have finished receiving the homage of my chief men, who have agreed to
come to me."  And they remained with him until he had done so.  Then they
set forth towards the Court of Arthur; and Geraint went to bear them
company, and Enid also, as far as Diganhwy: there they parted.  Then
Ondyaw the son of the duke of Burgundy said to Geraint, "Go first of all,
and visit the uttermost parts of thy dominions, and see well to the
boundaries of thy territories; and if thou hast any trouble respecting
them, send unto thy companions."  "Heaven reward thee," said Geraint,
"and this will I do."  And Geraint journeyed to the uttermost part of his
dominions.  And experienced guides, and the chief men of his country,
went with him.  And the furthermost point that they showed him he kept
possession of.

And, as he had been used to do when he was at Arthur's Court, he
frequented tournaments.  And he became acquainted with valiant and mighty
men, until he had gained as much fame there as he had formerly done
elsewhere.  And he enriched his Court, and his companions, and his
nobles, with the best horses, and the best arms, and with the best and
most valuable jewels, and he ceased not until his fame had flown over the
face of the whole kingdom.  And when he knew that it was thus, he began
to love ease and pleasure, for there was no one who was worth his
opposing.  And he loved his wife, and liked to continue in the palace,
with minstrelsy and diversions.  And for a long time he abode at home.
And after that he began to shut himself up in the chamber of his wife,
and he took no delight in anything besides, insomuch that he gave up the
friendship of his nobles, together with his hunting and his amusements,
and lost the hearts of all the host in his Court; and there was murmuring
and scoffing concerning him among the inhabitants of the palace, on
account of his relinquishing so completely their companionship for the
love of his wife.  And these tidings came to Erbin.  And when Erbin had
heard these things, he spoke unto Enid, and enquired of her whether it
was she that had caused Geraint to act thus, and to forsake his people
and his hosts.  "Not I, by my confession unto Heaven," said she; "there
is nothing more hateful to me than this."  And she knew not what she
should do, for, although it was hard for her to own this to Geraint, yet
was it not more easy for her to listen to what she heard without warning
Geraint concerning it.  And she was very sorrowful.

And one morning in the summer time, they were upon their couch, and
Geraint lay upon the edge of it.  And Enid was without sleep in the
apartment, which had windows of glass.  And the sun shone upon the couch.
And the clothes had slipped from off his arms and his breast, and he was
asleep.  Then she gazed upon the marvellous beauty of his appearance, and
she said, "Alas, and am I the cause that these arms and this breast have
lost their glory and the warlike fame which they once so richly enjoyed!"
And as she said this, the tears dropped from her eyes, and they fell upon
his breast.  And the tears she shed, and the words she had spoken, awoke
him; and another thing contributed to awaken him, and that was the idea
that it was not in thinking of him that she spoke thus, but that it was
because she loved some other man more than him, and that she wished for
other society, and thereupon Geraint was troubled in his mind, and he
called his squire; and when he came to him, "Go quickly," said he, "and
prepare my horse and my arms, and make them ready.  And do thou arise,"
said he to Enid, "and apparel thyself; and cause thy horse to be
accoutred, and clothe thee in the worst riding dress that thou hast in
thy possession.  And evil betide me," said he, "if thou returnest here
until thou knowest whether I have lost my strength so completely as thou
didst say.  And if it be so, it will then be easy for thee to seek the
society thou didst wish for of him of whom thou wast thinking."  So she
arose, and clothed herself in her meanest garments.  "I know nothing,
Lord," said she, "of thy meaning."  "Neither wilt thou know at this
time," said he.

Then Geraint went to see Erbin.  "Sir," said he, "I am going upon a
quest, and I am not certain when I may come back.  Take heed, therefore,
unto thy possessions, until my return."  "I will do so," said he, "but it
is strange to me that thou shouldst go so suddenly.  And who will proceed
with thee, since thou art not strong enough to traverse the land of
Lloegyr alone."  "But one person only will go with me."  "Heaven counsel
thee, my son," said Erbin, "and may many attach themselves to thee in
Lloegyr."  Then went Geraint to the place where his horse was, and it was
equipped with foreign armour, heavy and shining.  And he desired Enid to
mount her horse, and to ride forward, and to keep a long way before him.
"And whatever thou mayest see, and whatever thou mayest hear, concerning
me," said he, "do thou not turn back.  And unless I speak unto thee, say
not thou one word either."  And they set forward.  And he did not choose
the pleasantest and most frequented road, but that which was the wildest
and most beset by thieves, and robbers, and venomous animals.  And they
came to a high road, which they followed till they saw a vast forest, and
they went towards it, and they saw four armed horsemen come forth from
the forest.  When they had beheld them, one of them said to the other,
"Behold, here is a good occasion for us to capture two horses and armour,
and a lady likewise; for this we shall have no difficulty in doing
against yonder single knight, who hangs his head so pensively and
heavily."  And Enid heard this discourse, and she knew not what she
should do through fear of Geraint, who had told her to be silent.  "The
vengeance of Heaven be upon me," she said, "if I would not rather receive
my death from his hand than from the hand of any other; and though he
should slay me, yet will I speak to him, lest I should have the misery to
witness his death." {36a}  So she waited for Geraint until he came near
to her.  "Lord," said she, "didst thou hear the words of those men
concerning thee?"  Then he lifted up his eyes, and looked at her angrily.
"Thou hadst only," said he, "to hold thy peace as I bade thee.  I wish
but for silence and not for warning. {36b}  And though thou shouldst
desire to see my defeat and my death by the hands of those men, yet do I
feel no dread."  Then the foremost of them couched his lance, and rushed
upon Geraint.  And he received him, and that not feebly.  But he let the
thrust go by him, while he struck the horseman upon the centre of his
shield in such a manner, that his shield was split, and his armour
broken, and so that a cubit's length of the shaft of Geraint's lance
passed through his body, and sent him to the earth the length of the
lance over his horse's crupper.  Then the second horseman attacked him
furiously, being wroth at the death of his companion.  But with one
thrust Geraint overthrew him also, and killed him as he had done the
other.  Then the third set upon him, and he killed him in like manner.
And thus also he slew the fourth.  Sad and sorrowful was the maiden as
she saw all this.  Geraint dismounted his horse, and took the arms of the
men he had slain, and placed them upon their saddles, and tied together
the reins of their horses, and he mounted his horse again.  "Behold what
thou must do," said he, "take the four horses, and drive them before
thee, and proceed forward, as I bade thee just now.  And say not one word
unto me, unless I speak first unto thee.  And I declare unto Heaven,"
said he, "if thou doest not thus, it will be to thy cost."  "I will do,
as far as I can, Lord," said she, "according to thy desire."  Then they
went forward through the forest; and when they left the forest, they came
to a vast plain, in the centre of which was a group of thickly tangled
copse-wood; and from out thereof they beheld three horsemen coming
towards them, well equipped with armour, both they and their horses.  Then
the maiden looked steadfastly upon them; and when they had come near, she
heard them say one to another, "Behold, here is a good arrival for us,
here are coming for us four horses and four suits of armour.  We shall
easily obtain them spite of yonder dolorous knight, and the maiden also
will fall into our power."  "This is but too true," said she to herself,
"for my husband is tired with his former combat.  The vengeance of Heaven
will be upon me, unless I warn him of this."  So the maiden waited until
Geraint came up to her.  "Lord," said she, "dost thou not hear the
discourse of yonder men concerning thee?"  "What was it?" asked he.  "They
say to one another, that they will easily obtain all this spoil."  "I
declare to Heaven," he answered, "that their words are less grievous to
me than that thou wilt not be silent, and abide by my counsel."  "My
Lord," said she, "I feared lest they should surprise thee unawares."
"Hold thy peace then," said he, "do not I desire silence?" {38}  And
thereupon one of the horsemen couched his lance, and attacked Geraint.
And he made a thrust at him, which he thought would be very effective;
but Geraint received it carelessly, and struck it aside, and then he
rushed upon him, and aimed at the centre of his person, and from the
shock of man and horse, the quantity of his armour did not avail him, and
the head of the lance and part of the shaft passed through him, so that
he was carried to the ground an arm and a spear's length over the crupper
of his horse.  And both the other horsemen came forward in their turn,
but their onset was not more successful than that of their companion.  And
the maiden stood by, looking at all this; and on the one hand she was in
trouble lest Geraint should be wounded in his encounter with the men, and
on the other hand she was joyful to see him victorious.  Then Geraint
dismounted, and bound the three suits of armour upon the three saddles,
and he fastened the reins of all the horses together, so that he had
seven horses with him.  And he mounted his own horse, and commanded the
maiden to drive forward the others.  "It is no more use for me to speak
to thee than to refrain, for thou wilt not attend to my advice."  "I will
do so, as far I am able, Lord," said she; "but I cannot conceal from thee
the fierce and threatening words which I may hear against thee, Lord,
from such strange people as those that haunt this wilderness."  "I
declare to Heaven," said he, "that I desire nought but silence;
therefore, hold thy peace." {39}  "I will, Lord, while I can."  And the
maiden went on with the horses before her, and she pursued her way
straight onwards.  And from the copse-wood already mentioned, they
journeyed over a vast and dreary open plain.  And at a great distance
from them they beheld a wood, and they could see neither end nor boundary
to the wood, except on that side that was nearest to them, and they went
towards it.  Then there came from out the wood five horsemen, eager, and
bold, and mighty, and strong, mounted upon chargers that were powerful,
and large of bone, and high-mettled, and proudly snorting, and both the
men and the horses were well equipped with arms.  And when they drew near
to them, Enid heard them say, "Behold, here is a fine booty coming to us,
which we shall obtain easily and without labour, for we shall have no
trouble in taking all those horses and arms, and the lady also, from
yonder single knight, so doleful and sad."

Sorely grieved was the maiden upon hearing this discourse, so that she
knew not in the world what she should do.  At last, however, she
determined to warn Geraint; so she turned her horse's head towards him.
"Lord," said she, "if thou hadst heard as I did what yonder horsemen said
concerning thee, thy heaviness would be greater than it is."  Angrily and
bitterly did Geraint smile upon her, and he said, "Thee do I hear doing
everything that I forbade thee; but it may be that thou wilt repent this
yet."  And immediately, behold, the men met them, and victoriously and
gallantly did Geraint overcome them all five.  And he placed the five
suits of armour upon the five saddles, and tied together the reins of the
twelve horses, and gave them in charge to Enid.  "I know not," said he,
"what good it is for me to order thee; but this time I charge thee in an
especial manner."  So the maiden went forward towards the wood, keeping
in advance of Geraint, as he had desired her; and it grieved him as much
as his wrath would permit, to see a maiden so illustrious as she having
so much trouble with the care of the horses.  Then they reached the wood,
and it was both deep and vast; and in the wood night overtook them.  "Ah,
maiden," said he, "it is vain to attempt proceeding forward!"  "Well,
Lord," said she, "whatsoever thou wishest, we will do."  "It will be best
for us," he answered, "to turn out of the wood, and to rest, and wait for
the day, in order to pursue our journey."  "That will we, gladly," said
she.  And they did so.  Having dismounted himself, he took her down from
her horse.  "I cannot, by any means, refrain from sleep, through
weariness," said he.  "Do thou, therefore, watch the horses, and sleep
not."  "I will, Lord," said she.  Then he went to sleep in his armour,
and thus passed the night, which was not long at that season.  And when
she saw the dawn of day appear, she looked around her, to see if he were
waking, and thereupon he woke.  "My Lord," she said, "I have desired to
awake thee for some time."  But he spake nothing to her about fatigue,
{40} as he had desired her to be silent.  Then he arose, and said unto
her, "Take the horses, and ride on; and keep straight on before thee as
thou didst yesterday."  And early in the day they left the wood, and they
came to an open country, with meadows on one hand, and mowers mowing the
meadows.  And there was a river before them, and the horses bent down,
and drank the water.  And they went up out of the river by a lofty steep;
and there they met a slender stripling, with a satchel about his neck,
and they saw that there was something in the satchel, but they knew not
what it was.  And he had a small blue pitcher in his hand, and a bowl on
the mouth of the pitcher.  And the youth saluted Geraint.  "Heaven
prosper thee," said Geraint, "and whence dost thou come?"  "I come," said
he, "from the city that lies before thee.  My Lord," he added, "will it
be displeasing to thee, if I ask whence thou comest also?"  "By no
means--through yonder wood did I come."  "Thou camest not through the
wood to-day."  "No," he replied, "we were in the wood last night."  "I
warrant," said the youth, "that thy condition there last night was not
the most pleasant, and that thou hadst neither meat nor drink."  "No, by
my faith," said he.  "Wilt thou follow my counsel," said the youth, "and
take thy meal from me?"  "What sort of meal?" he enquired.  "The
breakfast which is sent for yonder mowers, nothing less than bread and
meat, and wine; and if thou wilt, Sir, they shall have none of it."  "I
will," said he, "and Heaven reward thee for it."

So Geraint alighted, and the youth took the maiden from off her horse.
Then they washed, and took their repast.  And the youth cut the bread in
slices, and gave them drink, and served them withal.  And when they had
finished, the youth arose, and said to Geraint, "My Lord, with thy
permission I will now go and fetch some food for the mowers."  "Go,
first, to the town," said Geraint, "and take a lodging for me in the best
place that thou knowest, and the most commodious one for the horses, and
take thou whichever horse and arms thou choosest in payment for thy
service and thy gift."  "Heaven reward thee, Lord," said the youth, "and
this would be ample to repay services much greater than those I rendered
unto thee."  And to the town went the youth, and he took the best and the
most pleasant lodgings that he knew; and after that he went to the
palace, having the horse and armour with him, and proceeded to the place
where the Earl was, and told him all his adventure.  "I go now, Lord,"
said he, "to meet the young man, and to conduct him to his lodging."  "Go
gladly," said the Earl, "and right joyfully shall he be received here, if
he so come."  And the youth went to meet Geraint, and told him that he
would be received gladly by the Earl in his own palace; but he would go
only to his lodgings.  And he had a goodly chamber, in which was plenty
of straw, and draperies, and a spacious and commodious place he had for
the horses, and the youth prepared for them plenty of provender.  And
after they had disarrayed themselves, Geraint spoke thus to Enid: "Go,"
said he, "to the other side of the chamber, and come not to this side of
the house; and thou mayest call to thee the woman of the house, if thou
wilt."  "I will do, Lord," said she, "as thou sayest."  And thereupon the
man of the house came to Geraint, and welcomed him.  "Oh, chieftain," he
said, "hast thou taken thy meal?"  "I have," said he.  Then the youth
spoke to him, and enquired if he would not drink something before he met
the Earl.  "Truly, I will," said he.  So the youth went into the town,
and brought them drink.  And they drank.  "I must needs sleep," said
Geraint.  "Well," said the youth, "and whilst thou sleepest, I will go to
see the Earl."  "Go, gladly," he said, "and come here again when I
require thee."  And Geraint went to sleep, and so did Enid also.

And the youth came to the place where the Earl was, and the Earl asked
him where the lodgings of the knight were, and he told him.  "I must go,"
said the youth, "to wait on him in the evening."  "Go," answered the
Earl, "and greet him well from me, and tell him that in the evening I
will go to see him."  "This will I do," said the youth.  So he came when
it was time for them to awake.  And they arose, and went forth.  And when
it was time for them to take their food they took it.  And the youth
served them.  And Geraint enquired of the man of the house, whether there
were any of his companions that he wished to invite to him, and he said
that there were.  "Bring them hither, and entertain them at my cost with
the best thou canst buy in the town."

And the man of the house brought there those whom he chose, and feasted
them at Geraint's expense.  Thereupon, behold, the Earl came to visit
Geraint, and his twelve honourable knights with him.  And Geraint rose
up, and welcomed him.  "Heaven preserve thee," said the Earl.  Then they
all sat down according to their precedence in honour.  And the Earl
conversed with Geraint and enquired of him the object of his journey.  "I
have none," he replied, "but to seek adventures, and to follow my own
inclination."  Then the Earl cast his eye upon Enid, and he looked at her
steadfastly.  And he thought he had never seen a maiden fairer or more
comely than she.  And he set all his thoughts and his affections upon
her.  Then he asked of Geraint, "Have I thy permission to go and converse
with yonder maiden, for I see that she is apart from thee?"  "Thou hast
it, gladly," said he.  So the Earl went to the place where the maiden
was, and spake with her.  "Ah, maiden," said he, "it cannot be pleasant
to thee to journey thus with yonder man!"  "It is not unpleasant to me,"
said she, "to journey the same road that he journeys."  "Thou hast
neither youths nor maidens to serve thee," said he.  "Truly," she
replied, "it is more pleasant for me to follow yonder man than to be
served by youths and maidens."  "I will give thee good counsel," said he.
"All my Earldom will I place in thy possession, if thou wilt dwell with
me."  "That will I not, by Heaven," she said, "yonder man was the first
to whom my faith was ever pledged; and shall I prove inconstant to him?"
"Thou art in the wrong," said the Earl; "if I slay the man yonder, I can
keep thee with me as long as I choose; and when thou no longer pleasest
me, I can turn thee away.  But if thou goest with me by thy own good
will, I protest that our union shall continue eternal and undivided as
long as I remain alive."  Then she pondered these words of his, and she
considered that it was advisable to encourage him in his request.
"Behold, then, chieftain, this is most expedient for thee to do to save
me any needless imputation; come here to-morrow, and take me away as
though I knew nothing thereof."  "I will do so," said he.  So he arose,
and took his leave, and went forth with his attendants.  And she told not
then to Geraint any of the conversation which she had had with the Earl,
lest it should rouse his anger, and cause him uneasiness and care.

And at the usual hour they went to sleep.  And at the beginning of the
night Enid slept a little; and at midnight she arose, and placed all
Geraint's armour together, so that it might be ready to put on.  And
although fearful of her errand, she came to the side of Geraint's bed;
and she spoke to him softly and gently, saying, "My Lord, arise, and
clothe thyself, for these were the words of the Earl to me, and his
intention concerning me."  So she told Geraint all that had passed.  And
although he was wroth with her, he took warning, and clothed himself.  And
she lighted a candle, that he might have light to do so.  "Leave there
the candle," said he, "and desire the man of the house to come here."
Then she went, and the man of the house came to him.  "Dost thou know how
much I owe thee?" asked Geraint.  "I think thou owest but little."  "Take
the eleven horses and the eleven suits of armour."  "Heaven reward thee,
Lord," said he, "but I spent not the value of one suit of armour upon
thee."  "For that reason," said he, "thou wilt be the richer.  And now
wilt thou come to guide me out of the town?"  "I will, gladly," said he,
"and in which direction dost thou intend to go?"  "I wish to leave the
town by a different way from that by which I entered it."  So the man of
the lodgings accompanied him as far as he desired.  Then he bade the
maiden to go on before him; and she did so, and went straight forward,
and his host returned home.  And he had only just reached his house,
when, behold, the greatest tumult approached that was ever heard.  And
when he looked out he saw fourscore knights in complete armour around the
house, with the Earl Dwrm at their head.  "Where is the knight that was
here?" said the Earl.  "By thy hand," said he, "he went hence some time
ago."  "Wherefore, villain," said he, "didst thou let him go without
informing me?"  "My Lord, thou didst not command me to do so, else would
I not have allowed him to depart."  "What way dost thou think that he
took?"  "I know not, except that he went along the high road."  And they
turned their horses' heads that way, and seeing the tracks of the horses
upon the high road, they followed.  And when the maiden beheld the
dawning of the day, she looked behind her, and saw vast clouds of dust
coming nearer and nearer to her.  And thereupon she became uneasy, and
she thought that it was the Earl and his host coming after them.  And
thereupon she beheld a knight appearing through the mist.  "By my faith,"
said she, "though he should slay me, it were better for me to receive my
death at his hands, than to see him killed without warning him."  "My
Lord," she said to him, "seest thou yonder man hastening after thee, and
many others with him?"  "I do see him," said he, "and in despite of all
my orders, I see that thou wilt never keep silence."  Then he turned upon
the knight, and with the first thrust he threw him down under his horse's
feet.  And as long as there remained one of the fourscore knights, he
overthrew every one of them at the first onset.  And from the weakest to
the strongest, they all attacked him one after the other, except the
Earl: and last of all the Earl came against him also.  And he broke his
lance, and then he broke a second.  But Geraint turned upon him, and
struck him with his lance upon the centre of his shield, so that by that
single thrust the shield was split, and all his armour broken, and he
himself was brought over his horse's crupper to the ground, and was in
peril of his life.  And Geraint drew near to him; and at the noise of the
trampling of his horse the Earl revived.  "Mercy, Lord," said he to
Geraint.  And Geraint granted him mercy.  But through the hardness of the
ground where they had fallen, and the violence of the stroke which they
had received, there was not a single knight amongst them that escaped
without receiving a fall, mortally severe, and grievously painful, and
desperately wounding, from the hand of Geraint.

{Picture: p48.jpg}

And Geraint journeyed along the high road that was before him, and the
maiden went on first; and near them they beheld a valley which was the
fairest ever seen, and which had a large river running through it; and
there was a bridge over the river, and the high road led to the bridge.
And above the bridge, upon the opposite side of the river, they beheld a
fortified town, the fairest ever seen.  And as they approached the
bridge, Geraint saw coming towards him from a thick copse a man mounted
upon a large and lofty steed, even of pace and spirited though tractable.
"Ah, knight," said Geraint, "whence comest thou?"  "I come," said he
"from the valley below us."  "Canst thou tell me," said Geraint, "who is
the owner of this fair valley and yonder walled town?"  "I will tell
thee, willingly," said he, "Gwiffert Petit he is called by the Franks,
but the Welsh call him the Little King."  "Can I go by yonder bridge,"
said Geraint, "and by the lower highway that is beneath the town?"  Said
the knight, "Thou canst not go by his tower {47a} on the other side of
the bridge, unless thou dost intend to combat him; because it is his
custom to encounter every knight that comes upon his lands."  "I declare
to Heaven," said Geraint, "that I will, nevertheless, pursue my journey
that way." {47b}  "If thou dost so," said the knight, "thou wilt probably
meet with shame and disgrace in reward for thy daring." {48a}  Then
Geraint proceeded along the road that led to the town, and the road
brought him to a ground that was hard, and rugged, and high, and ridgy.
{48b} And as he journeyed thus, he beheld a knight following him upon a
war-horse, strong, and large, and proudly-stepping, and wide-hoofed, and
broad-chested.  And he never saw a man of smaller stature than he who was
upon the horse.  And both he and his horse were completely armed.  When
he had overtaken Geraint he said to him, "Tell me, chieftain, whether it
is through ignorance or through presumption that thou seekest to insult
my dignity, and to infringe my rules?"  "Nay," answered Geraint, "I knew
not that this road was forbid to any."  "Thou didst know it," said the
other; "come with me to my Court, to do me satisfaction."  "That will I
not, by my faith," said Geraint; "I would not go even to thy Lord's
Court, excepting Arthur were thy Lord."  "By the hand of Arthur himself,"
said the knight, "I will have satisfaction of thee, or receive my
overthrow at thy hands."  And immediately they charged one another.  And
a squire of his came to serve him with lances as he broke them.  And they
gave each other such hard and severe strokes, that their shields lost all
their colour.  But it was very difficult for Geraint to fight with him on
account of his small size, for he was hardly able to get a full aim at
him with all the efforts he could make. {49}  And they fought thus until
their horses were brought down upon their knees; and at length Geraint
threw the knight headlong to the ground; and then they fought on foot,
and they gave one another blows so boldly fierce, so frequent, and so
severely powerful, that their helmets were pierced, and their skullcaps
were broken, and their arms were shattered, and the light of their eyes
was darkened by sweat and blood.  At the last Geraint became enraged, and
he called to him all his strength; and boldly angry, and swiftly
resolute, and furiously determined, he lifted up his sword, and struck
him on the crown of his head a blow so mortally painful, so violent, so
fierce, and so penetrating, that it cut through all his head armour, and
his skin, and his flesh, until it wounded the very bone, and the sword
flew out of the hand of the Little King to the furthest end of the plain,
and he besought Geraint that he would have mercy and compassion upon him.
"Though thou hast been neither courteous nor just," said Geraint, "thou
shalt have mercy, upon condition that thou wilt become my ally, and
engage never to fight against me again, but to come to my assistance
whenever thou hearest of my being in trouble."  "This will I do, gladly,
Lord," said he.  So he pledged him his faith thereof.  "And now, Lord,
come with me," said he, "to my Court yonder, to recover from thy
weariness and fatigue."  "That will I not, by Heaven," said he.

Then Gwiffert Petit beheld Enid where she stood, and it grieved him to
see one of her noble mien appear so deeply afflicted.  And he said to
Geraint, "My Lord, thou doest wrong not to take repose, and refresh
thyself awhile; for, if thou meetest with any difficulty in thy present
condition, it will not be easy for thee to surmount it."  But Geraint
would do no other than proceed on his journey, and he mounted his horse
in pain, and all covered with blood.  And the maiden went on first, and
they proceeded towards the wood which they saw before them.

And the heat of the sun was very great, and through the blood and sweat,
Geraint's armour cleaved to his flesh; and when they came into the wood,
he stood under a tree, to avoid the sun's heat; and his wounds pained him
more than they had done at the time when he received them.  And the
maiden stood under another tree.  And, lo! they heard the sound of horns,
and a tumultuous noise, and the occasion of it was, that Arthur and his
company had come down to the wood.  And while Geraint was considering
which way he should go to avoid them, behold, he was espied by a foot
page, who was an attendant on the Steward of the Household, and he went
to the steward, and told him what kind of man he had seen in the wood.
Then the steward caused his horse to be saddled, and he took his lance
and his shield, and went to the place where Geraint was.  "Ah, knight!"
said he, "what dost thou here?"  "I am standing under a shady tree, to
avoid the heat and the rays of the sun."  "Wherefore is thy journey, and
who art thou?"  "I seek adventures, and go where I list."  "Indeed," said
Kai, "then come with me to see Arthur, who is here hard by."  "That will
I not, by Heaven," said Geraint.  "Thou must needs come," said Kai.  Then
Geraint knew who he was, but Kai did not know Geraint.  And Kai attacked
Geraint as best as he could.  And Geraint became wroth, and he struck him
with the shaft of his lance, so that he rolled headlong to the ground.
But chastisement worse than this would he not inflict on him.

Scared and wildly Kai arose, and he mounted his horse, and went back to
his lodging.  And thence he proceeded to Gwalchmai's tent.  "Oh, Sir,"
said he to Gwalchmai, "I was told by one of the attendants, that he saw
in the wood above a wounded knight, having on battered armour, and if
thou dost right, thou wilt go and see if this be true."  "I care not if I
do so," said Gwalchmai.  "Take, then, thy horse, and some of thy armour,"
said Kai, "for I hear that he is not over-courteous to those who approach
him."  So Gwalchmai took his spear and his shield, and mounted his horse,
and came to the spot where Geraint was.  "Sir Knight," said he,
"wherefore is thy journey?"  "I journey for my own pleasure, and to seek
the adventures of the world."  "Wilt thou tell me who thou art, or wilt
thou come and visit Arthur, who is near at hand?"  "I will make no
alliance with thee, nor will I go and visit Arthur," said he.  And he
knew that it was Gwalchmai, but Gwalchmai knew him not.  "I purpose not
to leave thee," said Gwalchmai, "till I know who thou art."  And he
charged him with his lance, and struck him on his shield, so that the
shaft was shivered into splinters, and their horses were front to front.
Then Gwalchmai gazed fixedly upon him, and he knew him.  "Ah, Geraint,"
said he, "is it thou that art here?"  "I am not Geraint," said he.
"Geraint thou art, by Heaven," he replied, "and a wretched and insane
expedition is this."  Then he looked around, and beheld Enid, and he
welcomed her gladly.  "Geraint," said Gwalchmai, "come thou, and see
Arthur; he is thy lord and thy cousin."  "I will not," said he, "for I am
not in a fit state to go and see any one."  Thereupon, behold, one of the
pages came after Gwalchmai, to speak to him.  So he sent him to apprise
Arthur that Geraint was there wounded, and that he would not go to visit
him, and that it was pitiable to see the plight that he was in.  And this
he did without Geraint's knowledge, inasmuch as he spoke in a whisper to
the page.  "Entreat Arthur," said he, "to have his tent brought near to
the road, for he will not meet him willingly, and it is not easy to
compel him in the mood he is in."  So the page came to Arthur, and told
him this.  And he caused his tent to be removed unto the side of the
road.  And the maiden rejoiced in her heart.  And Gwalchmai led Geraint
onwards along the road, till they came to the place where Arthur was
encamped, and the pages were pitching his tent by the road-side.  "Lord,"
said Geraint, "all hail unto thee."  "Heaven prosper thee; and who art
thou?" said Arthur.  "It is Geraint," said Gwalchmai, "and of his own
free will would he not come to meet thee."  "Verily," said Arthur, "he is
bereft of his reason."  Then came Enid, and saluted Arthur.  "Heaven
protect thee," said he.  And thereupon he caused one of the pages to take
her from her horse.  "Alas!  Enid," said Arthur, "what expedition is
this?"  "I know not, Lord," said she, "save that it behoves me to journey
by the same road that he journeys."  "My Lord," said Geraint, "with thy
permission we will depart."  "Whither wilt thou go?" said Arthur.  "Thou
canst not proceed now, unless it be unto thy death." {53}  "He will not
suffer himself to be invited by me," said Gwalchmai.  "But by me he
will," said Arthur; "and, moreover, he does not go from here until he is
healed."  "I had rather, Lord," said Geraint, "that thou wouldest let me
go forth."  "That will I not, I declare to Heaven," said he.  Then he
caused a maiden to be sent for to conduct Enid to the tent where
Gwenhwyvar's chamber was.  And Gwenhwyvar and all her women were joyful
at her coming, and they took off her riding dress, and placed other
garments upon her.  Arthur also called Kadyrieith, and ordered him to
pitch a tent for Geraint, and the physicians, and he enjoined him to
provide him with abundance of all that might be requisite for him.  And
Kadyrieith did as he had commanded him.  And Morgan Tud and his disciples
were brought to Geraint.

And Arthur and his hosts remained there nearly a month, whilst Geraint
was being healed.  And when he was fully recovered, Geraint came to
Arthur, and asked his permission to depart.  "I know not if thou art
quite well."  "In truth I am, Lord," said Geraint.  "I shall not believe
thee concerning that, but the physicians that were with thee."  So Arthur
caused the physicians to be summoned to him, and asked them if it were
true.  "It is true, Lord," said Morgan Tud.  So the next day Arthur
permitted him to go forth, and he pursued his journey.  And on the same
day Arthur removed thence.  And Geraint desired Enid to go on, and to
keep before him, as she had formerly done.  And she went forward along
the high road.  And as they journeyed thus, they heard an exceeding loud
wailing near to them.  "Stay thou here," said he, "and I will go and see
what is the cause of this wailing."  "I will," said she.  Then he went
forward into an open glade that was near the road.  And in the glade he
saw two horses, one having a man's saddle, and the other a woman's saddle
upon it.  And, behold, there was a knight lying dead in his armour, and a
young damsel in a riding dress standing over him, lamenting.  "Ah! Lady,"
said Geraint, "what hath befallen thee?"  "Behold," she answered, "I
journeyed here with my beloved husband, when, lo! three giants came upon
us, and without any cause in the world, they slew him."  "Which way went
they hence?" said Geraint.  "Yonder by the high road," she replied.  So
he returned to Enid.  "Go," said he, "to the lady that is below yonder,
and await me there till I come."  She was sad when he ordered her to do
thus, but nevertheless she went to the damsel, whom it was ruth to hear,
and she felt certain that Geraint would never return.  Meanwhile Geraint
followed the giants, and overtook them.  And each of them was greater of
stature than three other men, and a huge club was on the shoulder of
each.  Then he rushed upon one of them, and thrust his lance through his
body.  And having drawn it forth again, he pierced another of them
through likewise.  But the third turned upon him, and struck him with his
club, so that he split his shield, and crushed his shoulder, and opened
his wounds anew, and all his blood began to flow from him.  But Geraint
drew his sword, and attacked the giant, and gave him a blow on the crown
of his head so severe, and fierce, and violent, that his head and his
neck were split down to his shoulders, and he fell dead.  So Geraint left
him thus, and returned to Enid.  And when he saw her, he fell down
lifeless from his horse.  Piercing, and loud, and thrilling was the cry
that Enid uttered.  And she came and stood over him where he had fallen.
And at the sound of her cries came the Earl of Limours, and the host that
journeyed with him, whom her lamentations brought out of their road.  And
the Earl said to Enid, "Alas, Lady, what hath befallen thee?"  "Ah! good
Sir," said she, "the only man I have loved, or ever shall love, is
slain."  Then he said to the other, "And what is the cause of thy grief?"
"They have slain my beloved husband also," said she.  "And who was it
that slew them?"  "Some giants," she answered, "slew my best beloved, and
the other knight went in pursuit of them, and came back in the state thou
seest, his blood flowing excessively; but it appears to me that he did
not leave the giants without killing some of them, if not all."  The Earl
caused the knight that was dead to be buried, but he thought that there
still remained some life in Geraint; and to see if he yet would live, he
had him carried with him in the hollow of his shield, and upon a bier.
And the two damsels went to the court; and when they arrived there,
Geraint was placed upon a litter-couch in front of the table that was in
the hall.  Then they all took off their travelling gear, and the Earl
besought Enid to do the same, and to clothe herself in other garments.  "I
will not, by Heaven," said she.  "Ah!  Lady," said he, "be not so
sorrowful for this matter."  "It were hard to persuade me to be
otherwise," said she.  "I will act towards thee in such wise, that thou
needest not be sorrowful, whether yonder knight live or die.  Behold, a
good Earldom, together with myself, will I bestow on thee; be, therefore,
happy and joyful."  "I declare to Heaven," said she, "that henceforth I
shall never be joyful while I live."  "Come, then," said he, "and eat."
"No, by Heaven, I will not," she answered.  "But by Heaven thou shalt,"
said he.  So he took her with him to the table against her will, and many
times desired her to eat.  "I call Heaven to witness," said she, "that I
will not eat until the man that is upon yonder bier shall eat likewise."
"Thou canst not fulfil that," said the Earl, "yonder man is dead
already."  "I will prove that I can," said she.  Then he offered her a
goblet of liquor.  "Drink this goblet," he said, "and it will cause thee
to change thy mind."  "Evil betide me," she answered, "if I drink aught
until he drink also."  "Truly," said the Earl, "it is of no more avail
for me to be gentle with thee than ungentle."  And he gave her a box in
the ear.  Thereupon she raised a loud and piercing shriek, and her
lamentations were much greater than they had been before, for she
considered in her mind that had Geraint been alive, he durst not have
struck her thus.  But, behold, at the sound of her cry Geraint revived
from his swoon, and he sat up on the bier, and finding his sword in the
hollow of his shield, he rushed to the place where the Earl was, and
struck him a fiercely-wounding, severely-venomous, and sternly-smiting
blow upon the crown of his head, so that he clove him in twain, until his
sword was stayed by the table.  Then all left the board and fled away.
And this was not so much through fear of the living as through the dread
they felt at seeing the dead man rise up to slay them.  And Geraint
looked upon Enid, and he was grieved for two causes; one was, to see that
Enid had lost her colour and her wonted aspect; and the other, to know
that she was in the right.  "Lady," said he, "knowest thou where our
horses are?"  "I know, Lord, where thy horse is," she replied, "but I
know not where is the other.  Thy horse is in the house yonder."  So he
went to the house, and brought forth his horse, and mounted him, and took
up Enid from the ground, and placed her upon the horse with him.  And he
rode forward.  And their road lay between two hedges.  And the night was
gaining on the day.  And, lo! they saw behind them the shafts of spears
betwixt them and the sky, and they heard the trampling of horses, and the
noise of a host approaching.  "I hear something following us," said he,
"and I will put thee on the other side of the hedge."  And thus he did.
And thereupon, behold, a knight pricked towards him, and couched his
lance.  When Enid saw this, she cried out, saying, "Oh! chieftain,
whoever thou art, what renown wilt thou gain by slaying a dead man?"  "Oh!
Heaven," said he, "is it Geraint?"  "Yes, in truth," said she.  "And who
art thou?"  "I am the Little King," he answered, "coming to thy
assistance, for I heard that thou wast in trouble.  And if thou hadst
followed my advice, none of these hardships would have befallen thee."
"Nothing can happen," said Geraint, "without the will of Heaven, though
much good results from counsel."  "Yes," said the Little King, "and I
know good counsel for thee now.  Come with me to the court of a son-in-
law of my sister, which is near here, and thou shalt have the best
medical assistance in the kingdom."  "I will do so, gladly," said
Geraint.  And Enid was placed upon the horse of one of the Little King's
squires, and they went forward to the Baron's palace.  And they were
received there with gladness, and they met with hospitality and
attention.  And the next morning they went to seek physicians; and it was
not long before they came, and they attended Geraint until he was
perfectly well.  And while Geraint was under medical care, the Little
King caused his armour to be repaired, until it was as good as it had
ever been.  And they remained there a fortnight and a month.

Then the Little King said to Geraint, "Now will we go towards my own
Court, to take rest and amuse ourselves."  "Not so," said Geraint, "we
will first journey for one day more, and return again."  "With all my
heart," said the Little King, "do thou go then."  And early in the day
they set forth.  And more gladly and more joyfully did Enid journey with
them that day than she had ever done.  And they came to the main road.
And when they reached a place where the road divided in two, they beheld
a man on foot coming towards them along one of these roads, and Gwiffert
asked the man whence he came.  "I come," said he, "from an errand in the
country."  "Tell me," said Geraint, "which is the best for me to follow
of these two roads?"  "That is the best for thee to follow," answered he,
"for if thou goest by this one, thou wilt never return.  Below us," said
he, "there is a hedge of mist, and within it are enchanted games, and no
one who has gone there has ever returned.  And the Court of the Earl
Owain is there, and he permits no one to go to lodge in the town except
he will go to his Court."  "I declare to Heaven," said Geraint, "that we
will take the lower road."  And they went along it until they came to the
town.  And they took the fairest and pleasantest place in the town for
their lodging.  And while they were thus, behold, a young man came to
them, and greeted them.  "Heaven be propitious to thee," said they.  "Good
Sirs," said he, "what preparations are you making here?"  "We are taking
up our lodging," said they, "to pass the night."  "It is not the custom
with him who owns the town," he answered, "to permit any of gentle birth,
unless they come to stay in his Court, to abide here; therefore, come you
to the Court."  "We will come, gladly," said Geraint.  And they went with
the page, and they were joyfully received.  And the Earl came to the hall
to meet them, and he commanded the tables to be laid.  And they washed,
and sat down.  And this is the order in which they sat, Geraint on one
side of the Earl, and Enid on the other side, and next to Enid the Little
King, and then the Countess next to Geraint, and all after that as became
their rank.  Then Geraint recollected the games, and thought that he
should not go to them; and on that account he did not eat.  Then the Earl
looked upon Geraint, and considered, and he bethought him that his not
eating was because of the games, and it grieved him that he had ever
established those games, were it only on account of losing such a youth
as Geraint.  And if Geraint had asked him to abolish the games, he would
gladly have done so.  Then the Earl said to Geraint, "What thought
occupies thy mind, that thou dost not eat?  If thou hesitatest about
going to the games, thou shall not go, and no other of thy rank shall
ever go either."  "Heaven reward thee," said Geraint, "but I wish nothing
better than to go to the games, and to be shown the way thither."  "If
that is what thou dost prefer, thou shalt obtain it willingly."  "I do
prefer it, indeed," said he.  Then they ate, and they were amply served,
and they had a variety of gifts, and abundance of liquor.  And when they
had finished eating, they arose.  And Geraint called for his horse and
his armour, and he accoutred both himself and his horse.  And all the
hosts went forth until they came to the side of the hedge, and the hedge
was so lofty, that it reached as high as they could see in the air, and
upon every stake in the hedge, except two, there was the head of a man,
and the number of stakes throughout the hedge was very great.  Then said
the Little King, "May no one go in with the chieftain?"  "No one may,"
said Earl Owain.  "Which way can I enter?" enquired Geraint.  "I know
not," said Owain, "but enter by the way that thou wilt, and that seemeth
easiest to thee."

Then fearlessly and unhesitatingly Geraint dashed forward into the mist.
And on leaving the mist he came to a large orchard, and in the orchard he
saw an open space, wherein was a tent of red satin, and the door of the
tent was open, and an apple-tree stood in front of the door of the tent,
and on a branch of the apple-tree hung a huge hunting horn.  Then he
dismounted, and went into the tent, and there was no one in the tent save
one maiden sitting in a golden chair, and another chair was opposite to
her, empty.  And Geraint went to the empty chair, and sat down therein.
"Ah! chieftain," said the maiden, "I would not counsel thee to sit in
that chair."  "Wherefore?" said Geraint.  "The man to whom that chair
belongs has never suffered another to sit in it."  "I care not," said
Geraint, "though it displease him that I sit in the chair."  And
thereupon they heard a mighty tumult around the tent.  And Geraint looked
to see what was the cause of the tumult.  And he beheld without a knight
mounted upon a war-horse, proudly-snorting, high-mettled, and large of
bone, and a robe of honour in two parts was upon him and upon his horse,
and beneath it was plenty of armour.  "Tell me, chieftain," said he to
Geraint, "who it was that bade thee sit there?"  "Myself," answered he.
"It was wrong of thee to do me this shame and disgrace.  Arise, and do me
satisfaction for thine insolence."  Then Geraint arose, and they
encountered immediately, and they broke a set of lances; and a second
set; and a third; and they gave each other fierce and frequent strokes;
and at last Geraint became enraged, and he urged on his horse, and rushed
upon him, and gave him a thrust on the centre of his shield, so that it
was split, and so that the head of his lance went through his armour, and
his girths were broken, and he himself was borne headlong to the ground
the length of Geraint's lance and arm, over his horse's crupper.  "Oh, my
Lord!" said he, "thy mercy, and thou shalt have what thou wilt."  "I only
desire," said Geraint, "that this game shall no longer exist here, nor
the hedge of mist, nor magic, nor enchantment."  "Thou shalt have this
gladly, Lord," he replied.  "Cause then the mist to disappear from this
place," said Geraint.  "Sound yonder horn," said he, "and when thou
soundest it, the mist will vanish; but it will not go hence unless the
horn be blown by the knight by whom I am vanquished."  And sad and
sorrowful was Enid where she remained, through anxiety concerning
Geraint.  Then Geraint went and sounded the horn.  And at the first blast
he gave, the mist vanished.  And all the hosts came together, and they
all became reconciled to each other.  And the Earl invited Geraint and
the Little King to stay with him that night.  And the next morning they
separated.  And Geraint went towards his own dominions; and thenceforth
he reigned prosperously, and his warlike fame and splendour lasted with
renown and honour both to him and to Enid from that time forward.

{Picture: p62.jpg}




KILHWCH AND OLWEN
OR THE
TWRCH TRWYTH


{Picture: p63.jpg}

Kilydd, the son of Prince Kelyddon desired a wife as a helpmate, and the
wife that he chose was Goleuddydd, the daughter of Prince Anlawdd.  And
after their union the people put up prayers that they might have an heir.
And they had a son through the prayers of the people.  From the time of
her pregnancy Goleuddydd became wild, and wandered about, without
habitation; but when her delivery was at hand, her reason came back to
her.  Then she went to a mountain where there was a swineherd, keeping a
herd of swine.  And through fear of the swine the queen was delivered.
And the swineherd took the boy, and brought him to the palace; and he was
christened, and they called him Kilhwch, because he had been found in a
swine's burrow.  Nevertheless the boy was of gentle lineage, and cousin
unto Arthur; and they put him out to nurse.

After this the boy's mother, Goleuddydd, the daughter of Prince Anlawdd,
fell sick.  Then she called her husband unto her, and said to him, "Of
this sickness I shall die, and thou wilt take another wife.  Now wives
are the gift of the Lord, but it would be wrong for thee to harm thy son.
Therefore I charge thee that thou take not a wife until thou see a briar
with two blossoms upon my grave."  And this he promised her.  Then she
besought him to dress her grave every year, that nothing might grow
thereon. {64}  So the queen died.  Now the king sent an attendant every
morning to see if anything were growing upon the grave.  And at the end
of the seventh year the master neglected that which he had promised to
the queen.

One day the king went to hunt, and he rode to the place of burial, to see
the grave, and to know if it were time that he should take a wife; and
the king saw the briar.  And when he saw it, the king took counsel where
he should find a wife.  Said one of his counsellors, "I know a wife that
will suit thee well, and she is the wife of King Doged."  And they
resolved to go to seek her; and they slew the king, and brought away his
wife and one daughter that she had along with her.  And they conquered
the king's lands.

On a certain day as the lady walked abroad, she came to the house of an
old crone that dwelt in the town, and that had no tooth in her head.  And
the queen said to her, "Old woman, tell me that which I shall ask thee,
for the love of Heaven.  Where are the children of the man who has
carried me away by violence?"  Said the crone, "He has not children."
Said the queen, "Woe is me, that I should have come to one who is
childless!"  Then said the hag, "Thou needest not lament on account of
that, for there is a prediction that he shall have an heir by thee, and
by none other.  Moreover, be not sorrowful, for he has one son."

The lady returned home with joy, and she asked her consort, "Wherefore
hast thou concealed thy children from me?"  The king said, "I will do so
no longer."  And he sent messengers for his son, and he was brought to
the Court.  His stepmother said unto him, "It were well for thee to have
a wife, and I have a daughter who is sought of every man of renown in the
world."  "I am not yet of an age to wed," answered the youth.  Then said
she unto him, "I declare to thee, that it is thy destiny not to be suited
with a wife until thou obtain Olwen, the daughter of Yspaddaden Penkawr."
And the youth blushed, and the love of the maiden diffused itself through
all his frame, although he had never seen her.  And his father enquired
of him, "What has come over thee, my son, and what aileth thee?"  "My
stepmother has declared to me, that I shall never have a wife until I
obtain Olwen, the daughter of Yspaddaden Penkawr."  "That will be easy
for thee," answered his father.  "Arthur is thy cousin.  Go, therefore,
unto Arthur, to cut thy hair, and ask this of him as a boon."

{Picture: p66.jpg}

And the youth pricked forth upon a steed with head dappled grey, of four
winters old, firm of limb, with shell-formed hoofs, having a bridle of
linked gold on his head, and upon him a saddle of costly gold.  And in
the youth's hand were two spears of silver, sharp, well-tempered, headed
with steel, three ells in length, of an edge to wound the wind, and cause
blood to flow, and swifter than the fall {66} of the dew-drop from the
blade of reed grass upon the earth, when the dew of June is at the
heaviest.  A gold-hilted sword was upon his thigh, the blade of which was
of gold, bearing a cross of inlaid gold of the hue of the lightning of
heaven: his war-horn was of ivory.  Before him were two brindled white-
breasted greyhounds, having strong collars of rubies about their necks,
reaching from the shoulder to the ear.  And the one that was on the left
side bounded across to the right side, and the one on the right to the
left, and like two sea swallows sported around him.  And his courser cast
up four sods with his four hoofs, like four swallows in the air, about
his head, now above, now below.  About him was a four-cornered cloth of
purple, and an apple of gold was at each corner; and every one of the
apples was of the value of an hundred kine.  And there was precious gold
of the value of three hundred kine upon his shoes, and upon his stirrups,
from his knee to the tip of his toe.  And the blade of grass bent not
beneath him, so light was his courser's tread as he journeyed towards the
gate of Arthur's palace.

Spoke the youth, "Is there a porter?"  "There is; and if thou holdest not
thy peace, small will be thy welcome. {67}  I am Arthur's porter every
first day of January.  And during every other part of the year but this
the office is filled by Huandaw, and Gogigwc, and Llaeskenym, and
Pennpingyon, who goes upon his head to save his feet, neither towards the
sky nor towards the earth, but like a rolling stone upon the floor of the
Court."  "Open the portal."  "I will not open it."  "Wherefore not?"  "The
knife is in the meat, and the drink is in the horn, and there is revelry
in Arthur's hall, and none may enter therein but the son of a king of a
privileged country, or a craftsman bringing his craft.  But there will be
refreshment for thy dogs, and for thy horses; and for thee there will be
collops cooked and peppered, and luscious wine and mirthful songs, and
food for fifty men shall be brought unto thee in the guest chamber, where
the stranger and the sons of other countries eat, who come not unto the
precincts of the Palace of Arthur.  Thou wilt fare no worse there than
thou wouldest with Arthur in the Court.  A lady shall smooth thy couch,
and shall lull thee with songs; and early to-morrow morning, when the
gate is open for the multitude that came hither to-day, for thee shall it
be opened first, and thou mayest sit in the place that thou shall choose
in Arthur's Hall, from the upper end to the lower."  Said the youth,
"That will I not do.  If thou openest the gate, it is well.  If thou dost
not open it, I will bring disgrace upon thy Lord, and evil report upon
thee.  And I will set up three shouts at this very gate, than which none
were ever more deadly, from the top of Pengwaed in Cornwall to the bottom
of Dinsol, in the North, and to Esgair Oervel, in Ireland.  And all the
women in this Palace that are pregnant shall lose their offspring; and
such as are not pregnant, their hearts shall be turned by illness, so
that they shall never bear children from this day forward."  "What
clamour soever thou mayest make," said Glewlwyd Gavaelvawr, "against the
laws of Arthur's Palace, shalt thou not enter therein, until I first go
and speak with Arthur."  Then Glewlwyd went into the Hall.  And Arthur
said to him, "Hast thou news from the gate?"--"Half of my life is past,
and half of thine.  I was heretofore in Kaer Se and Asse, in Sach and
Salach, in Lotor and Fotor; and I have been heretofore in India the Great
and India the Lesser; and I was in the battle of Dau Ynyr, when the
twelve hostages were brought from Llychlyn.  And I have also been in
Europe, and in Africa, and in the Islands of Corsica, and in Caer
Brythwch, and Brythach, and Verthach; and I was present when formerly
thou didst slay the family of Clis the son of Merin, and when thou didst
slay Mil Du, the son of Ducum, and when thou didst conquer Greece in the
East.  And I have been in Caer Oeth and Annoeth, and in Caer Nevenhyr;
nine supreme sovereigns, handsome men, saw we there, but never did I
behold a man of equal dignity with him who is now at the door of the
portal."  Then said Arthur, "If walking thou didst enter in here, return
thou running.  And every one that beholds the light, and every one that
opens and shuts the eye, let him show him respect, and serve him, some
with gold-mounted drinking horns, others with collops cooked and
peppered, until food and drink can be prepared for him.  It is unbecoming
to keep such a man as thou sayest he is in the wind and the rain."  Said
Kai, "By the hand of my friend, if thou wouldest follow my counsel, thou
wouldest not break through the laws of the Court because of him."  "Not
so, blessed Kai, it is an honour to us to be resorted to, and the greater
our courtesy, the greater will be our renown, and our fame, and our
glory."

And Glewlwyd came to the gate, and opened the gate before him; and
although all dismounted upon the horse-block at the gate, yet did he not
dismount, but he rode in upon his charger.  Then said Kilhwch, "Greeting
be unto thee, Sovereign Ruler of this Island; and be this greeting no
less unto the lowest than unto the highest, and be it equally unto thy
guests, and thy warriors, and thy chieftains--let all partake of it as
completely as thyself.  And complete be thy favour, and thy fame, and thy
glory, throughout all this Island."  "Greeting unto thee also," said
Arthur, "sit thou between two of my warriors, and thou shalt have
minstrels before thee, and thou shalt enjoy the privileges of a king born
to a throne, as long as thou remainest here.  And when I dispense my
presents to the visitors and strangers in this Court, they shall be in
thy hand at my commencing."  Said the youth, "I came not here to consume
meat and drink; but if I obtain the boon that I seek, I will requite it
thee, and extol thee; and if I have it not, I will bear forth thy
dispraise to the four quarters of the world, as far as thy renown has
extended."  Then said Arthur, "Since thou wilt not remain here,
chieftain, thou shalt receive the boon whatsoever thy tongue may name, as
far as the wind dries and the rain moistens, and the sun revolves, and
the sea encircles, and the earth extends; save only my ship; and my
mantle; and Caledvwlch, my sword, and Rhongomyant, my lance; and
Wynebgwrthucher, my shield; and Carnwenhau, {70a} my dagger; and
Gwenhwyvar, my wife.  By the truth of Heaven, thou shalt have it
cheerfully, name what thou wilt."  "I would that thou bless {70b} my
hair."  "That shalt be granted thee."

And Arthur took a golden comb, and scissors, whereof the loops were of
silver, and he combed his hair.  And Arthur enquired of him who he was.
"For my heart warms unto thee, and I know that thou art come of my blood.
Tell me, therefore, who thou art."  "I will tell thee," said the youth,
"I am Kilhwch, the son of Kilydd, the son of Prince Kelyddon, by
Goleuddydd, my mother, the daughter of Prince Anlawdd."  "That is true,"
said Arthur.  "Thou art my cousin.  Whatsoever boon thou mayest ask, thou
shalt receive, be it what it may that thy tongue shall name."  "Pledge
the truth of Heaven and the faith of thy kingdom thereof."  "I pledge it
thee, gladly."  "I crave of thee then, that thou obtain for me Olwen, the
daughter of Yspaddaden Penkawr, and this boon I likewise seek at the
hands of thy warriors.  I seek it from Kai, and Bedwyr, and Greidawl
Galldonyd, {71a} and Gwythyr the son of Greidawl, and Greid the son of
Eri, and Kynddelig Kyvarwydd, and Tathal Twyll Goleu, and Maelwys the son
of Baeddan, and Crychwr {71b} the son of Nes, and Cubert the son of
Daere, and Percos the son of Poch, and Lluber Beuthach, and Corvil
Bervach, and Gwynn the son of Nudd, and Edeyrn the son of Nudd, and Gadwy
{71c} the son of Geraint, and Prince Fflewddur Fflam, and Ruawn Pebyr the
son of Dorath, and Bradwen the son of Moren Mynawc, and Moren Mynawc
himself, and Dalldav the son of Kimin Cov, and the son of Alun Dyved, and
the son of Saidi, and the son of Gwryon, and Uchtryd Ardywad Kad, and
Kynwas Curvagyl, and Gwrhyr Gwarthegvras, and Isperyr Ewingath, and
Gallcoyt Govynynat, and Duach, and Grathach, and Nerthach, the sons of
Gwawrddur Kyrvach, (these men came forth from the confines of Hell), and
Kilydd Canhastyr, and Canastyr Kanllaw, and Cors Cant-Ewin, and Esgeir
Gulhwch Govynkawn, and Drustwrn Hayarn, and Glewlwyd Gavaelvawr, and
Lloch Llawwynnyawc, and Aunwas {71d} Adeiniawc, and Sinnoch the son of
Seithved, and Gwennwynwyn the son of Naw, and Bedyw the son of Seithved,
and Gobrwy the son of Echel Vorddwyttwll, and Echel Vorddwyttwll himself,
and Mael the son of Roycol, and Dadweir Dallpenn, and Garwyli the son of
Gwythawc Gwyr, and Gwythawc Gwyr himself, and Gormant the son of Ricca,
and Menw the son of Teirgwaedd, and Digon the son of Alar, and Selyf the
son of Smoit, {71e} and Gusg the son of Atheu, and Nerth the son of
Kedarn, and Drudwas the son of Tryffin, and Twrch the son of Perif, and
Twrch the son of Annwas, and Iona king of France, and Sel the son of
Selgi, and Teregud the son of Iaen, and Sulyen the son of Iaen, and
Bradwen the son of Iaen, and Moren the son of Iaen, and Siawn the son of
Iaen, and Cradawc the son of Iaen.  (They were men of Caerdathal, of
Arthur's kindred on his father's side.)  Dirmyg the son of Kaw, and
Justic the son of Kaw, and Etmic the son of Kaw, and Anghawd the son of
Kaw, and Ovan the son of Kaw, and Kelin the son of Kaw, and Connyn the
son of Kaw, and Mabsant the son of Kaw, and Gwyngad the son of Kaw, and
Llwybyr the son of Kaw, and Coth the son of Kaw, and Meilic the son of
Kaw, and Kynwas the son of Kaw, and Ardwyad the son of Kaw, and Ergyryad
the son of Kaw, and Neb the son of Kaw, and Gilda the son of Kaw, and
Calcas the son of Kaw, and Hueil the son of Kaw, (he never yet made a
request at the hand of any Lord).  And Samson Vinsych, and Taliesin the
chief of the bards, and Mamawyddan the son of Llyr, and Llary the son of
Prince Kasnar, and Ysperni {72a} the son of Fflergant king of Armorica,
and Saranhon the son of Glythwyr, and Llawr Eilerw, and Annyanniawc the
son of Menw the son of Teirgwaedd, and Gwynn the son of Nwyvre, and Fflam
the son of Nwyvre, and Geraint the son of Erbin, and Ermid {72b} the son
of Erbin, and Dyvel the son of Erbin, and Gwynn the son of Ermid, and
Kyndrwyn the son of Ermid, and Hyveidd Unllenn, and Eiddon Vawr Vrydic,
and Reidwn Arwy, and Gormant the son of Ricca (Arthur's brother by his
mother's side; the Penhynev of Cornwall was his father), and Llawnrodded
Varvawc, and Nodawl Varyf Twrch, and Berth the son of Kado, and Rheidwn
the son of Beli, and Iscovan Hael, and Iscawin the son of Panon, and
Morvran the son of Tegid (no one struck him in the battle of Camlan by
reason of his ugliness; all thought he was an auxiliary devil.  Hair had
he upon him like the hair of a stag).  And Sandde Bryd Angel (no one
touched him with a spear in the battle of Camlan because of his beauty;
all thought he was a ministering angel).  And Kynwyl Sant, the third man
that escaped from the battle of Camlan, (and he was the last who parted
from Arthur on Hengroen his horse).  And Uchtryd the son of Erim, and Eus
the son of Erim, and Henwas Adeinawg the son of Erim, and Henbedestyr the
son of Erim, and Sgilti Yscawndroed son of Erim.  (Unto these three men
belonged these three qualities,--with Henbedestyr there was not any one
who could keep pace, either on horseback or on foot; with Henwas
Adeinawg, no four-footed beast could run the distance of an acre, much
less could it go beyond it; and as to Sgilti Yscawndroed, when he
intended to go upon a message for his Lord, he never sought to find a
path, but knowing whither he was to go, if his way lay through a wood he
went along the tops of the trees.  During his whole life, a blade of reed
grass bent not beneath his feet, much less did one ever break, so lightly
did he tread.)  Teithi Hen the son of Gwynhan, (his dominions were
swallowed up by the sea and he himself hardly escaped, and he came to
Arthur; and his knife had this peculiarity, that from the time that he
came there, no haft would ever remain upon it, and owing to this a
sickness came over him, and he pined away during the remainder of his
life, and of this he died).  And Carneddyr the son of Govynyon Hen, and
Gwenwynwyn the son of Nav Gyssevin, Arthur's champion, and Llysgadrudd
Emys, and Gwrbothu Hen, (uncles unto Arthur were they, his mother's
brothers).  Kulvanawyd the son of Goryon, and Llenlleawg {74a} Wyddel
from the headland of Ganion, and Dyvynwal Moel, and Dunard king of the
North, Teirnon Twryf Bliant, and Tegvan Gloff, and Tegyr Talgellawg,
Gwrdinal {74b} the son of Ebrei, and Morgant Hael, Gwystyl the son of
Rhun the son of Nwython, and Llwyddeu, the son of Nwython, and Gwydre the
son of Llwyddeu, (Gwenabwy the daughter of [Kaw] was his mother, Hueil
his uncle stabbed him, and hatred was between Hueil and Arthur because of
the wound).  Drem the son of Dremidyd, (when the gnat arose in the
morning with the sun, he could see it from Gelli Wic in Cornwall, as far
off as Pen Blathaon in North Britain).  And Eidyol the son of Ner, and
Glwyddyn Saer, (who constructed Ehangwen, Arthur's Hall).  Kynyr
Keinvarvawc, (when he was told he had a son born, {74c} he said to his
wife, 'Damsel, if thy son be mine, his heart will be always cold, and
there will be no warmth in his hands; and he will have another
peculiarity, if he is my son he will always be stubborn; and he will have
another peculiarity, when he carries a burden, whether it be large or
small, no one will be able to see it, either before him or at his back;
and he will have another peculiarity, no one will be able to resist water
and fire so well as he will; and he will have another peculiarity, there
will never be a servant or an officer equal to him').  Henwas, and
Henwyneb, (an old companion to Arthur).  Gwallgoyc, (another; when he
came to a town, though there were three hundred houses in it, if he
wanted any thing, he would not let sleep come to the eyes of any one
whilst he remained there).  Berwyn the son of Gerenhir, and Paris king of
France, {75a} and Osla Gyllellvawr, (who bore a short broad dagger.  When
Arthur and his hosts came before a torrent, they would seek for a narrow
place where they might pass the water, and would lay the sheathed dagger
across the torrent, and it would form a bridge sufficient for the armies
of the three Islands of Britain, and of the three Islands adjacent, with
their spoil).  Gwyddawg the son of Menestyr, (who slew Kai, and whom
Arthur slew together with his brothers, to revenge Kai).  Garanwyn the
son of Kai, and Amren the son of Bedwyr, and Ely Amyr, and Rheu Rhwyd
Dyrys, and Rhun Rhudwern, and Eli, and Trachmyr, (Arthur's chief
huntsmen).  And Llwyddeu the son of Kelcoed, and Hunabwy the son of
Gwryon, and Gwynn Godyvron, and Gweir Datharwenniddawg, and Gweir the son
of Cadell the son of Talaryant, {75b} and Gweir Gwrhyd Ennwir, and Gweir
Paladyr Hir, (the uncles of Arthur, the brothers of his mother).  The
sons of Llwch Llawwynnyawg, (from beyond the raging sea).  Llenlleawg
Wyddel, and Ardderchawg Prydain.  Cas the son of Saidi, Gwrvan Gwallt
Avwyn, and Gwyllennhin the king of France, and Gwittart the son of Oedd
king of Ireland, Garselit Wyddel, Panawr Pen Bagad, and Ffleudor the son
of Nav, Gwynnhyvar mayor of Cornwall and Devon, (the ninth man that
rallied the battle of Camlan).  Keli and Kueli, and Gilla Coes Hydd, (he
would clear three hundred acres at one bound.  The chief leaper of
Ireland was he).  Sol, and Gwadyn Ossol and Gwadyn Odyeith.  (Sol could
stand all day upon one foot.  Gwadyn Ossol, if he stood upon the top of
the highest mountain in the world, it would become a level plain under
his feet.  Gwadyn Odyeith, the soles of his feet emitted sparks of fire
when they struck upon things hard, like the heated mass when drawn out of
the forge.  He cleared the way for Arthur when he came to any stoppage.)
Hirerwm and Hiratrwm.  (The day they went on a visit three Cantrevs
provided for their entertainment, and they feasted until noon and drank
until night, when they went to sleep.  And then they devoured the heads
of the vermin through hunger, as if they had never eaten anything.  When
they made a visit, they left neither the fat nor the lean, neither the
hot nor the cold, the sour nor the sweet, the fresh nor the salt, the
boiled nor the raw.)  Huarwar the son of Aflawn, (who asked Arthur such a
boon as would satisfy him.  It was the third great plague of Cornwall
when he received it.  None could get a smile from him but when he was
satisfied).  Gware Gwallt Euryn.  The two cubs of Gast Rhymi, Gwyddrud
and Gwyddneu Astrus.  Sugyn the son of Sugnedydd, (who would suck up the
sea on which were three hundred ships, so as to leave nothing but a dry
strand.  He was broad-chested). {76a}  Rhacymwri, the attendant of
Arthur; (whatever barn he was shown, were there the produce of thirty
ploughs within it, he would strike it with an iron flail until the
rafters, the beams, and the boards, were no better than the small oats in
the mow upon the floor of the barn).  Dygyflwng, and Anoeth Veidawg.  And
Hir Eiddyl, and Hir Amreu, (they were two attendants of Arthur).  And
Gwevyl the son of Gwestad, (on the day that he was sad, he would let one
of his lips drop below his waist, while he turned up the other like a cap
upon his head).  Uchtryd Varyf Draws, (who spread his red untrimmed beard
over the eight-and-forty rafters which were in Arthur's Hall).  Elidyr
Gyvarwydd, Yskyrdav, and Yscudydd, (two attendants of Gwenhwyvar were
they.  Their feet were swift as their thoughts when bearing a message).
Brys the son of Bryssethach, (from the Hill of the Black Fernbrake in
North Britain).  And Grudlwyn Gorr.  Bwlch, and Kyfwlch, and Sefwlch, the
sons of Cleddyf Kyfwlch, the grandsons of Cleddyf Difwlch.  (Their three
shields were three gleaming glitterers; their three spears were three
pointed piercers; their three swords were three griding gashers; Glas,
Glessic, and Gleisad.  Their three dogs, Call, Cuall, and Cavall.  Their
three horses, Hwyrdyddwd, and Drwgdyddwd, and Llwyrdyddwg. {77a}  Their
three wives, Och, and Garym, and Diaspad.  Their three grand-children,
Lluched, and Neved, and Eissiwed.  Their three daughters, Drwg, and
Gwaeth, and Gwaethav Oll.  Their three handmaids, Eheubryd the daughter
of Kyfwlch, Gorascwrn the daughter of Nerth, Ewaedan the daughter of
Kynvelyn Keudawd Pwyll the half man.)  Dwnn Diessic Unbenn, Eiladyr the
son of Pen Llarcau, Kynedyr Wyllt the son of Hettwn Talaryant, Sawyl, Ben
Uchel, Gwalchmai the son of Gwyar, Gwalhaved the son of Gwyar, Gwrhyr
Gwastawd Ieithoedd, (to whom all tongues were known,) and Kethcrwn {77b}
the Priest.  Clust the son of Clustveinad, (though he were buried seven
cubits beneath the earth, he would hear the ant, fifty miles off, rise
from her nest in the morning).  Medyr the son of Methredydd, (from Gelli
Wic he could, in a twinkling, shoot the wren through the two legs upon
Esgeir Oervel in Ireland).  Gwiawn Llygad Cath, (who would cut a haw from
the eye of the gnat without hurting him).  Ol the son of Olwydd; (seven
years before he was born his father's swine were carried off, and when he
grew up a man, he tracked the swine, and brought them back in seven
herds).  Bedwini the Bishop, (who blessed Arthur's meat and drink).  For
the sake of the golden-chained daughters of this island.  For the sake of
Gwenhwyvar, its chief lady, and Gwennhwyach her sister, and Rathtyeu the
only daughter of Clemenhill, and Rhelemon the daughter of Kai, and
Tannwen the daughter of Gweir Datharweniddawg. {78a}  Gwenn Alarch, the
daughter of Kynwyl Canbwch. {78b}  Eurneid the daughter of Clydno Eiddin.
Eneuawc the daughter of Bedwyr.  Enrydreg the daughter of Tudvathar.
Gwennwledyr the daughter of Gwaledyr Kyrvach.  Erddudnid the daughter of
Tryffin.  Eurolwen the daughter of Gwdolwyn Gorr.  Teleri the daughter of
Peul.  Indeg the daughter of Garwy {78c} Hir.  Morvudd the daughter of
Urien Rheged.  Gwenllian Deg the majestic maiden.  Creiddylad the
daughter of Llud Llaw Ereint.  (She was the most splendid maiden in the
three Islands of the mighty, and in the three Islands adjacent, and for
her Gwythyr the son of Greidawl and Gwynn the son of Nudd fight every
first of May until the day of doom.)  Ellylw the daughter of Neol Kynn-
Crog.  (She lived three ages.)  Essyllt Vinwen, and Essyllt Vingul."  And
all these did Kilhwch son of Kilydd adjure to obtain his boon.

Then said Arthur, "Oh! Chieftain, I have never heard of the maiden of
whom thou speakest, nor of her kindred, but I will gladly send messengers
in search of her.  Give me time to seek her."  And the youth said, "I
will willingly grant from this night to that at the end of the year to do
so."  Then Arthur sent messengers to every land within his dominions, to
seek for the maiden, and at the end of the year Arthur's messengers
returned without having gained any knowledge or intelligence concerning
Olwen, more than on the first day.  Then said Kilhwch, "Every one has
received his boon, and I yet lack mine.  I will depart and bear away thy
honour with me."  Then said Kai, "Rash chieftain! dost thou reproach
Arthur?  Go with us, and we will not part until thou dost either confess
that the maiden exists not in the world, or until we obtain her."
Thereupon Kai rose up.  Kai had this peculiarity, that his breath lasted
nine nights and nine days under water, and he could exist nine nights and
nine days without sleep.  A wound from Kai's sword no physician could
heal.  Very subtle was Kai.  When it pleased him he could render himself
as tall as the highest tree in the forest.  And he had another
peculiarity,--so great was the heat of his nature, that when it rained
hardest, whatever he carried remained dry for a handbreadth above and a
handbreadth below his hand; and when his companions were coldest, it was
to them as fuel with which to light their fire.

And Arthur called Bedwyr, who never shrank from any enterprise upon which
Kai was bound.  None were equal to him in swiftness throughout this
Island except Arthur and Drych Ail Kibddar.  And although he was
one-handed, three warriors could not shed blood faster than he on the
field of battle.  Another property he had, his lance would produce a
wound equal to those of nine opposing lances.

And Arthur called to Kynddelig the Guide, "Go thou upon this expedition
with the chieftain."  For as good a guide was he in a land which he had
never seen as he was in his own.

He called Gwrhyr Gwalstawt Ieithoedd, because he knew all tongues.

He called Gwalchmai the son of Gwyar, because he never returned home
without achieving the adventure of which he went in quest.  He was the
best of footmen and the best of knights.  He was nephew to Arthur, the
son of his sister, and his cousin.

And Arthur called Menw the son of Teirgwaedd, in order that if they went
into a savage country, he might cast a charm and an illusion over them,
so that none might see them, whilst they could see every one.

They journeyed until they came to a vast open plain, wherein they saw a
great castle, which was the fairest of the castles of the world.  And
they journeyed that day until the evening, and when they thought they
were nigh to the castle, they were no nearer to it than they had been in
the morning.  And the second and the third day they journeyed, and even
then scarcely could they reach so far.  And when they came before the
castle, they beheld a vast flock of sheep, which was boundless, and
without an end.  And upon the top of a mound there was a herdsman,
keeping the sheep.  And a rug made of skins was upon him; and by his side
was a shaggy mastiff, larger than a steed nine winters old.  Never had he
lost even a lamb from his flock, much less a large sheep.  He let no
occasion ever pass without doing some hurt and harm.  All the dead trees
and bushes in the plain he burnt with his breath down to the very ground.

Then said Kai, "Gwrhyr Gwalstawt Ieithoedd, go thou and salute yonder
man."  "Kai," said he, "I engaged not to go further than thou thyself."
"Let us go then together," answered Kai. {81a}  Said Menw the son of
Teirgwaedd, "Fear not to go thither, for I will cast a spell upon the
dog, so that he shall injure no one."  And they went up to the mound
whereon the herdsman was, and they said to him, "How dost thou fare?  O
herdsman!"  "No less fair be it to you than to me."  "Truly, art thou the
chief?"  "There is no hurt to injure me but my own." {81b}  "Whose are
the sheep that thou dost keep, and to whom does yonder castle belong?"
"Stupid are ye, truly!  Through the whole world is it known that this is
the castle of Yspaddaden Penkawr."  "And who art thou?"  "I am called
Custennin the son of Dyfnedig, and my brother Yspaddaden Penkawr
oppressed me because of my possession.  And ye also, who are ye?"  "We
are an embassy from Arthur, come to seek Olwen, the daughter of
Yspaddaden Penkawr."  "Oh men! the mercy of Heaven be upon you, do not
that for all the world.  None who ever came hither on this quest has
returned alive."  And the herdsman rose up.  And as he arose, Kilhwch
gave unto him a ring of gold.  And he sought to put on the ring, but it
was too small for him, so he placed it in the finger of his glove.  And
he went home, and gave the glove to his spouse to keep.  And she took the
ring from the glove when it was given her, and she said, "Whence came
this ring, for thou art not wont to have good fortune?"  "I went," said
he, "to the sea to seek for fish, and lo, I saw a corpse borne by the
waves.  And a fairer corpse than it did I never behold.  And from its
finger did I take this ring."  "Oh man! does the sea permit its dead to
wear jewels?  Show me then this body."  "Oh wife, him to whom this ring
belonged thou shalt see herein the evening." {82}  "And who is he?" asked
the woman.  "Kilhwch the son of Kilydd, the son of Prince Kelyddon, by
Goleuddydd the daughter of Prince Anlawdd, his mother, who is come to
seek Olwen as his wife."  And when she heard that, her feelings were
divided between the joy that she had that her nephew, the son of her
sister, was coming to her, and sorrow because she had never known any one
depart alive who had come on that quest.

And they went forward to the gate of Custennin the herdsman's dwelling.
And when she heard their footsteps approaching, she ran out with joy to
meet them.  And Kai snatched a billet out of the pile.  And when she met
them she sought to throw her arms about their necks.  And Kai placed the
log between her two hands, and she squeezed it so that it became a
twisted coil.  "Oh woman," said Kai, "if thou hadst squeezed me thus,
none could ever again have set their affections on me.  Evil love were
this."  They entered into the house, and were served; and soon after they
all went forth to amuse themselves.  Then the woman opened a stone chest
that was before the chimney corner, and out of it arose a youth with
yellow curling hair.  Said Gwrhyr, "It is a pity to hide this youth.  I
know that it is not his own crime that is thus visited upon him."  "This
is but a remnant," said the woman.  "Three and twenty of my sons has
Yspaddaden Penkawr slain, and I have no more hope of this one than of the
others."  Then said Kai, "Let him come and be a companion with me, and he
shall not be slain unless I also am slain with him."  And they ate.  And
the woman asked them, "Upon what errand come you here?"  "We come to seek
Olwen for this youth."  Then said the woman, "In the name of Heaven,
since no one from the castle hath yet seen you, return again whence you
came."  "Heaven is our witness, that we will not return until we have
seen the maiden."  Said Kai, "Does she ever come hither, so that she may
be seen?"  "She comes here every Saturday to wash her head, and in the
vessel where she washes, she leaves all her rings, and she never either
comes herself or sends any messengers to fetch them."  "Will she come
here if she is sent to?"  "Heaven knows that I will not destroy my soul,
nor will I betray those that trust me; unless you will pledge me your
faith that you will not harm her, I will not send to her."  "We pledge
it," said they.  So a message was sent, and she came.

The maiden was clothed in a robe of flame-coloured silk, and about her
neck was a collar of ruddy gold, on which were precious emeralds and
rubies.  More yellow was her head than the flower of the broom, and her
skin was whiter than the foam of the wave, and fairer were her hands and
her fingers than the blossoms of the wood anemone amidst the spray of the
meadow fountain.  The eye of the trained hawk, the glance of the three-
mewed falcon, was not brighter than hers.  Her bosom was more snowy than
the breast of the white swan, her cheek was redder than the reddest
roses.  Whoso beheld her was filled with her love.  Four white trefoils
sprung up wherever she trod.  And therefore was she called Olwen.

She entered the house, and sat beside Kilhwch upon the foremost bench;
and as soon as he saw her he knew her.  And Kilhwch said unto her, "Ah!
maiden, thou art she whom I have loved; come away with me lest they speak
evil of thee and of me.  Many a day have I loved thee."  "I cannot do
this, for I have pledged my faith to my father not to go without his
counsel, for his life will last only until the time of my espousals.
Whatever is, must be.  But I will give thee advice if thou wilt take it.
Go, ask me of my father, and that which he shall require of thee, grant
it, and thou wilt obtain me; but if thou deny him anything, thou wilt not
obtain me, and it will be well for thee if thou escape with thy life."  "I
promise all this, if occasion offer," said he. {84a}

She returned to her chamber, and they all rose up and followed her to the
castle.  And they slew the nine porters that were at the nine gates in
silence.  And they slew the nine watch-dogs without one of them barking.
And they went forward to the hall.

"The greeting of Heaven and of man be unto thee, Yspaddaden Penkawr,"
said they.  "And you, wherefore come you?"  "We come to ask thy daughter
Olwen, for Kilhwch the son of Kilydd, the son of Prince Kelyddon."  "Where
are my pages and my servants? {84b}  Raise up the forks beneath my two
eyebrows which have fallen over my eyes, that I may see the fashion of my
son-in-law."  And they did so.  "Come hither to-morrow, and you shall
have an answer."

They rose to go forth, and Yspaddaden Penkawr seized one of the three
poisoned darts that lay beside him, and threw it after them.  And Bedwyr
caught it, and flung it, and pierced Yspaddaden Penkawr grievously with
it through the knee. {85a}  Then he said, "A cursed ungentle son-in-law,
truly.  I shall ever walk the worse for his rudeness, and shall ever be
without a cure.  This poisoned iron pains me like the bite of a gad-fly.
Cursed be the smith who forged it, and the anvil whereon it was wrought!
So sharp is it!"

That night also they took up their abode in the house of Custennin the
herdsman.  The next day with the dawn, they arrayed themselves in haste,
and proceeded to the castle, and entered the hall, and they said,
"Yspaddaden Penkawr, give us thy daughter in consideration of her dower
and her maiden fee, which we will pay to thee and to her two kinswomen
likewise.  And unless thou wilt do so, thou shall meet with thy death on
her account."  Then he said, "Her four great-grandmothers, and her four
great-grandsires are yet alive, it is needful that I take counsel of
them."  "Be it so," answered they, "we will go to meat."  As they rose
up; he took the second dart that was beside him, and cast it after them.
And Menw the son of Gwaedd caught it, and flung it back at him, and
wounded him in the centre of the breast, so that it came out at the small
of his back.  "A cursed ungentle son-in-law, truly," said he, "the hard
iron pains me like the bite of a horse-leech.  Cursed be the hearth
whereon it was heated, and the smith who formed it!  So sharp is it!
Henceforth, whenever I go up a hill, I shall have a scant in my breath,
and a pain in my chest, and I shall often loathe my food."  And they went
to meat.

And the third day they returned to the palace.  And Yspaddaden Penkawr
said to them, "Shoot not at me again unless you desire death.  Where are
my attendants?  Lift up the forks of my eyebrows which have fallen over
my eyeballs, that I may see the fashion of my son-in-law."  Then they
arose, and, as they did so, Yspaddaden Penkawr took the third poisoned
dart, and cast it at them.  And Kilhwch caught it, and threw it
vigorously, and wounded him through the eyeball, so that the dart came
out at the back of his head.  "A cursed ungentle son-in-law, truly!  As
long as I remain alive, my eyesight will be the worse.  Whenever I go
against the wind, my eyes will water; and peradventure my head will burn,
and I shall have a giddiness every new moon.  Cursed be the fire in which
it was forged.  Like the bite of a mad dog is the stroke of this poisoned
iron."  And they went to meat.

And the next day they came again to the palace, and they said, "Shoot not
at us any more, unless thou desirest such hurt, and harm, and torture as
thou now hast, and even more.  Give me thy daughter; and if thou wilt not
give her, thou shall receive thy death because of her."  "Where is he
that seeks my daughter?  Come hither where I may see thee."  And they
placed him a chair face to face with him.

Said Yspaddaden Penkawr, "Is it thou that seekest my daughter?"  "It is
I," answered Kilhwch.  "I must have thy pledge that thou wilt not do
towards me otherwise than is just, and, when I have gotten that which I
shall name, my daughter thou shalt have."  "I promise thee that
willingly," said Kilhwch; "name what thou wilt."  "I will do so," said
he.

"Seest thou yonder vast hill?"  "I see it."  "I require that it be rooted
up, and that the grubbings be burned for manure on the face of the land,
and that it be ploughed and sown in one day, and in one day that the
grain ripen.  And of that wheat I intend to make food and liquor fit for
the wedding of thee and my daughter.  And all this I require to be done
in one day."

"It will be easy for me to compass this, although thou mayest think that
it will not be easy."

"Though this be easy for thee, there is yet that which will not be so.  No
husbandman can till or prepare this land, so wild is it, except Amaethon
the son of Don, and he will not come with thee by his own free will, and
thou wilt not be able to compel him."

"It will be easy for me to compass this, although thou mayest think that
it will not be easy."

"Though thou get this, there is yet that which thou wilt not get.
Govannon the son of Don to come to the headland to rid the iron, he will
do no work of his own good will except for a lawful king, and thou wilt
not be able to compel him."  "It will be easy for me to compass this."
"Though thou get this, there is yet that which thou wilt not get; the two
dun oxen of Gwlwlyd, {87} both yoked together, to plough the wild land
yonder stoutly.  He will not give them of his own free will, and thou
wilt not be able to compel him."  "It will be easy for me to compass
this."  "Though thou get this, there is yet that which thou wilt not get;
the yellow and the brindled bull yoked together do I require."

"It will be easy for me to compass this."

"Though thou get this, there is yet that which thou wilt not get; the two
horned oxen, one of which is beyond, and the other this side of the
peaked mountain, yoked together in the same plough.  And these are
Nynniaw and Peibaw, whom God turned into oxen on account of their sins."

"It will be easy for me to compass this."

"Though thou get this, there is yet that which thou wilt not get.  Seest
thou yonder red tilled ground?"

"I see it."

"When first I met the mother of this maiden, nine bushels of flax were
sown therein, and none has yet sprung up, neither white nor black; and I
have the measure by me still.  I require to have the flax to sow in the
new land yonder, that when it grows up it may make a white wimple, for my
daughter's head on the day of thy wedding."

"It will be easy for me to compass this, although thou mayest think that
it will not be easy."

"Though thou get this, there is yet that which thou wilt not get.  Honey
that is nine times sweeter than the honey of the virgin swarm, without
scum and bees, do I require to make bragget for the feast."

"It will be easy for me to compass this, although thou mayest think that
it will not be easy."

"The vessel of Llwyr the son of Llwyryon, which is of the utmost value.
There is no other vessel in the world that can hold this drink.  Of his
free will thou wilt not get it, and thou canst not compel him."

"It will be easy for me to compass this, although thou mayest think that
it will not be easy."

"Though thou get this, there is yet that which thou wilt not get.  The
basket of Gwyddneu Garanhir, if the whole world should come together,
thrice nine men at a time, the meat that each of them desired would be
found within it.  I require to eat therefrom on the night that my
daughter becomes thy bride.  He will give it to no one of his own free
will, and thou canst not compel him."

"It will be easy for me to compass this, although thou mayest think that
it will not be easy."

"Though thou get this, there is yet that which thou wilt not get.  The
horn of Gwlgawd Gododin to serve us with liquor that night.  He will not
give it of his own free will, and thou wilt not be able to compel him."

"It will be easy for me to compass this, although thou mayest think that
it will not be easy."

"Though thou get this, there is yet that which thou wilt not get.  The
harp of Teirtu to play to us that night. {89}  When a man desires that it
should play, it does so of itself, and when he desires that it should
cease, it ceases.  And this he will not give of his own free will, and
thou wilt not be able to compel him."

"It will be easy for me to compass this, although thou mayest think that
it will not be easy."

"Though thou get this, there is yet that which thou wilt not get.  The
cauldron of Diwrnach Wyddel, the steward of Odgar the son of Aedd, king
of Ireland, to boil the meat for thy marriage feast."

"It will be easy for me to compass this, although thou mayest think that
it will not be easy."

"Though thou get this, there is yet that which thou wilt not get.  It is
needful for me to wash my head, and shave my beard, and I require the
tusk of Yskithyrwyn Benbaedd to shave myself withal, neither shall I
profit by its use if it be not plucked alive out of his head."

"It will be easy for me to compass this, although thou mayest think that
it will not be easy."

"Though thou get this, there is yet that which thou wilt not get.  There
is no one in the world that can pluck it out of his head except Odgar the
son of Aedd, king of Ireland."

"It will be easy for me to compass this."

"Though thou get this, there is yet that which thou wilt not get.  I will
not trust any one to keep the tusk except Gado of North Britain.  Now the
threescore Cantrevs of North Britain are under his sway, and of his own
free will he will not come out of his kingdom, and thou wilt not be able
to compel him."

"It will be easy for me to compass this, although thou mayest think that
it wilt not be easy."

"Though thou get this, there is yet that which thou wilt not get.  I must
spread out my hair in order to shave it, and it will never be spread out
unless I have the blood of the jet black sorceress, the daughter of the
pure white sorceress, from Pen Nant Govid, on the confines of Hell."

"It will be easy for me to compass this, although thou mayest think that
it will not be easy."

"Though thou get this, there is yet that which thou wilt not get.  I will
not have the blood unless I have it warm, and no vessels will keep warm
the liquid that is put therein except the bottles of Gwyddolwyn Gorr,
which preserve the heat of the liquor that is put into them in the east,
until they arrive at the west.  And he will not give them of his own free
will, and thou wilt not be able to compel him."

"It will be easy for me to compass this, although thou mayest think that
it will not be easy."

"Though thou get this, there is yet that which thou wilt not get.  Some
will desire fresh milk, and it will not be possible to have fresh milk
for all, unless we have the bottles of Rhinnon Rhin Barnawd, wherein no
liquor ever turns sour.  And he will not give them of his own free will,
and thou wilt not be able to compel him."

"It will be easy for me to compass this, although thou mayest think that
it will not be easy."

"Though thou get this, there is yet that which thou wilt not get.
Throughout the world there is not a comb or scissors with which I can
arrange my hair, on account of its rankness, except the comb and scissors
that are between the two ears of Twrch Trwyth, the son of Prince Tared.
He will not give them of his own free will, and thou wilt not be able to
compel him."

"It will be easy for me to compass this, although thou mayest think that
it will not be easy."

"Though thou get this, there is yet that which thou wilt not get.  It
will not be possible to hunt Twrch Trwyth without Drudwyn, the whelp of
Greid, the son of Eri."

"It will be easy for me to compass this, although thou mayest think that
it will not be easy."

"Though thou get this, there is yet that which thou wilt not get.
Throughout the world there is not a leash that can hold him, except the
leash of Cwrs Cant Ewin."

"It will be easy for me to compass this, although thou mayest think that
it will not be easy."

"Though thou get this, there is yet that which thou wilt not get.
Throughout the world there is no collar that wilt hold the leash except
the collar of Canhastyr Canllaw."

"It will be easy for me to compass this, although thou mayest think that
it will not be easy."

"Though thou get this, there is yet that which thou wilt not get.  The
chain of Kilydd Canhastyr to fasten the collar to the leash."

"It will be easy for me to compass this, although thou mayest think that
it will not be easy."

"Though thou get this, there is yet that which thou wilt not get.
Throughout the world there is not a huntsman who can hunt with this dog,
except Mabon the son of Modron.  He was taken from his mother when three
nights old, and it is not known where he now is, nor whether he is living
or dead."

"It will be easy for me to compass this, although thou mayest think that
it will not be easy."

"Though thou get this, there is yet that which thou wilt not get.  Gwynn
Mygdwn, the horse of Gweddw that is as swift as the wave, to carry Mabon
the son of Modron to hunt the Boar Trwyth.  He will not give him of his
own free will, and thou wilt not be able to compel him."

"It will be easy for me to compass this, although thou mayest think that
it will not be easy."

"Though thou get this, there is yet that which thou wilt not get.  Thou
wilt not get Mabon, for it is not known where he is, unless thou find
Eidoel, his kinsman in blood, the son of Aer.  For it would be useless to
seek for him.  He is his cousin."

"It will be easy for me to compass this, although thou mayest think that
it will not be easy."

"Though thou get this, there is yet that which thou wilt not get.
Garselit the Gwyddelian {92} is the chief huntsman of Ireland; the Twrch
Trwyth can never be hunted without him."

"It will be easy for me to compass this, although thou mayest think that
it will not be easy."

"Though thou get this, there is yet that which thou wilt not get.  A
leash made from the beard of Dissull Varvawc, for that is the only one
that can hold those two cubs.  And the leash will be of no avail unless
it be plucked from his beard while he is alive, and twitched out with
wooden tweezers.  While he lives he will not suffer this to be done to
him, and the leash will be of no use should he be dead, because it will
be brittle."

"It will be easy for me to compass this, although thou mayest think that
it will not be easy."

"Though thou get this, there is yet that which thou wilt not get.
Throughout the world there is no huntsman that can hold those two whelps,
except Kynedyr Wyllt, the son of Hettwn Glafyrawc; he is nine times more
wild than the wildest beast upon the mountains.  Him wilt thou never get,
neither wilt thou ever get my daughter."

"It will be easy for me to compass this, although thou mayest think that
it will not be easy."

"Though thou get this, there is yet that which thou wilt not get.  It is
not possible to hunt the Boar Trwyth without Gwynn the son of Nudd, whom
God has placed over the brood of devils in Annwn, lest they should
destroy the present race.  He will never be spared thence."

"It will be easy for me to compass this, although thou mayest think that
it will not be easy."

"Though thou get this, there is yet that which thou wilt not get.  There
is not a horse in the world that can carry Gwynn to hunt the Twrch
Trwyth, except Du, the horse of Mor of Oerveddawg." {93}

"It will be easy for me to compass this, although thou mayest think that
it will not be easy."

"Though thou get this, there is yet that which thou wilt not get.  Until
Gilennhin the king of France shall come, the Twrch Trwyth cannot be
hunted.  It will be unseemly for him to leave his kingdom for thy sake,
and he will never come hither."

"It will be easy for me to compass this, although thou mayest think that
it will not be easy."

"Though thou get this, there is yet that which thou wilt not get.  The
Twrch Trwyth can never be hunted without the son of Alun Dyved; he is
well skilled in letting loose the dogs."

"It will be easy for me to compass this, although thou mayest think that
it will not be easy."

"Though thou get this, there is yet that which thou wilt not get.  The
Twrch Trwyth cannot be hunted unless thou get Aned and Aethlem.  They are
as swift as the gale of wind, and they were never let loose upon a beast
that they did not kill him."

"It will be easy for me to compass this, although thou mayest think that
it will not be easy."

"Though thou get this, there is yet that which thou wilt not get; Arthur
and his companions to hunt the Twrch Trwyth.  He is a mighty man, and he
will not come for thee, neither wilt thou be able to compel him."

"It will be easy for me to compass this, although thou mayest think that
it will not be easy."

"Though thou get this, there is yet that which thou wilt not get.  The
Twrch Trwyth cannot be hunted unless thou get Bwlch, and Kyfwlch, [and
Sefwlch,] the grandsons of Cleddyf Difwlch.  Their three shields are
three gleaming glitterers.  Their three spears are three pointed
piercers.  Their three swords are three griding gashers, Glas, Glessic,
and Clersag.  Their three dogs, Call, Cuall, and Cavall, Their three
horses, Hwyrdydwg, and Drwgdydwg, and Llwyrdydwg.  Their three wives,
Och, and Geram, and Diaspad.  Their three grandchildren, Lluched, and
Vyned, and Eissiwed.  Their three daughters, Drwg, and Gwaeth, and
Gwaethav Oil.  Their three handmaids, [Eheubryd, the daughter of Kyfwlch;
Gorasgwrn, the daughter of Nerth; and Gwaedan, the daughter of Kynvelyn.]
These three men shall sound the horn, and all the others shall shout, so
that all will think that the sky is falling to the earth."

"It will be easy for me to compass this, although thou mayest think that
it will not be easy."

"Though thou get this, there is yet that which thou wilt not get.  The
sword of Gwrnach the Giant; he will never be slain except therewith.  Of
his own free will he will not give it, either for a price or as a gift,
and thou wilt never be able to compel him."

"It will be easy for me to compass this, although thou mayest think that
it will not be easy."

"Though thou get this, there is yet that which thou wilt not get.
Difficulties shall thou meet with, and nights without sleep, in seeking
this, and if thou obtain it not, neither shalt thou obtain my daughter."

"Horses shall I have, and chivalry; and my lord and kinsman Arthur will
obtain for me all these things.  And I shall gain thy daughter, and thou
shalt lose thy life."

"Go forward.  And thou shalt not be chargeable for food or raiment for my
daughter while thou art seeking these things; and when thou hast
compassed all these marvels, thou shalt have my daughter for thy wife."

* * * * *

All that day they journeyed until the evening, and then they beheld a
vast castle, which was the largest in the world.  And lo, a black man,
huger than three of the men of this world, came out from the castle.  And
they spoke unto him, "Whence comest them, O man?"  "From the castle which
you see yonder."  "Whose castle is that?" asked they.  "Stupid are ye
truly, O men.  There is no one in the world that does not know to whom
this castle belongs.  It is the castle of Gwrnach the Giant."  "What
treatment is there for guests and strangers that alight in that castle?"
"Oh! chieftain, Heaven protect thee.  No guest ever returned thence
alive, and no one may enter therein unless he brings with him his craft."

Then they proceeded towards the gate.  Said Gwrhyr Gwalstawd Ieithoedd,
"Is there a porter?"  "There is.  And thou, if thy tongue be not mute in
thy head, wherefore dost thou call?"  "Open the gate."  "I will not open
it."  "Wherefore wilt thou not?"  "The knife is in the meat, and the
drink is in the horn, and there is revelry in the hall of Gwrnach the
Giant, and except for a craftsman who brings his craft, the gate will not
be opened to-night."  "Verily, porter," then said Kai, "my craft bring I
with me."  "What is thy craft?"  "The best burnisher of swords am I in
the world."  "I will go and tell this unto Gwrnach the Giant, and I will
bring thee an answer."

So the porter went in, and Gwrnach said to him, "Hast thou any news from
the gate?"  "I have.  There is a party at the door of the gate who desire
to come in."  "Didst thou enquire of them if they possessed any art?"  "I
did enquire," said he, "and one told me that he was well skilled in the
burnishing of swords."  "We have need of him then.  For some time have I
sought for some one to polish my sword, and could find no one.  Let this
man enter, since he brings with him his craft."

The porter thereupon returned, and opened the gate.  And Kai went in by
himself, and he saluted Gwrnach the Giant.  And a chair was placed for
him opposite to Gwrnach.  And Gwrnach said to him, "Oh man! is it true
that is reported of thee that thou knowest how to burnish swords?"  "I
know full well how to do so," answered Kai.  Then was the sword of
Gwrnach brought to him.  And Kai took a blue whetstone from under his
arm, and asked him whether he would have it burnished white or blue.  "Do
with it as it seems good to thee, and as thou wouldest if it were thine
own."  Then Kai polished one half of the blade and put it in his hand.
"Will this please thee?" asked he.  "I would rather than all that is in
my dominions that the whole of it were like unto this.  It is a marvel to
me that such a man as thou should be without a companion."  "Oh! noble
sir, I have a companion, albeit he is not skilled in this art."  "Who may
he be?"  "Let the porter go forth, and I will tell him whereby he may
know him.  The head of his lance will leave its shaft, and draw blood
from the wind, and will descend upon its shaft again."  Then the gate was
opened, and Bedwyr entered.  And Kai said, "Bedwyr is very skilful,
although he knows not this art."

And there was much discourse among those who were without, because that
Kai and Bedwyr had gone in.  And a young man who was with them, the only
son of Custennin the herdsman, got in also.  And he caused all his
companions to keep close to him as he passed the three wards, and until
he came into the midst of the castle. {98a}  And his companions said unto
the son of Custennin, "Thou hast done this!  Thou art the best of all
men."  And thenceforth he was called Goreu, the son of Custennin.  Then
they dispersed to their lodgings, that they might slay those who lodged
therein, unknown to the Giant.

The sword was now polished, and Kai gave it unto the hand of Gwrnach the
Giant, to see if he were pleased with his work.  And the Giant said, "The
work is good, I am content therewith."  Said Kai, "It is thy scabbard
that hath rusted thy sword; give it to me that I may take out the wooden
sides of it, and put in new ones."  And he took the scabbard from him,
and the sword in the other hand.  And he came and stood over against the
Giant, as if he would have put the sword into the scabbard; and with it
he struck at the head of the Giant, and cut off his head at one blow.
Then they despoiled the castle, and took from it what goods and jewels
they would.  And again on the same day, at the beginning of the year,
they came to Arthur's Court, bearing with them the sword of Gwrnach the
Giant.

Now when they had told Arthur how they had sped, Arthur said, "Which of
these marvels will it be best for us to seek first?"  "It will be best,"
said they, "to seek Mabon the son of Modron; and he will not be found
unless we first find Eidoel, the son of Aer, his kinsman."  Then Arthur
rose up, and the warriors of the Islands of Britain with him, to seek for
Eidoel; and they proceeded until they came before the Castle of Glivi,
{98b} where Eidoel was imprisoned.  Glivi {99a} stood on the summit of
his Castle, and he said, "Arthur, what requirest thou of me, since
nothing remains to me in this fortress, and I have neither joy nor
pleasure in it; neither wheat nor oats?  Seek not therefore to do me
harm."  Said Arthur, "Not to injure thee came I hither, but to seek for
the prisoner that is with thee."  "I will give thee my prisoner, though I
had not thought to give him up to any one; and therewith shall thou have
my support and my aid."

His followers said unto Arthur, "Lord, go thou home, thou canst not
proceed with thy host in quest of such small adventures as these."  Then
said Arthur, "It were well for thee, Gwrhyr Gwalstawd Iethoedd, to go
upon this quest, for thou knowest all languages, and art familiar with
{99b} those of the birds and the beasts.  Thou Eidoel oughtest likewise
to go with my men in search of thy cousin.  And as for you, Kai and
Bedwyr, I have hope of whatever adventure ye are in quest of, that ye
will achieve it.  Achieve ye this adventure for me."

They went forward until they came to the Ousel of Cilgwri.  And Gwrhyr
adjured her for the sake of Heaven, saying, "Tell me if thou knowest
aught of Mabon the son of Modron, who was taken when three nights old
from between his mother and the wall."  And the Ousel answered, "When I
first came here, there was a smith's anvil in this place, and I was then
a young bird; and from that time no work has been done upon it, save the
pecking of my beak every evening, and now there is not so much as the
size of a nut remaining thereof; yet the vengeance of Heaven be upon me,
if during all that time I have ever heard of the man for whom you
enquire.  Nevertheless I will do that which is right, and that which it
is fitting that I should do for an embassy from Arthur.  There is a race
of animals who were formed before me, and I will be your guide to them."

So they proceeded to the place where was the Stag of Redynvre.  "Stag of
Redynvre, behold we are come to thee, an embassy from Arthur, for we have
not heard of any animal older than thou.  Say, knowest thou aught of
Mabon the son of Modron, who was taken from his mother when three nights
old?"  The Stag said, "When first I came hither, there was a plain all
around me, without any trees save one oak sapling, {100} which grew up to
be an oak with an hundred branches.  And that oak has since perished, so
that now nothing remains of it but the withered stump; and from that day
to this I have been here, yet have I never heard of the man for whom you
enquire.  Nevertheless, being an embassy from Arthur, I will be your
guide to the place where there is an animal which was formed before I
was."

So they proceeded to the place where was the Owl of Cwm Cawlwyd.  "Owl of
Cwm Cawlwyd, here is an embassy from Arthur; knowest thou aught of Mabon
the son of Modron, who was taken after three nights from his mother?"  "If
I knew I would tell you.  When first I came hither, the wide valley you
see was a wooded glen.  And a race of men came and rooted it up.  And
there grew there a second wood; and this wood is the third.  My wings,
are they not withered stumps?  Yet all this time, even until to-day, I
have never heard of the man for whom you enquire.  Nevertheless, I will
be the guide of Arthur's embassy until you come to the place where is the
oldest animal in this world, and the one that has travelled most, the
Eagle of Gwern Abwy."

Gwrhyr said, "Eagle of Gwern Abwy, we have come to thee an embassy from
Arthur, to ask thee if thou knowest aught of Mabon the son of Modron, who
was taken from his mother when he was three nights old."  The Eagle said,
"I have been here for a great space of time, and when I first came hither
there was a rock here, from the top of which I pecked at the stars every
evening; and now it is not so much as a span high.  From that day to this
I have been here, and I have never heard of the man for whom you enquire,
except once when I went in search of food as far as Llyn Llyw.  And when
I came there, I struck my talons into a salmon, thinking he would serve
me as food for a long time.  But he drew me into the deep, and I was
scarcely able to escape from him.  After that I went with my whole
kindred to attack him, and to try to destroy him, but he sent messengers,
and made peace with me; and came and besought me to take fifty fish
spears out of his back.  Unless he know something of him whom you seek, I
cannot tell who may.  However, I will guide you to the place where he
is."

So they went thither; and the Eagle said, "Salmon of Llyn Llyw, I have
come to thee with an embassy from Arthur, to ask thee if thou knowest
aught concerning Mabon the son of Modron, who was taken away at three
nights old from his mother."  "As much as I know I will tell thee.  With
every tide I go along the river upwards, until I come near to the walls
of Gloucester, and there have I found such wrong as I never found
elsewhere; and to the end that ye may give credence thereto, let one of
you go thither upon each of my two shoulders."  So Kai and Gwrhyr
Gwalstawd Ieithoedd went upon the two shoulders of the salmon, and they
proceeded until they came unto the wall of the prison, and they heard a
great wailing and lamenting from the dungeon. {102}  Said Gwrhyr, "Who is
it that laments in this house of stone?"  "Alas, there is reason enough
for whoever is here to lament.  It is Mabon the son of Modron who is here
imprisoned, and no imprisonment was ever so grievous as mine, neither
that of Lludd Llaw Ereint, nor that of Greid the son of Eri."  "Hast thou
hope of being released for gold, or for silver, or for any gifts of
wealth, or through battle and fighting?"  "By fighting will whatever I
may gain be obtained."

{Picture: p102.jpg}

Then they went thence, and returned to Arthur, and they told him where
Mabon the son of Modron was imprisoned.  And Arthur summoned the warriors
of the Island, and they journeyed as far as Gloucester, to the place
where Mabon was in prison.  Kai and Bedwyr went upon the shoulders of the
fish, whilst the warriors of Arthur attacked the castle.  And Kai broke
through the wall into the dungeon, and brought away the prisoner upon his
back, whilst the fight was going on between the warriors.  And Arthur
returned home, and Mabon with him at liberty.

* * * * *

Said Arthur, "Which of the marvels will it be best for us now to seek
first?"  "It will be best to seek for the two cubs of Gast Rhymhi."  "Is
it known," said Arthur, "where she is?"  "She is in Aber Deu Gleddyf,"
said one.  Then Arthur went to the house of Tringad, in Aber Cleddyf, and
he enquired of him whether he had heard of her there.  "In what form may
she be?"  "She is in the form of a she wolf," said he, "and with her
there are two cubs."  "She has often slain my herds, and she is there
below in a cave in Aber Cleddyf."

So Arthur went in his ship Prydwen by sea, and the others went by land,
to hunt her.  And they surrounded her and her two cubs, and God did
change them again for Arthur into their own form.  And the host of Arthur
dispersed themselves into parties of one and two.

* * * * *

On a certain day, as Gwythyr the son of Greidawl was walking over a
mountain, he heard a wailing and a grievous cry.  And when he heard it,
{103} he sprung forward, and went towards it.  And when he came there, he
drew his sword, and smote off an ant-hill close to the earth, whereby it
escaped being burned in the fire.  And the ants said to him, "Receive
from us the blessing of Heaven, and that which no man can give we will
give thee."  Then they fetched the nine bushels of flax-seed which
Yspaddaden Penkawr had required of Kilhwch, and they brought the full
measure, without lacking any, except one flax-seed, and that the lame
pismire brought in before night.

* * * * *

As Kai and Bedwyr sat on a beacon carn on the summit of Plinlimmon, in
the highest wind that ever was in the world, they looked around them, and
saw a great smoke towards the south, afar off, which did not bend with
the wind.  Then said Kai, "By the hand of my friend, behold, yonder is
the fire of a robber!"  Then they hastened towards the smoke, and they
came so near to it, that they could see Dillus Varvawc scorching a wild
Boar.  "Behold, yonder is the greatest robber that ever fled from
Arthur," said Bedwyr unto Kai.  "Dost thou know him?"  "I do know him,"
answered Kai, "he is Dillus Varvawc, and no leash in the world will be
able to hold Drudwyn, the cub of Greid the son of Eri, save a leash made
from the beard of him thou seest yonder.  And that even will be useless,
unless his beard be plucked alive with wooden tweezers; for if dead, it
will be brittle."  "What thinkest thou that we should do concerning
this?" said Bedwyr.  "Let us suffer him," said Kai, "to eat as much as he
will of the meat, and after that he will fall asleep."  And during that
time they employed themselves in making the wooden tweezers.  And when
Kai knew certainly that he was asleep, he made a pit under his feet, the
largest in the world, and he struck him a violent blow, and squeezed him
into the pit.  And there they twitched out his beard completely with the
wooden tweezers; and after that they slew him altogether.

And from thence they both went to Gelli Wic, in Cornwall, and took the
leash made of Dillus Varvawc's beard with them, and they gave it unto
Arthur's hand.

Then Arthur composed this Englyn,

   Kai made a leash
   Of Dillus son of Eurei's beard.
   Were he alive, thy death he'd be.

And thereupon Kai was wroth, so that the warriors of the Island could
scarcely make peace between Kai and Arthur.  And thenceforth, neither in
Arthur's troubles, nor for the slaying of his men, would Kai come forward
to his aid for ever after.

* * * * *

Said Arthur, "Which of the marvels is it best for us now to seek?"  "It
is best for us to seek Drudwyn, the cub of Greid, the son of Eri."

A little while before this, Creiddylad, the daughter of Lludd Llaw
Ereint, and Gwythyr the son of Greidawl, were betrothed.  And before she
had become his bride, Gwyn ap Nudd came, and carried her away by force;
and Gwythyr the son of Greidawl gathered his host together, and went to
fight with Gwyn ap Nudd.  But Gwyn overcame him, and captured Greid the
son of Eri, and Glinneu the son of Taran and Gwrgwst Ledlwm, and Dynvarth
{105} his son.  And he captured Penn the son of Nethawg, and Nwython, and
Kyledyr Wyllt his son.  And they slew Nwython, and took out his heart,
and constrained Kyledyr to eat the heart of his father.  And therefrom
Kyledyr became mad.  When Arthur heard of this, he went to the North, and
summoned Gwyn ap Nudd before him, and set free the nobles whom he had put
in prison, and made peace between Gwyn ap Nudd and Gwythyr the son of
Greidawl.  And this was the peace that was made: that the maiden should
remain in her father's house, without advantage to either of them, and
that Gwyn ap Nudd and Gwythyr the son of Greidawl should fight for her
every first of May, from thenceforth until the day of doom, and that
whichever of them should then be conqueror should have the maiden.

And when Arthur had thus reconciled these chieftains, he obtained Mygdwn,
Gweddw's horse, and the leash of Cwrs Cant Ewin.

And after that Arthur went into Armorica, and with him Mabon the son of
Mellt, and Gware Gwallt Euryn, to seek the two dogs of Glythmyr Ledewic.
And when he had got them, he went to the West of Ireland, in search of
Gwrgi Severi; and Odgar the son of Aedd, king of Ireland, went with him.
And thence went Arthur into the North, and captured Kyledyr Wyllt; and he
went after Yskithyrwyn Penbaedd.  And Mabon the son of Mellt came with
the two dogs of Glythmyr Ledewic in his hand, and Drudwyn, the cub of
Greid the son of Eri.  And Arthur went himself to the chase, leading his
own dog Cavall.  And Kaw, of North Britain, mounted Arthur's mare
Llamrei, and was first in the attack.  Then Kaw, of North Britain,
wielded a mighty axe, and absolutely daring he came valiantly up to the
Boar, and clave his head in twain.  And Kaw took away the tusk.  Now the
Boar was not slain by the dogs that Yspaddaden had mentioned, but by
Cavall, Arthur's own dog.

And after Yskithyrwyn Penbaedd was killed, Arthur and his host departed
to Gelli Wic in Cornwall.  And thence he sent Menw the son of Teirgwaedd
to see if the precious things were between the two ears of Twrch Trwyth,
since it were useless to encounter him if they were not there.  Albeit it
was certain where he was, for he had laid waste the third part of
Ireland.  And Menw went to seek for him, and he met with him in Ireland,
in Esgeir Oervel.  And Menw took the form of a bird; and he descended
upon the top of his lair, and strove to snatch away one of the precious
things from him, but he carried away nothing but one of his bristles.  And
the boar rose up angrily and shook himself so that some of his venom fell
upon Menw, and he was never well from that day forward.

After this Arthur sent an embassy to Odgar, the son of Aedd, king of
Ireland, to ask for the Cauldron of Diwrnach Wyddel, his purveyor.  And
Odgar commanded him to give it.  But Diwrnach said, "Heaven is my
witness, if it would avail him anything even to look at it, he should not
do so."  And the embassy of Arthur returned from Ireland with this
denial.  And Arthur set forward with a small retinue, and entered into
Prydwen, his ship, and went over to Ireland.  And they proceeded into the
house of Diwrnach Wyddel.  And the hosts of Odgar saw their strength.
When they had eaten and drank as much as they desired, Arthur demanded to
have the cauldron.  And he answered, "If I would have given it to any
one, I would have given it at the word of Odgar, king of Ireland."

When he had given them this denial, Bedwyr arose and seized hold of the
cauldron, and placed it upon the back of Hygwyd, Arthur's servant, who
was brother, by the mother's side, to Arthur's servant, Cachamwri.  His
office was always to carry Arthur's cauldron, and to place fire under it.
And Llenlleawg Wyddel seized Caledvwlch, and brandished it.  And they
slew Diwrnach Wyddel and his company.  Then came the Irish, {108a} and
fought with them.  And when he had put them to flight, Arthur with his
men went forward to the ship, carrying away the cauldron full of Irish
money. {108b}  And he disembarked at the house of Llwydden {108c} the son
of Kelcoed, at Forth Kerddin in Dyved.  And there is the measure of the
cauldron.

Then Arthur summoned unto him all the warriors that were in the three
Islands of Britain, and in the three Islands adjacent, and all that were
in France and in Armorica, in Normandy and in the Summer Country, and all
that were chosen footmen and valiant horsemen.  And with all these, he
went into Ireland.  And in Ireland there was great fear and terror
concerning him.  And when Arthur had landed in the country, there came
unto him the saints of Ireland and besought his protection.  And he
granted his protection unto them, and they gave him their blessing.  Then
the men of Ireland came unto Arthur, and brought him provisions.  And
Arthur went as far as Esgeir Oervel in Ireland, to the place where the
Boar Trwyth was with his seven young pigs.  And the dogs were let loose
upon him from all sides.  That day until evening, the Irish fought with
him, nevertheless he laid waste the fifth part of Ireland.  And on the
day following the household of Arthur fought with him, and they were
worsted by him, and got no advantage.  And the third day Arthur himself
encountered him, and he fought with him nine nights and nine days without
so much as killing even one little pig. {109}  The warriors enquired of
Arthur, what was the origin of that swine; and he told them that he was
once a king, and that God had transformed him into a swine for his sins.

Then Arthur sent Gwrhyr Gwalstawt Ieithoedd, to endeavour to speak with
him.  And Gwrhyr assumed the form of a bird, and alighted upon the top of
the lair, where he was with the seven young pigs.  And Gwrhyr Gwalstawt
Ieithoedd asked him, "By him who turned you into this form, if you can
speak, let some one of you, I beseech you, come and talk with Arthur."
Grugyn Gwrych Ereint made answer to him.  (Now his bristles were like
silver wire, and whether he went through the wood or through the plain,
he was to be traced by the glittering of his bristles.)  And this was the
answer that Grugyn made, "By him who turned us into this form we will not
do so, and we will not speak with Arthur.  That we have been transformed
thus is enough for us to suffer, without your coming here to fight with
us."  "I will tell you.  Arthur comes but to fight for the comb, and the
razor, and the scissors, which are between the two ears of Twrch Trwyth."
Said Grugyn, "Except he first take his life, he will never have those
precious things.  And to-morrow morning we will rise up hence, and we
will go into Arthur's country, and there will we do all the mischief that
we can."

So they set forth through the sea towards Wales.  And Arthur and his
hosts, and his horses and his dogs, entered Prydwen, that they might
encounter them without delay.  Twrch Trwyth landed in Porth Cleis in
Dyved, and the {110} came to Mynyw.  The next day it was told to Arthur,
that they had gone by, and he overtook them, as they were killing the
cattle of Kynnwas Kwrr y Vagyl, having slain all that were at Aber
Gleddyf, of man and beast, before the coming of Arthur.

Now when Arthur approached, Twrch Trwyth went on as far as Preseleu, and
Arthur and his hosts followed him thither, and Arthur sent men to hunt
him; Eli and Trachmyr, leading Drutwyn the whelp of Greid, the son of
Eri, and Gwarthegyd the son of Kaw, in another quarter, with the two dogs
of Glythmyr Ledewig, and Bedwyr leading Cavall, Arthur's own dog.  And
all the warriors ranged themselves around the Nyver.  And there came
there the three sons of Cleddyf Divwlch, men who had gained much fame at
the slaying of Yskithyrwyn Penbaedd; and they went on from Glyn Nyver,
and came to Cwm Kerwyn.

And there Twrch Trwyth made a stand, and slew four of Arthur's champions,
Gwarthegyd the son of Kaw, and Tarawc of Allt Clwyd, and Rheidwn the son
of Eli Atver, and Iscovan Hael.  And after he had slain these men, he
made a second stand in the same place.  And there he slew Gwydre the son
of Arthur, and Garselit Wyddel, and Glew the son of Ysgawd, and Iscawn
the son of Panon; and there he himself was wounded.

And the next morning before it was day, some of the men came up with him.
And he slew Huandaw, and Gogigwr, and Penpingon, three attendants upon
Glewlwyd Gavaelvawr, so that Heaven knows he had not an attendant
remaining, excepting only Llaesgevyn, a man from whom no one ever derived
any good.  And together with these, he slew many of the men of that
country, and Gwlydyn Saer, Arthur's chief Architect.

Then Arthur overtook him at Pelumyawc, and there he slew Madawc the son
of Teithyon, and Gwyn the son of Tringad, the son of Neved, and Eiryawn
Penllorau.  Thence he went to Aberteivi, {111a} where he made another
stand, and where he slew Kyflas {111b} the son of Kynan, and Gwilenhin
king of France.  Then he went as far as Glyn Ystu, and there the men and
the dogs lost him.

Then Arthur summoned unto him Gwyn ab Nudd, and he asked him if he knew
aught of Twrch Trwyth.  And he said that he did not.

And all the huntsmen went to hunt the swine as far as Dyffryn Llychwr.
And Grugyn Gwallt Ereint, and Llwydawg Govynnyad closed with them and
killed all the huntsmen, so that there escaped but one man only.  And
Arthur and his hosts came to the place where Grugyn and Llwydawg were.
And there he let loose the whole of the dogs upon them, and with the
shout and barking that was set up, Twrch Trwyth came to their assistance.

And from the time that they came across the Irish sea, Arthur had never
got sight of him until then. {111c}  So he set men and dogs upon him, and
thereupon he started off and went to Mynydd Amanw.  And there one of his
young pigs was killed. {112a}  Then they set upon him life for life, and
Twrch Llawin was slain, and then there was slain another of the swine,
Gwys was his name.  After that he went on to Dyffryn Amanw, and there
Banw and Bennwig were killed. {112b}  Of all his pigs there went with him
alive from that place none save Grugyn Gwallt Ereint, and Llwydawg
Govynnyad.

Thence he went on to Llwch Ewin, and Arthur overtook him there, and he
made a stand.  And there he slew Echel Forddwytwll, and Garwyli the son
of Gwyddawg Gwyr, and many men and dogs likewise.  And thence they went
to Llwch Tawy.  Grugyn Gwrych Ereint parted from them there, and went to
Din Tywi.  And thence he proceeded to Ceredigiawn, and Eli and Trachmyr
with him, and a multitude likewise.  Then he came to Garth Gregyn, and
there Llwydawg Govynnyad fought in the midst of them, and slew Rhudvyw
Rhys and many others with him.  Then Llwydawg went thence to Ystrad Yw,
and there the men of Armorica met him, and there he slew Hirpeissawg, the
king of Armorica, and Llygatrudd Emys, and Gwrbothu, Arthur's uncles, his
mother's brothers, and there was he himself slain.

Twrch Trwyth went from there to between Tawy and Euyas, and Arthur
summoned all Cornwall and Devon unto him, to the estuary of the Severn,
and he said to the warriors of this Island, "Twrch Trwyth has slain many
of my men, but, by the valour of warriors, while I live he shall not go
into Cornwall.  And I will not follow him any longer, but I will oppose
him life to life.  Do ye as ye will."  And he resolved that he would send
a body of knights, with the dogs of the Island, as far as Euyas, who
should return thence to the Severn, and that tried warriors should
traverse the Island, and force him into the Severn.  And Mabon the son of
Modron came up with him at the Severn, upon Gwynn Mygddon, the horse of
Gweddw, and Goreu the son of Custennin, and Menw the son of Teirgwaedd;
this was betwixt Llyn Lliwan and Aber Gwy.  And Arthur fell upon him
together with the champions of Britain.  And Osla Kyllellvawr drew near,
and Manawyddan the son of Llyr, and Kacmwri the servant of Arthur, and
Gwyngelli, and they seized hold of him, catching him first by his feet,
and plunged him in the Severn, so that it overwhelmed him.  On the one
side, Mabon the son of Modron spurred his steed and snatched his razor
from him, and Kyledyr Wyllt came up with him on the other side, upon
another steed, in the Severn, and took from him the scissors.  But before
they could obtain the comb, he had regained the ground with his feet, and
from the moment that he reached the shore, neither dog, nor man, nor
horse could overtake him until he came to Cornwall.  If they had had
trouble in getting the jewels from him, much more had they in seeking to
save the two men from being drowned.  Kacmwri, as they drew him forth,
was dragged by two millstones into the deep.  And as Osla Kyllellvawr was
running after the Boar his knife had dropped out of the sheath, and he
had lost it, and after that the sheath became full of water, and its
weight drew him down into the deep, as they were drawing him forth.

Then Arthur and his hosts proceeded until they overtook the Boar in
Cornwall, and the trouble which they had met with before was mere play to
what they encountered in seeking the comb.  But from one difficulty to
another, the comb was at length obtained.  And then he was hunted from
Cornwall, and driven straight forward into the deep sea.  And thenceforth
it was never known whither he went; and Aned and Aethlem with him.  Then
went Arthur to Gelliwic, in Cornwall, to anoint himself, and to rest from
his fatigues.

* * * * *

Said Arthur, "Is there any one of the marvels yet unobtained?"  Said one
of his men, "There is--the blood of the witch Orddu, the daughter of the
witch Orwen, of Penn Nant Govid, on the confines of Hell."  Arthur set
forth towards the North, and came to the place where was the witch's
cave.  And Gwyn ab Nudd, and Gwythyr the son of Greidawl, counselled him
to send Kacmwri, and Hygwyd his brother to fight with the witch.  And as
they entered the cave, the witch seized upon them, and she caught Hygwyd
by the hair of his head, and threw him on the floor beneath her.  And
Kacmwri caught her by the hair of her head, and dragged her to the earth
from off Hygwyd, but she turned again upon them both, {114} and drove
them both out with kicks and with cuffs.

And Arthur was wroth at seeing his two attendants almost slain, and he
sought to enter the cave; but Gwyn and Gwythyr said unto him, "It would
not be fitting or seemly for us to see thee squabbling with a hag.  Let
Hiramren, and Hireidil go to the cave."  So they went.  But if great was
the trouble of the two first that went, much greater was that of these
two.  And Heaven knows that not one of the four could move from the spot,
until they placed them all upon Llamrei, Arthur's mare.  And then Arthur
rushed to the door of the cave, and at the door, he struck at the witch,
with Carnwennan his dagger, and clove her in twain, so that she fell in
two parts.  And Kaw, of North Britain, took the blood of the witch and
kept it.

Then Kilhwch set forward, and Goreu, the son of Custennin, with him, and
as many as wished ill to Yspaddaden Penkawr.  And they took the marvels
with them to his Court.  And Kaw of North Britain came and shaved his
beard, skin and flesh, clean off to the very bone from ear to ear.  "Art
thou shaved, man?" said Kilhwch.  "I am shaved," answered he.  "Is thy
daughter mine now?"  "She is thine," said he, "but therefore needest thou
not thank me, but Arthur who hath accomplished this for thee.  By my free
will thou shouldest never have had her, for with her I lose my life."
Then Goreu the son of Custennin, seized him by the hair of his head, and
dragged him after him to the keep, and cut off his head, and placed it on
a stake on the citadel.  Then they took possession of his castle, and of
his treasures.

{Picture: p115.jpg}

And that night Olwen became Kilhwch's bride, and she continued to be his
wife as long as she lived.  And the hosts of Arthur dispersed themselves,
each man to his own country.  And thus did Kilhwch obtain Olwen the
daughter of Yspaddaden Penkawr.




THE DREAM OF MAXEN WLEDIG.


{Picture: p116.jpg}

Maxen Wledig was emperor of Rome, and he was a comelier man, and a better
and a wiser than any emperor that had been before him. {116}  And one day
he held a council of Kings, and he said to his friends, "I desire to go
to-morrow to hunt."  And the next day in the morning he set forth with
his retinue, and came to the valley of the river that flowed towards
Rome.  And he hunted through the valley until mid-day.  And with him also
were two and thirty crowned kings, that were his vassals; not for the
delight of hunting went the emperor with them, but to put himself on
equal terms with those kings. {117}

And the sun was high in the sky over their heads, and the heat was great.
And sleep came upon Maxen Wledig.  And his attendants stood and set up
their shields around him upon the shafts of their spears to protect him
from the sun, and they placed a gold enamelled shield under his head, and
so Maxen slept.

And he saw a dream.  And this is the dream that he saw.  He was
journeying along the valley of the river towards its source; and he came
to the highest mountain in the world.  And he thought that the mountain
was as high as the sky; and when he came over the mountain, it seemed to
him that he went through the fairest and most level regions that man ever
yet beheld, on the other side of the mountain.  And he saw large and
mighty rivers descending from the mountain to the sea, and towards the
mouths of the rivers he proceeded.  And as he journeyed thus, he came to
the mouth of the largest river ever seen.  And he beheld a great city at
the entrance of the river, and a vast castle in the city, and he saw many
high towers of various colours in the castle.  And he saw a fleet at the
mouth of the river, the largest ever seen.  And he saw one ship among the
fleet; larger was it by far, and fairer than all the others.  Of such
part of the ship as he could see above the water, one plank was gilded
and the other silvered over.  He saw a bridge of the bone of the whale
from the ship to the land, and he thought that he went along the bridge
and came into the ship.  And a sail was hoisted on the ship, and along
the sea and the ocean was it borne.  Then it seemed that he came to the
fairest island in the whole world, and he traversed the island from sea
to sea, even to the farthest shore of the island.  Valleys he saw, and
steeps, and rocks of wondrous height, and rugged precipices. {118a}  Never
yet saw he the like.  And thence he beheld an island in the sea, facing
this rugged {118b} land.  And between him and this island was a country
of which the plain was as large as the sea, the mountain as vast as the
wood.  And from the mountain he saw a river that flowed through the land
and fell into the sea.  And at the mouth of the river, he beheld a
castle, the fairest that man ever saw, and the gate of the castle was
open, and he went into the castle.  And in the castle he saw a fair hall
of which the roof seemed to be all gold, the walls of the hall seemed to
be entirely of glittering precious gems, the doors all seemed to be of
gold.  Golden seats he saw in the hall, and silver tables.  And on a seat
opposite to him, he beheld two auburn-haired youths playing at chess.  He
saw a silver board for the chess, and golden pieces thereon.  The
garments of the youths were of jet black satin, and chaplets of ruddy
gold bound their hair, whereon were sparkling jewels of great price,
{119} rubies, and gems, alternately with imperial stones.  Buskins of new
cordovan leather on their feet, fastened by slides of red gold.

{Picture: p118.jpg}

And beside a pillar in the hall he saw a hoary-headed man, in a chair of
ivory, with the figures of two eagles of ruddy gold thereon.  Bracelets
of gold were upon his arms, and many rings upon his hands, and a golden
torquis about his neck; and his hair was bound with a golden diadem.  He
was of powerful aspect.  A chessboard of gold was before him, and a rod
of gold, and a steel file in his hand.  And he was carving out chessmen.

And he saw a maiden sitting before him in a chair of ruddy gold.  Not
more easy than to gaze upon the sun when brightest, was it to look upon
her by reason of her beauty.  A vest of white silk was upon the maiden,
with clasps of red gold at the breast; and a surcoat of gold tissue was
upon her, and a frontlet of red gold upon her head, and rubies and gems
were in the frontlet, alternating with pearls and imperial stones.  And a
girdle of ruddy gold was around her.  She was the fairest sight that man
ever beheld.

The maiden arose from her chair before him, and he threw his arms about
the neck of the maiden, and they two sat down together in the chair of
gold: and the chair was not less roomy for them both, than for the maiden
alone.  And as he had his arms about the maiden's neck, and his cheek by
her cheek, behold, through the chafing of the dogs at their leashing, and
the clashing of the shields as they struck against each other, and the
beating together of the shafts of the spears, and the neighing of the
horses and their prancing, the emperor awoke.

And when he awoke, nor spirit nor existence was left him, because of the
maiden whom he had seen in his sleep, for the love of the maiden pervaded
his whole frame. {120}  Then his household spake unto him.  "Lord," said
they "is it not past the time for thee to take thy food?"  Thereupon the
emperor mounted his palfrey, the saddest man that mortal ever saw, and
went forth towards Rome.

And thus he was during the space of a week.  When they of the household
went to drink wine and mead out of golden vessels, he went not with any
of them.  When they went to listen to songs and tales, he went not with
them there; neither could he be persuaded to do anything but sleep.  And
as often as he slept, he beheld in his dreams the maiden he loved best;
but except when he slept he saw nothing of her, for he knew not where in
the world she was.

One day the page of the chamber spake unto him; now, although he was page
of the chamber, he was king of the Romans.  "Lord," said he, "all thy
people revile thee."  "Wherefore do they revile me?" asked the emperor.
"Because they can get neither message nor answer from thee, as men should
have from their lord.  This is the cause why thou art spoken evil of."
"Youth," said the emperor, "do thou bring unto me the wise men of Rome,
and I will tell them wherefore I am sorrowful."

Then the wise men of Rome were brought to the emperor, and he spake to
them.  "Sages of Rome," said he, "I have seen a dream.  And in the dream
I beheld a maiden, and because of the maiden is there neither life, nor
spirit, nor existence within me."  "Lord," they answered, "since thou
judgest us worthy to counsel thee, we will give thee counsel.  And this
is our counsel; that thou send messengers for three years to the three
parts of the world, to seek for thy dream.  And as thou knowest not what
day or what night good news may come to thee, the hope thereof will
support thee."

So the messengers journeyed for the space of a year wandering about the
world, and seeking tidings concerning his dream.  But when they came back
at the end of the year they knew not one word more than they did the day
they set forth.  And then was the emperor exceeding sorrowful, for he
thought that he should never have tidings of her whom best he loved.

Then spoke the king of the Romans unto the emperor.  "Lord," said he, "go
forth to hunt by the way that thou didst seem to go, whither it were to
the east or to the west."  So the emperor went forth to hunt, and he came
to the bank of the river.  "Behold," said he, "this is where I was when I
saw the dream, and I went towards the source of the river westward."

And thereupon thirteen messengers of the emperor's set forth, and before
them they saw a high mountain, which seemed to them to touch the sky.  Now
this was the guise in which the messengers journeyed; one sleeve was on
the cap of each of them in front; as a sign that they were messengers, in
order that through what hostile land soever they might pass no harm might
be done them.  And when they were come over this mountain they beheld
vast plains, and large rivers flowing therethrough.  "Behold," said they,
"the land which our master saw."

And they went along the mouths of the rivers, until they came to the
mighty river which they saw flowing to the sea, and the vast city, and
the many-coloured high towers in the castle.  They saw the largest fleet
in the world, in the harbour of the river, and one ship that was larger
than any of the others.  "Behold again," said they, "the dream that our
master saw."  And in the great ship they crossed the sea, and came to the
Island of Britain.  And they traversed the island until they came to
Snowdon.  "Behold," said they, "the rugged {122} land that our master
saw."  And they went forward until they saw Anglesey before them, and
until they saw Arvon likewise.  "Behold," said they, "the land our master
saw in his sleep."  And they saw Aber Sain, and a castle at the mouth of
the river.  The portal of the castle saw they open, and into the castle
they went, and they saw a hall in the castle.  Then said they, "Behold
the hall which he saw in his sleep."

They went into the hall, and they beheld two youths playing at chess on
the golden bench.  And they beheld the hoary-headed man beside the
pillar, in the ivory chair, carving chessmen.  And they beheld the maiden
sitting on a chair of ruddy gold.

The messengers bent down upon their knees.  "Empress of Rome, all hail!"
"Ha, gentles," said the maiden, "ye bear the seeming of honourable men,
and the badge of envoys, what mockery is this ye do to me?"  "We mock
thee not, lady, but the emperor of Rome hath seen thee in his sleep, and
he has neither life nor spirit left because of thee.  Thou shall have of
us therefore the choice, lady, whether thou wilt go with us and be made
empress of Rome, or that the emperor come hither and take thee for his
wife?"  "Ha, lords," said the maiden, "I will not deny what you say,
neither will I believe it too well.  If the emperor love me, let him come
here to seek me."

And by day and night the messengers hied them back.  And when their
horses failed, they bought other fresh ones.  And when they came to Rome
they saluted the emperor, and asked their boon, which was given to them
according as they named it.  "We will be thy guides, lord," said they,
"over sea and over land, to the place where is the woman whom best thou
lovest, for we know her name, and her kindred, and her race."

{Picture: p123.jpg}

And immediately the emperor set forth with his army.  And these men were
his guides.  Towards the Island of Britain they went over the sea and the
deep.  And he conquered the Island from Beli the son of Manogan, and his
sons, and drove them to the sea, and went forward even unto Arvon.  And
the emperor knew the land when he saw it.  And when he beheld the castle
of Aber Sain, "Look yonder," said he, "there is the castle wherein I saw
the damsel whom I best love."  And he went forward into the castle and
into the hall, and there he saw Kynan the son of Eudav, and Adeon the son
of Eudav, playing at chess.  And he saw Eudav the son of Caradawc,
sitting on a chair of ivory carving chessmen.  And the maiden whom he had
beheld in his sleep, he saw sitting on a chair of gold.  "Empress of
Rome," said he, "all hail!"  And the emperor threw his arms about her
neck; and that night she became his bride.

And the next day in the morning, the damsel asked her maiden portion.  And
he told her to name what she would, and she asked to have the Island of
Britain for her father, from the Channel to the Irish Sea, together with
the three adjacent islands to hold under the empress of Rome; and to have
three chief castles made for her, in whatever places she might choose in
the Island of Britain.  And she chose to have the highest castle made at
Arvon.  And they brought thither earth from Rome that it might be more
healthful for the emperor to sleep, and sit, and walk upon.  After that
the two other castles were made for her, which were Caerlleon and
Caermarthen.

And one day, the emperor went to hunt at Caermarthen, and he came so far
as the top of Brevi Vawr, and there the emperor pitched his tent.  And
that encamping place is called Cadeir Maxen, even to this day.  And
because that he built the castle with a myriad of men, he called it
Caervyrddin.  Then Helen bethought her to make high roads from one castle
to another throughout the Island of Britain.  And the roads were made.
And for this cause are they called the roads of Helen Luyddawc, {124}
that she was sprung from a native of this island, and the men of the
Island of Britain would not have made these great roads {125} for any
save for her.

Seven years did the emperor tarry in this Island.  Now, at that time, the
men of Rome had a custom that whatsoever emperor should remain in other
lands more than seven years, should remain to his own overthrow, and
should never return to Rome again.

So they made a new emperor.  And this one wrote a letter of threat to
Maxen.  There was nought in the letter but only this, "If thou comest,
and if thou ever comest to Rome."  And even unto Caerlleon came this
letter to Maxen, and these tidings.  Then sent he a letter to the man who
styled himself emperor in Rome.  There was nought in that letter also but
only this, "If I come to Rome, and if I come."

And thereupon Maxen set forth towards Rome with his army, and vanquished
France and Burgundy, and every land on the way, and sat down before the
city of Rome.

A year was the emperor before the city, and he was no nearer taking it
than the first day.  And after him there came the brothers of Helen
Luyddawc from the Island of Britain, and a small host with them, and
better warriors were in that small host than twice as many Romans.  And
the emperor was told that a host was seen, halting close to his army and
encamping, and no man ever saw a fairer or better appointed host for its
size, nor more handsome standards.

And Helen went to see the hosts, and she knew the standards of her
brothers.  Then came Kynan the son of Eudav, and Adeon the son of Eudav,
to meet the emperor.  And the emperor was glad because of them, and
embraced them.

Then they looked at the Romans as they attacked the city.  Said Kynan to
his brother, "We will try to attack the city more expertly than this."  So
they measured by night the height of the wall, and they sent their
carpenters to the wood, and a ladder was made for every four men of their
number.  Now when these were ready, every day at mid-day the emperors
went to meat, and they ceased to fight on both sides till all had
finished eating.  And in the morning the men of Britain took their food,
and they drank until they were invigorated.  And while the two emperors
were at meat, the Britons came to the city, {126a} and placed their
ladders against it, and forthwith they came in through the city.

The new emperor had not time to arm himself when they fell upon him, and
slew him and many others with him.  And three nights and three days were
they subduing the men that were in the city and taking the castle.  And
others of them kept the city, lest any of the host of Maxen should come
therein, until they had subjected all to their will.

Then spake Maxen to Helen Luyddawc, "I marvel, lady," said he, "that thy
brothers have not conquered this city for me." {126b}  "Lord, emperor,"
she answered, "the wisest youths in the world are my brothers.  Go thou
thither and ask the city of them, and if it be in their possession thou
shalt have it gladly."  So the emperor and Helen went and demanded the
city.  And they told the emperor that none had taken the city, and that
none could give it him, but the men of the Island of Britain.  Then the
gates of the city of Rome were opened, and the emperor sat on the throne
and all the men of Rome submitted themselves unto him.

The emperor then said unto Kynan and Adeon, "Lords," said he, "I have now
had possession of the whole of my empire.  This host give I unto you to
vanquish whatever region ye may desire in the world."

So they set forth and conquered lands, and castles and cities.  And they
slew all the men, but the women they kept alive.  And thus they continued
until the young men that had come with them were grown grey headed, from
the length of time they were upon this conquest.

{Picture: p127.jpg}

Then spoke Kynan unto Adeon his brother, "Whether wilt thou rather," said
he, "tarry in this land, or go back into the land whence thou didst come
forth?"  Now he chose to go back to his own land and many with him.  But
Kynan tarried there with the other part, and dwelt there.

And they took counsel and cut out the tongues of the women, lest they
should corrupt their speech.  And because of the silence of the women
from their own speech, the men of Armorica are called Britons.  From that
time there came frequently, and still comes, that language from the
Island of Britain.

And this tale is called the Dream of Maxen Wledig, emperor of Rome.  And
here it ends.




Footnotes:


{7a}  Add "successively."

{7b}  And he summoned to him.

{10}  Add "bespattered."

{11}  And it may be that I shall have as much entertainment on account of
the hunting as they.

{15}  Good Sir.

{17}   There.

{19}  And his words reached Geraint.

{22}  As thou art impartial concerning the question of right between us.

{27}  More probably "though."  The ambiguity of the original would be
best expressed by "while."

{36a}  "Lest he should be overtaken by a piteous death."

{36b}  "Thine I do not consider a protection, nor thy warning a warning."

{38}  "Wilt thou not at last be silent?  Thy protection do I not consider
such."

{39}  "I declare to Heaven," said he, "that thy protection I do not
regard as such.  Hold thy peace, at last."

{40}  He spoke not a word, being angry.

{47a}  "Do thou not go to his land beyond the bridge."

{47b}  "I will go my way in spite of the one thou speakest of."

{48a}  In a very rough and bitter manner.

{48b}  Gereint took the road that he had meant to take; it was not the
road that led to the town from the bridge that he took, but the road that
led to the ground that was hard, and rugged, and high, and ridgy.

{49}  But it was unfair for Gereint to have to fight him, so small was
he, and so difficult to take aim at, and so hard were the blows he gave.
And they did not end that part of their fight until their horses fell
down on their knees.

{53}  "To complete thy death."

{64}  And what she did was to call her tutor to her, and she commanded
him to dress her grave every year in such a way that nothing would grow
on it.

{66}  And there were two silver spears, sharpened, in his hand.  A
prince's glaive was in his hand, a cubit from hilt to edge, that would
draw blood from the wind; swifter was it than.

{67}  Yes.  And as for thee, thy head is not under thy control; curt is
thy greeting.

{70a}  Carnwenhan.

{70b}  Dress.

{71a}  Galldovydd.

{71b}  Cnychwr.

{71c}  And Adwy.

{71d}  Annwas.

{71e}  Sinoit.

{72a}  Ysperin.

{72b}  Erinit.

{74a}  Llenuleawc.

{74b}  Gwrdival.

{74c}  Kai was said to be his son.

{75a}  Add, "And from him is Paris named."

{75b}  Gweir, son of Cadellin Talaryant (Cadellin of the silver brow).

{76a}  His flat breast was ruddy.

{77a}  Hwyrdyddwc, Drwgdyddwc, and Llwyrdyddwc.

{77b}  Cethtrwm.

{78a}  Gweirdathar Wenidawc.

{78b}  Canhwch.

{78c}  Arwy.

{81a}  "We all of us will come there," said Kai.

{81b}  This dialogue consists of a series of repartees, with a play upon
words which it is impossible to follow in the translation.

{82}  "Oh man, since the sea does not allow a beautiful dead man in it,
show me that dead body."  "Oh woman, the one to whom the dead body
belongs thou wilt see here this evening."

{84a}  "I promise all this, and will obtain it," said he.

{84b}  "Where are my bad servants and my knaves?"

{85a}  Knee-pan.

{87}  The two oxen of Gwlwlwyd Wineu.

{89}  The harp of Teirtu to console me that night.

{92}  Garselit Wyddel.

{93}  Moro Oerveddawc.

{98a}  And what he and his companions with him did was this--they crossed
the three wards until he was within the fortress.

{98b}  Glini.

{99a}  Glini.

{99b}  Add "some of."

{100}  There was but one horn on each side of my head, and there were no
trees here except one oak sapling.

{102}  And they proceeded until they came to the wall opposite to where
the prisoner was, where they heard lamentations and groaning on the other
side of the wall.

{103}  And it was piteous to hear them.  And he hastened to the place.

{105}  Dyvnarth.

{108a}  Hosts of Ireland.

{108b}  And when all the hosts had fled, Arthur and his men went to their
ship in their sight, carrying with them the cauldron full of Irish money.

{108c}  Llwyddeu.

{109}  And he only killed one of his young pigs.

{110}  Add "same night Arthur."

{111a}  Aber Tywi.

{111b}  Kynlas.

{111c}  And ever since they had crossed the Irish Sea, he had not
appeared to them until then.

{112a}  And there was killed a young boar from among his pigs.

{112b}  And there was killed a young boar and a young sow.

{114}  But she turned again upon Kacmwri; she beat both men soundly,
disarmed them, and drove them out.

{116}  Maxen Wledig was an emperor at Rome.  And the comeliest man was
he, and the wisest, and the one that was most fit to be an emperor, of
all that had been before him.

{117}  Not for the delight of hunting went the emperor so far as that,
but to make himself such a man that he would be lord over those kings.

{118a}  Valleys he saw, and precipices, and wondrous high rocks, and a
rugged, waterless land.

{118b}  Barren.

{119}  Sparkling jewels laboriously wrought.

{120}  There was no joint of his bones, or cavity of his nails, not to
speak of anything larger than these, that was not full of the maiden's
love.

{122}  Waterless.

{124}  Helen of the Legions.

{125}  Legions.

{126a}  Over the wall into the city.

{126b}  That it was not for me that thy brothers conquered the city.



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MABINOGION VOL. 2 (OF 3)***


******* This file should be named 19973.txt or 19973.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/1/9/9/7/19973



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
