The Project Gutenberg eBook, The Story of the Glittering Plain, by William
Morris


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: The Story of the Glittering Plain
       or the Land of Living Men


Author: William Morris



Release Date: October 16, 2007  [eBook #2565]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE STORY OF THE GLITTERING
PLAIN***


Transcribed from the 1913 Longmans, Green and Co. edition by David Price,
email ccx074@pglaf.org





THE STORY OF THE GLITTERING PLAIN WHICH HAS BEEN ALSO CALLED THE LAND OF
LIVING MEN OR THE ACRE OF THE UNDYING


WRITTEN
BY WILLIAM MORRIS

POCKET EDITION

LONGMANS, GREEN AND CO.
39 PATERNOSTER ROW, LONDON
NEW YORK, BOMBAY, AND CALCUTTA
1913




BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTE


First printed in the _English Illustrated Magazine_, Vol. VII, 1890.

First Edition in book form, 200 copies printed at the Kelmscott Press in
the Golden Type, quarto, April 1891, Reeves and Turner, with six copies
on vellum.

Printed at the Kelmscott Press in the Troy Type, with wood-engravings
from designs by Walter Crane, 250 copies and seven on vellum, January
1894.

Printed September 1891, in imperial 16mo.

Transferred to Longmans, Green and Co., June 1896.

Reprinted February 1898 and August 1904.

Included in Volume XIV of the _Collected Works of William Morris_, July
1912.

Included in Longmans' Pocket Library, November 1913.




CHAPTER I: OF THOSE THREE WHO CAME TO THE HOUSE OF THE RAVEN


It has been told that there was once a young man of free kindred and
whose name was Hallblithe: he was fair, strong, and not untried in
battle; he was of the House of the Raven of old time.

This man loved an exceeding fair damsel called the Hostage, who was of
the House of the Rose, wherein it was right and due that the men of the
Raven should wed.

She loved him no less, and no man of the kindred gainsaid their love, and
they were to be wedded on Midsummer Night.

But one day of early spring, when the days were yet short and the nights
long, Hallblithe sat before the porch of the house smoothing an ash stave
for his spear, and he heard the sound of horse-hoofs drawing nigh, and he
looked up and saw folk riding toward the house, and so presently they
rode through the garth gate; and there was no man but he about the house,
so he rose up and went to meet them, and he saw that they were but three
in company: they had weapons with them, and their horses were of the
best; but they were no fellowship for a man to be afraid of; for two of
them were old and feeble, and the third was dark and sad, and drooping of
aspect: it seemed as if they had ridden far and fast, for their spurs
were bloody and their horses all a-sweat.

Hallblithe hailed them kindly and said: "Ye are way-worn, and maybe ye
have to ride further; so light down and come into the house, and take
bite and sup, and hay and corn also for your horses; and then if ye needs
must ride on your way, depart when ye are rested; or else if ye may, then
abide here night-long, and go your ways to-morrow, and meantime that
which is ours shall be yours, and all shall be free to you."

Then spake the oldest of the elders in a high piping voice and said:
"Young man, we thank thee; but though the days of the springtide are
waxing, the hours of our lives are waning; nor may we abide unless thou
canst truly tell us that this is the Land of the Glittering Plain: and if
that be so, then delay not, lead us to thy lord, and perhaps he will make
us content."

Spake he who was somewhat less stricken in years than the first: "Thanks
have thou! but we need something more than meat and drink, to wit the
Land of Living Men.  And Oh! but the time presses."

Spake the sad and sorry carle: "We seek the Land where the days are many:
so many that he who hath forgotten how to laugh, may learn the craft
again, and forget the days of Sorrow."

Then they all three cried aloud and said:

"Is this the Land?  Is this the Land?"

But Hallblithe wondered, and he laughed and said: "Wayfarers, look under
the sun down the plain which lieth betwixt the mountains and the sea, and
ye shall behold the meadows all gleaming with the spring lilies; yet do
we not call this the Glittering Plain, but Cleveland by the Sea.  Here
men die when their hour comes, nor know I if the days of their life be
long enough for the forgetting of sorrow; for I am young and not yet a
yokefellow of sorrow; but this I know, that they are long enough for the
doing of deeds that shall not die.  And as for Lord, I know not this
word, for here dwell we, the sons of the Raven, in good fellowship, with
our wives that we have wedded, and our mothers who have borne us, and our
sisters who serve us.  Again I bid you light down off your horses, and
eat and drink, and be merry; and depart when ye will, to seek what land
ye will."

They scarce looked on him, but cried out together mournfully:

"This is not the Land!  This is not the Land!"

No more than that they said, but turned about their horses and rode out
through the garth gate, and went clattering up the road that led to the
pass of the mountains.  But Hallblithe hearkened wondering, till the
sound of their horse-hoofs died away, and then turned back to his work:
and it was then two hours after high-noon.




CHAPTER II: EVIL TIDINGS COME TO HAND AT CLEVELAND


Not long had he worked ere he heard the sound of horsehoofs once more,
and he looked not up, but said to himself, "It is but the lads bringing
back the teams from the acres, and riding fast and driving hard for joy
of heart and in wantonness of youth."

But the sound grew nearer and he looked up and saw over the turf wall of
the garth the flutter of white raiment; and he said:

"Nay, it is the maidens coming back from the sea-shore and the gathering
of wrack."

So he set himself the harder to his work, and laughed, all alone as he
was, and said: "She is with them: now I will not look up again till they
have ridden into the garth, and she has come from among them, and leapt
off her horse, and cast her arms about my neck as her wont is; and it
will rejoice her then to mock me with hard words and kind voice and
longing heart; and I shall long for her and kiss her, and sweet shall the
coming days seem to us: and the daughters of our folk shall look on and
be kind and blithe with us."

Therewith rode the maidens into the garth, but he heard no sound of
laughter or merriment amongst them, which was contrary to their wont; and
his heart fell, and it was as if instead of the maidens' laughter the
voices of those wayfarers came back upon the wind crying out, "Is this
the Land?  Is this the Land?"

Then he looked up hastily, and saw the maidens drawing near, ten of the
House of the Raven, and three of the House of the Rose; and he beheld
them that their faces were pale and woe-begone, and their raiment rent,
and there was no joy in them.  Hallblithe stood aghast while one who had
gotten off her horse (and she was the daughter of his own mother) ran
past him into the hall, looking not at him, as if she durst not: and
another rode off swiftly to the horse-stalls.  But the others, leaving
their horses, drew round about him, and for a while none durst utter a
word; and he stood gazing at them, with the spoke-shave in his hand, he
also silent; for he saw that the Hostage was not with them, and he knew
that now he was the yokefellow of sorrow.

At last he spoke gently and in a kind voice, and said: "Tell me, sisters,
what evil hath befallen us, even if it be the death of a dear friend, and
the thing that may not be amended."

Then spoke a fair woman of the Rose, whose name was Brightling, and said:
"Hallblithe, it is not of death that we have to tell, but of sundering,
which may yet be amended.  We were on the sand of the sea nigh the Ship-
stead and the Rollers of the Raven, and we were gathering the wrack and
playing together; and we saw a round-ship nigh to shore lying with her
sheet slack, and her sail beating the mast; but we deemed it to be none
other than some bark of the Fish-biters, and thought no harm thereof, but
went on running and playing amidst the little waves that fell on the
sand, and the ripples that curled around our feet.  At last there came a
small boat from the side of the round-ship, and rowed in toward shore,
and still we feared not, though we drew a little aback from the surf and
let fall our gown-hems.  But the crew of that boat beached her close to
where we stood, and came hastily wading the surf towards us; and we saw
that they were twelve weaponed men, great, and grim, and all clad in
black raiment.  Then indeed were we afraid, and we turned about and fled
up the beach; but now it was too late, for the tide was at more than half
ebb and long was the way over the sand to the place where we had left our
horses tied among the tamarisk-bushes.  Nevertheless we ran, and had
gotten up to the pebble-beach before they ran in amongst us: and they
caught us, and cast us down on to the hard stones.

"Then they made us sit in a row on a ridge of the pebbles; and we were
sore afraid, yet more for defilement at their hands than for death; for
they were evil-looking men exceeding foul of favour.  Then said one of
them: 'Which of all you maidens is the Hostage of the House of the Rose?'

"Then all we kept silence, for we would not betray her.  But the evil man
spake again: 'Choose ye then whether we shall take one, or all of you
across the waters in our black ship.'  Yet still we others spake not,
till arose thy beloved, O Hallblithe, and said:

"'Let it be one then, and not all; for I am the Hostage.'

"'How shalt thou make us sure thereof?' said the evil carle.

"She looked on him proudly and said: 'Because I say it.'

"'Wilt thou swear it?' said he.

"'Yea,' said she, 'I swear it by the token of the House wherein I shall
wed; by the wings of the Fowl that seeketh the Field of Slaying.'

"'It is enough,' said the man, 'come thou with us.  And ye maidens sit ye
there, and move not till we have made way on our ship, unless ye would
feel the point of the arrow.  For ye are within bowshot of the ship, and
we have shot weapons aboard.'

"So the Hostage departed with them, and she unweeping, but we wept
sorely.  And we saw the small boat come up to the side of the round-ship,
and the Hostage going over the gunwale along with those evil men, and we
heard the hale and how of the mariners as they drew up the anchor and
sheeted home; and then the sweeps came out and the ship began to move
over the sea.  And one of those evil-minded men bent his bow and shot a
shaft at us, but it fell far short of where we sat, and the laugh of
those runagates came over the sands to us.  So we crept up the beach
trembling, and then rose to our feet and got to our horses, and rode
hither speedily, and our hearts are broken for thy sorrow."

At that word came Hallblithe's own sister out from the hall; and she bore
weapons with her, to wit Hallblithe's sword and shield and helm and
hauberk.  As for him he turned back silently to his work, and set the
steel of the spear on the new ashen shaft, and took the hammer and smote
the nail in, and laid the weapon on a round pebble that was thereby, and
clenched the nail on the other side.  Then he looked about, and saw that
the other damsel had brought him his coal-black war-horse ready saddled
and bridled; then he did on his armour, and girt his sword to his side
and leapt into the saddle, and took his new-shafted spear in hand and
shook the rein.  But none of all those damsels durst say a word to him or
ask him whither he went, for they feared his face, and the sorrow of his
heart.  So he got him out of the garth and turned toward the sea-shore,
and they saw the glitter of his spear-point a minute over the turf-wall,
and heard the clatter of his horse-hoofs as he galloped over the hard
way; and thus he departed.




CHAPTER III: THE WARRIORS OF THE RAVEN SEARCH THE SEAS


Then the women bethought them, and they spake a word or two together, and
then they sundered and went one this way and one that, to gather together
the warriors of the Raven who were a-field, or on the way, nigh unto the
house, that they might follow Hallblithe down to the sea-shore and help
him; after a while they came back again by one and two and three,
bringing with them the wrathful young men; and when there was upward of a
score gathered in the garth armed and horsed, they rode their ways to the
sea, being minded to thrust a long-ship of the Ravens out over the
Rollers into the sea, and follow the strong-thieves of the waters and
bring a-back the Hostage, so that they might end the sorrow at once, and
establish joy once more in the House of the Raven and the House of the
Rose.  But they had with them three lads of fifteen winters or
thereabouts to lead their horses back home again, when they should have
gone up on to the Horse of the Brine.

Thus then they departed, and the maidens stood in the garth-gate till
they lost sight of them behind the sandhills, and then turned back
sorrowfully into the house, and sat there talking low of their sorrow.
And many a time they had to tell their tale anew, as folk came into the
hall one after another from field and fell.  But the young men came down
to the sea, and found Hallblithe's black horse straying about amongst the
tamarisk-bushes above the beach; and they looked thence over the sand,
and saw neither Hallblithe nor any man: and they gazed out seaward, and
saw neither ship nor sail on the barren brine.  Then they went down on to
the sand, and sundered their fellowship, and went half one way, half the
other, betwixt the sandhills and the surf, where now the tide was
flowing, till the nesses of the east and the west, the horns of the bay,
stayed them.  Then they met together again by the Rollers, when the sun
was within an hour of setting.  There and then they laid hand to that
ship which is called the Seamew, and they ran her down over the Rollers
into the waves, and leapt aboard and hoisted sail, and ran out the oars
and put to sea; and a little wind was blowing seaward from the gates of
the mountains behind them.

So they quartered the sea-plain, as the kestrel doth the water-meadows,
till the night fell on them, and was cloudy, though whiles the wading
moon shone out; and they had seen nothing, neither sail nor ship, nor
aught else on the barren brine, save the washing of waves and the
hovering of sea-fowl.  So they lay-to outside the horns of the bay and
awaited the dawning.  And when morning was come they made way again, and
searched the sea, and sailed to the out-skerries, and searched them with
care; then they sailed into the main and fared hither and thither and up
and down: and this they did for eight days, and in all that time they saw
no ship nor sail, save three barks of the Fish-biters nigh to the Skerry
which is called Mew-stone.

So they fared home to the Raven Bay, and laid their keel on the Rollers,
and so went their ways sadly, home to the House of the Raven: and they
deemed that for this time they could do no more in seeking their valiant
kinsman and his fair damsel.  And they were very sorry; for these two
were well-beloved of all men.  But since they might not amend it, they
abode in peace, awaiting what the change of days might bring them.




CHAPTER IV: NOW HALLBLITHE TAKETH THE SEA


Now must it be told of Hallblithe that he rode fiercely down to the sea-
shore, and from the top of the beach he gazed about him, and there below
him was the Ship-stead and Rollers of his kindred, whereon lay the three
long-ships, the Seamew, and the Osprey and the Erne.  Heavy and huge they
seemed to him as they lay there, black-sided, icy-cold with the washing
of the March waves, their golden dragon-heads looking seaward wistfully.
But first had he looked out into the offing, and it was only when he had
let his eyes come back from where the sea and sky met, and they had
beheld nothing but the waste of waters, that he beheld the Ship-stead
closely; and therewith he saw where a little to the west of it lay a
skiff, which the low wave of the tide lifted and let fall from time to
time.  It had a mast, and a black sail hoisted thereon and flapping with
slackened sheet.  A man sat in the boat clad in black raiment, and the
sun smote a gleam from the helm on his head.  Then Hallblithe leapt off
his horse, and strode down the sands shouldering his spear; and when he
came near to the man in the boat he poised his spear and shook it and
cried out: "Man, art thou friend or foe?"

Said the man: "Thou art a fair young man: but there is grief in thy voice
along with wrath.  Cast not till thou hast heard me, and mayst deem
whether I may do aught to heal thy grief."

"What mayst thou do?" said Hallblithe; "art thou not a robber of the sea,
a harrier of the folks that dwell in peace?"

The man laughed: "Yea," said he, "my craft is thieving and carrying off
the daughters of folk, so that we may have a ransom for them.  Wilt thou
come over the waters with me?"

Hallblithe said wrathfully:

"Nay, rather, come thou ashore here!  Thou seemest a big man, and belike
shall be good of thine hands.  Come and fight with me; and then he of us
who is vanquished, if he be unslain, shall serve the other for a year,
and then shalt thou do my business in the ransoming."

The man in the boat laughed again, and that so scornfully that he angered
Hallblithe beyond measure: then he arose in the boat and stood on his
feet swaying from side to side as he laughed.  He was passing big, long-
armed and big-headed, and long hair came from under his helm like the
tail of a red horse; his eyes were grey and gleaming, and his mouth wide.

In a while he stayed his laughter and said: "O Warrior of the Raven, this
were a simple game for thee to play; though it is not far from my mind,
for fighting when I needs must win is no dull work.  Look you, if I slay
or vanquish thee, then all is said; and if by some chance stroke thou
slayest me, then is thine only helper in this matter gone from thee.  Now
to be short, I bid thee come aboard to me if thou wouldst ever hear
another word of thy damsel betrothed.  And moreover this need not hinder
thee to fight with me if thou hast a mind to it thereafter; for we shall
soon come to a land big enough for two to stand on.  Or if thou listest
to fight in a boat rocking on the waves, I see not but there may be
manhood in that also."

Now was the hot wrath somewhat run off Hallblithe, nor durst he lose any
chance to hear a word of his beloved; so he said: "Big man, I will come
aboard.  But look thou to it, if thou hast a mind to bewray me; for the
sons of the Raven die hard."

"Well," said the big man, "I have heard that their minstrels are of many
words, and think that they have tales to tell.  Come aboard and loiter
not."  Then Hallblithe waded the surf and lightly strode over the gunwale
of the skiff and sat him down.  The big man thrust out into the deep and
haled home the sheet; but there was but little wind.

Then said Hallblithe: "Wilt thou have me row, for I wot not whitherward
to steer?"

Said the red carle: "Maybe thou art not in a hurry; I am not: do as thou
wilt."  So Hallblithe took the oars and rowed mightily, while the alien
steered, and they went swiftly and lightly over the sea, and the waves
were little.




CHAPTER V: THEY COME UNTO THE ISLE OF RANSOM


So the sun grew low, and it set; the stars and the moon shone a while and
then it clouded over.  Hallblithe still rowed and rested not, though he
was weary; and the big man sat and steered, and held his peace.  But when
the night was grown old and it was not far from the dawn, the alien said:
"Youngling of the Ravens, now shalt thou sleep and I will row."

Hallblithe was exceeding weary; so he gave the oars to the alien and lay
down in the stern and slept.  And in his sleep he dreamed that he was
lying in the House of the Raven, and his sisters came to him and said,
"Rise up now, Hallblithe! wilt thou be a sluggard on the day of thy
wedding?  Come thou with us to the House of the Rose that we may bear
away the Hostage."  Then he dreamed that they departed, and he arose and
clad himself: but when he would have gone out of the hall, then was it no
longer daylight, but moonlight, and he dreamed that he had dreamed:
nevertheless he would have gone abroad, but might not find the door; so
he said he would go out by a window; but the wall was high and smooth
(quite other than in the House of the Raven, where were low windows all
along one aisle), nor was there any way to come at them.  But he dreamed
that he was so abashed thereat, and had such a weakness on him, that he
wept for pity of himself: and he went to his bed to lie down; and lo!
there was no bed and no hall; nought but a heath, wild and wide, and
empty under the moon.  And still he wept in his dream, and his manhood
seemed departed from him, and he heard a voice crying out, "Is this the
Land?  Is this the Land?"

Therewithal he awoke, and as his eyes cleared he beheld the big man
rowing and the black sail flapping against the mast; for the wind had
fallen dead and they were faring on over a long smooth swell of the sea.
It was broad daylight, but round about them was a thick mist, which
seemed none the less as if the sun were ready to shine through it.

As Hallblithe caught the red man's eye, he smiled and nodded on him and
said: "Now has the time come for thee first to eat and then to row.  But
tell me what is that upon thy cheeks?"

Hallblithe, reddening somewhat, said: "The night dew hath fallen on me."

Quoth the sea-rover, "It is no shame for thee a youngling to remember thy
betrothed in thy sleep, and to weep because thou lackest her.  But now
bestir thee, for it is later than thou mayest deem."

Therewith the big man drew in the oars and came to the afterpart of the
boat, and drew meat and drink out of a locker thereby; and they ate and
drank together, and Hallblithe grew strong and somewhat less downcast;
and he went forward and gat the oars into his hands.

Then the big red man stood up and looked over his left shoulder and said:
"Soon shall we have a breeze and bright weather."

Then he looked into the midmost of the sail and fell a-whistling such a
tune as the fiddles play to dancing men and maids at Yule-tide, and his
eyes gleamed and glittered therewithal, and exceeding big he looked.  Then
Hallblithe felt a little air on his cheek, and the mist grew thinner, and
the sail began to fill with wind till the sheet tightened: then, lo! the
mist rising from the face of the sea, and the sea's face rippling gaily
under a bright sun.  Then the wind increased, and the wall of mist
departed and a few light clouds sped over the sky, and the sail swelled
and the boat heeled over, and the seas fell white from the prow, and they
sped fast over the face of the waters.

Then laughed the red-haired man, and said: "O croaker on the dead branch,
now is the wind such that no rowing of thine may catch up with it: so in
with the oars now, and turn about, and thou shalt see whitherward we are
going."

Then Hallblithe turned about on the thwart and looked across the sea, and
lo! before them the high cliffs and crags and mountains of a new land
which seemed to be an isle, and they were deep blue under the sun, which
now shone aloft in the mid heaven.  He said nought at all, but sat
looking and wondering what land it might be; but the big man said: "O
tomb of warriors, is it not as if the blueness of the deep sea had heaved
itself up aloft, and turned from coloured air into rock and stone, so
wondrous blue it is?  But that is because those crags and mountains are
so far away, and as we draw nigher to them, thou shalt see them as they
verily are, that they are coal-black; and yonder land is an isle, and is
called the Isle of Ransom.  Therein shall be the market for thee where
thou mayst cheapen thy betrothed.  There mayst thou take her by the hand
and lead her away thence, when thou hast dealt with the chapman of
maidens and hast pledged thee by the fowl of battle, and the edge of the
fallow blade to pay that which he will have of thee."

As the big man spoke there was a mocking in his voice and his face and in
his whole huge body, which made the sword of Hallblithe uneasy in his
scabbard; but he refrained his wrath, and said: "Big man, the longer I
look, the less I can think how we are to come up on to yonder island; for
I can see nought but a huge cliff, and great mountains rising beyond it."

"Thou shalt the more wonder," said the alien, "the nigher thou drawest
thereto; for it is not because we are far away that thou canst see no
beach or strand, or sloping of the land seaward, but because there is
nought of all these things.  Yet fear not! am I not with thee? thou shalt
come ashore on the Isle of Ransom."

Then Hallblithe held his peace, and the other spake not for a while, but
gave a short laugh once or twice; and said at last in a big voice,
"Little Carrion-biter, why dost thou not ask me of my name?"

Now Hallblithe was a tall man and a fell fighter; but he said: "Because I
was thinking of other things and not of thee."

"Well," said the big man, in a voice still louder, "when I am at home men
call me the Puny Fox."

Then Hallblithe said: "Art thou a Fox?  It may well be that thou shalt
beguile me as such beasts will but look to it, that if thou dost I shall
know how to avenge me."

Then rose up the big man from the helm, and straddled wide in the boat,
and cried out in a great roaring voice: "Crag-nester, I am one of seven
brethren, and the smallest and weakest of them.  Art thou not afraid?"

"No," said Hallblithe, "for the six others are not here.  Wilt thou fight
here in boat, O Fox?"

"Nay," said Fox, "rather we will drink a cup of wine together."

So he opened the locker again and drew out thence a great horn of some
huge neat of the outlands, which was girthed and stopped with silver, and
also a golden cup, and he filled the cup from the horn and gave it into
Hallblithe's hand and said: "Drink, O black-fledged nestling!  But call a
health over the cup if thou wilt."  So Hallblithe raised the cup aloft
and cried: "Health to the House of the Raven and to them that love it! an
ill day to its foemen!"  Then he set his lips to the cup and drank; and
that wine seemed to him better and stronger than any he had ever tasted.
But when he had given the cup back again to Fox, that red one filled it
again, and cried over it, "The Treasure of the Sea! and the King that
dieth not!"  Then he drank, and filled again for Hallblithe, and steered
with his knees meanwhile; and thus they drank three cups each, and Fox
smiled and was peaceful and said but little, but Hallblithe sat wondering
how the world was changed for him since yesterday.

But now was the sky blown all clear of clouds and the wind piped shrill
behind them, and the great waves rose and fell about them, and the sun
glittered on them in many colours.  Fast flew the boat before the wind as
though it would never stop, and the day was waning, and the wind still
rising; and now the Isle of Ransom uphove huge before them, and
coal-black, and no beach and no haven was to be seen therein; and still
they ran before the wind towards that black cliff-wall, against which the
sea washed for ever, and no keel ever built by man might live for one
moment 'twixt the surf and the cliff of that grim land.  The sun grew
low, and sank red under the sea, and that world of stone swallowed up
half the heavens before them, for they were now come very nigh thereto;
nor could Hallblithe see aught for it, but that they must be dashed
against the cliff and perish in a moment of time.

Still the boat flew on; but now when the twilight was come, and they had
just opened up along reach of the cliff that lay beyond a high ness,
Hallblithe thought he saw down by the edge of the sea something darker
than the face of the rock-wall, and he deemed it was a cave: they came a
little nearer and he saw it was a great cave high enough to let a round-
ship go in with all her sails set.

"Son of the Raven," quoth Fox, "hearken, for thy heart is not little.
Yonder is the gate into the Isle of Ransom, and if thou wilt, thou mayst
go through it.  Yet it may be that if thou goest ashore on to the Isle
something grievous shall befall thee, a trouble more than thou canst
bear: a shame it may be.  Now there are two choices for thee: either to
go up on to the Isle and face all; or to die here by my hand having done
nothing unmanly or shameful: What sayest thou?"

"Thou art of many words when time so presses, Fox," said Hallblithe.  "Why
should I not choose to go up on to the Island to deliver my trothplight
maiden?  For the rest, slay me if thou canst, if we come alive out of
this cauldron of waters."

Said the big red man: "Look on then, and note Fox how he steereth, as it
were through a needle's eye."

Now were they underneath the black shadow of the black cliff and amidst
the twilight the surf was tossed about like white fire.  In the lower
heavens the stars were beginning to twinkle and the moon was bright and
yellow, and aloft all was peaceful, for no cloud sullied the sky.  One
moment Hallblithe saw all this hanging above the turmoil of thundering
water and dripping rock and the next he was in the darkness of the cave,
the roaring wind and the waves still making thunder about him, though of
a different voice from the harsh hubbub without.  Then he heard Fox say:
"Sit down now and take the oars, for presently shall we be at home at the
landing place."

So Hallblithe took the oars and rowed, and as they went up the cave the
sea fell, and the wind died out into the aimless gustiness of hollow
places; and for a little while was all as dark as dark might be.  Then
Hallblithe saw that the darkness grew a little greyer, and he looked over
his shoulder and saw a star of light before the bows of the boat, and Fox
cried out: "Yea, it is like day; bright will the moon be for such as
needs must be wayfaring to-night!  Cease rowing, O Son of the coal-blue
fowl, for there is way enough on her."

Then Hallblithe lay on his oars, and in a minute the bows smote the land;
then he turned about and saw a steep stair of stone, and up the sloping
shaft thereof the moonlit sky and the bright stars.  Then Fox arose and
came forward and leapt out of the boat and moored her to a big stone:
then he leapt back again and said: "Bear a hand with the victuals; we
must bring them out of the boat unless thou wilt sleep supperless, as I
will not.  For to-night must we be guests to ourselves, since it is far
to the dwelling of my people, and the old man is said to be a
skin-changer, a flit-by-night.  And as to this cave, it is deemed to be
nowise safe to sleep therein, unless the sleeper have a double share of
luck.  And thy luck, meseemeth, O Son of the Raven, is as now somewhat
less than a single share.  So to-night we shall sleep under the naked
heaven."

Hallblithe yea-said this, and they took the meat and drink, such as they
needed, from out the boat, and climbed the steep stair no little way, and
so came out on to a plain place, which seemed to Hallblithe bare and
waste so far as he saw it by the moonlight; for the twilight was gone
now, and nought was left of the light of day save a glimmer in the west.

This Hallblithe deemed wonderful, that no less out on the open heath and
brow of the land than in the shut-in cave, all that tumult of the wind
had fallen, and the cloudless night was calm, and with a little air
blowing from the south and the landward.

Therewithal was Fox done with his loud-voiced braggart mood, and spoke
gently and peaceably like to a wayfarer, who hath business of his to look
to as other men.  Now he pointed to certain rocks or low crags that a
little way off rose like a reef out of the treeless plain; then said he:
"Shipmate, underneath yonder rocks is our resting-place for to-night; and
I pray thee not to deem me churlish that I give thee no better harbour.
But I have a charge over thee to bring thee safe thus far on thy quest;
and thou wouldst find it hard to live among such housemates as thou
wouldst find up yonder amongst our folks to-night.  But to-morrow shalt
thou come to speech with him who will deal with thee concerning the
ransom."

"It is enough," said Hallblithe, "and I thank thee for thy leading: and
as for thy rough and uncomely words which thou hast given me, I pardon
thee for them: for I am none the worse of them: forsooth, if I had been,
my sword would have had a voice in the matter."

"I am well content as it is, Son of the Raven," quoth Fox; "I have done
my bidding and all is well."

"Tell me then who it is hath bidden thee bring me hither?"

"I may not tell thee," said Fox; "thou art here, be content, as I am."

And he spake no more till they had come to the reef aforesaid, which was
some two furlongs from the place where they had come from out of the
cave.  There then they set forth their supper on the stones, and ate what
they would, and drank of that good strong wine while the horn bare out.
And now was Fox of few words, and when Hallblithe asked him concerning
that land, he had little to say.  And at last when Hallblithe asked him
of that so perilous house and those who manned it, he said to him:

"Son of the Raven, it avails not asking of these matters; for if I tell
thee aught concerning them I shall tell thee lies.  Once again let it be
enough for thee that thou hast passed over the sea safely on thy quest;
and a more perilous sea it is forsooth than thou deemest.  But now let us
have an end of vain words, and make our bed amidst these stones as best
we may; for we should be stirring betimes in the morning."  Hallblithe
said little in answer, and they arrayed their sleeping places cunningly,
as the hare doth her form, and like men well used to lying abroad.

Hallblithe was very weary and he soon fell asleep; and as he lay there,
he dreamed a dream, or maybe saw a vision; whether he were asleep when he
saw it, or between sleeping and waking, I know not.  But this was his
dream or his vision; that the Hostage was standing over him, and she as
he had seen her but yesterday, bright-haired and ruddy-cheeked and white-
skinned, kind of hand and soft of voice, and she said to him:
"Hallblithe, look on me and hearken, for I have a message for thee."  And
he looked and longed for her, and his soul was ravished by the sweetness
of his longing, and he would have leapt up and cast his arms about her,
but sleep and the dream bound him, and he might not.  Then the image
smiled on him and said: "Nay, my love, lie still, for thou mayst not
touch me: here is but the image of the body which thou desirest.  Hearken
then.  I am in evil plight, in the hands of strong-thieves of the sea,
nor know I what they will do with me, and I have no will to be shamed; to
be sold for a price from one hand to another, yet to be bedded without a
price, and to lie beside some foe-man of our folk, and he to cast his
arms about me, will I, will I not: this is a hard case.  Therefore to-
morrow morning at daybreak while men sleep, I think to steal forth to the
gunwale of the black ship and give myself to the gods, that they and not
these runagates may be masters of my life and my soul, and may do with me
as they will: for indeed they know that I may not bear the strange
kinless house, and the love and caressing of the alien house-master, and
the mocking and stripes of the alien house-mistress.  Therefore let the
Hoary One of the sea take me and look to my matters, and carry me to life
or death, which-so he will.  Thin now grows the night, but lie still a
little yet, while I speak another word.

"Maybe we shall meet alive again, and maybe not: and if not, though we
have never yet lain in one bed together, yet I would have thee remember
me: yet not so that my image shall come between thee and thy
speech-friend and bed-fellow of the kindred, that shall lie where I was
to have lain.  Yet again, if I live and thou livest, I have been told and
have heard that by one way or other I am like to come to the Glittering
Plain, and the Land of Living Men.  O my beloved, if by any way thou
mightest come thither also, and we might meet there, and we two alive,
how good it were!  Seek that land then, beloved! seek it, whether or no
we once more behold the House of the Rose, or tread the floor of the
Raven dwelling.  And now must even this image of me sunder from thee.
Farewell!"

Therewith was the dream done and the vision departed; and Hallblithe sat
up full of anguish and longing; and he looked about him over the dreary
land, and it was somewhat light and the sky was grown grey and cloudy,
and he deemed that the dawn was come.  So he leapt to his feet and
stooped down over Fox, and took him by the shoulder, and shook him and
said: "Faring-fellow, awake! the dawn is come, and we have much to do."

Fox sat up and growled like a dog, and rubbed his eyes and looked about
him and said: "Thou hast waked me for nought: it is the false dawn of the
moon that shineth now behind the clouds and casteth no shadow; it is but
an hour after midnight.  Go to sleep again, and let me be, else will I
not be a guide to thee when the day comes."  And he lay down and was
asleep at once.  Then Hallblithe went and lay down again full of sorrow:
Yet so weary was he that he presently fell asleep, and dreamed no more.




CHAPTER VI: OF A DWELLING OF MAN ON THE ISLE OF RANSOM


When he awoke again the sun shone on him, and the morning was calm and
windless.  He sat up and looked about him, but could see no signs of Fox
save the lair wherein he had lain.  So he arose to his feet and sought
for him about the crannies of the rocks, and found him not; and he
shouted for him, and had no answer.  Then he said, "Belike he has gone
down to the boat to put a thing in, or take a thing out."  So he went his
ways to the stair down into the water-cave, and he called on Fox from the
top of the stair, and had no answer.

So he went down that long stair with a misgiving in his heart, and when
he came to the last step there was neither man nor boat, nor aught else
save the water and the living rock.  Then was he exceeding wroth, for he
knew that he had been beguiled, and he was in an evil case, left alone on
an Isle that he knew not, a waste and desolate land, where it seemed most
like he should die of famine.

He wasted no breath or might now in crying out for Fox, or seeking him;
for he said to himself: "I might well have known that he was false and a
liar, whereas he could scarce refrain his joy at my folly and his guile.
Now is it for me to strive for life against death."

Then he turned and went slowly up the stair, and came out on to the open
face of that Isle, and he saw that it was waste indeed, and dreadful: a
wilderness of black sand and stones and ice-borne rocks, with here and
there a little grass growing in the hollows, and here and there a dreary
mire where the white-tufted rushes shook in the wind, and here and there
stretches of moss blended with red-blossomed sengreen; and otherwhere
nought but the wind-bitten creeping willow clinging to the black sand,
with a white bleached stick and a leaf or two, and again a stick and a
leaf.  In the offing looking landward were great mountains, some very
great and snow-capped, some bare to the tops; and all that was far away,
save the snow, was deep-blue in the sunny morning.  But about him on the
heath were scattered rocks like the reef beneath which he had slept the
last night, and peaks, and hammers, and knolls of uncouth shapes.

Then he went to the edge of the cliffs and looked down on the sea which
lay wrinkled and rippling on toward the shore far below him, and long he
gazed thereon and all about, but could see neither ship nor sail, nor
aught else save the washing of waves and the hovering of sea fowl.

Then he said: "Were it not well if I were to seek that house-master of
whom Fox spake?  Might he not flit me at least to the Land of the
Glittering Plain?  Woe is me! now am I of that woful company, and I also
must needs cry out, Where is the land?  Where is the land?"

Therewith he turned toward the reef above their lair, but as he went he
thought and said: "Nay, but was not this Stead a lie like the rest of
Fox's tale? and am I not alone in this sea-girt wilderness?  Yea, and
even that image of my Beloved which I saw in the dream, perchance that
also was a mere beguiling; for now I see that the Puny Fox was in all
ways wiser than is meet and comely."  Yet again he said: "At least I will
seek on, and find out whether there be another man dwelling on this
hapless Isle, and then the worst of it will be battle with him, and death
by point and edge rather than by hunger; or at the best we may become
friends and fellows and deliver each other."  Therewith he came to the
reef, and with much ado climbed to the topmost of its rocks and looked
down thence landward: and betwixt him and the mountains, and by seeming
not very far off, he saw smoke arising: but no house he saw, nor any
other token of a dwelling.  So he came down from the stone and turned his
back upon the sea and went toward that smoke with his sword in its
sheath, and his spear over his shoulder.  Rough and toilsome was the way:
three little dales he crossed amidst the mountain necks, each one narrow
and bare, with a stream of water amidst, running seaward, and whether in
dale or on ridge, he went ever amidst sand and stones, and the weeds of
the wilderness, and saw no man, or man-tended beast.

At last, after he had been four hours on the way, but had not gone very
far, he topped a stony bent, and from the brow thereof beheld a wide
valley grass-grown for the more part, with a river running through it,
and sheep and kine and horses feeding up and down it.  And amidst this
dale by the stream-side, was a dwelling of men, a long hall and other
houses about it builded of stone.

Then was Hallblithe glad, and he strode down the bent speedily, his war-
gear clashing upon him: and as he came to the foot thereof and on to the
grass of the dale, he got amongst the pasturing horses, and passed close
by the horse-herd and a woman that was with him.  They scowled at him as
he went by, but meddled not with him in any way.  Although they were
giant-like of stature and fierce of face, they were not ill-favoured:
they were red-haired, and the woman as white as cream where the sun had
not burned her skin; they had no weapons that Hallblithe might see save
the goad in the hand of the carle.

So Hallblithe passed on and came to the biggest house, the hall
aforesaid: it was very long, and low as for its length, not over shapely
of fashion, a mere gabled heap of stones.  Low and strait was the door
thereinto, and as Hallblithe entered stooping lowly, and the fire of the
steel of his spear that he held before him was quenched in the mirk of
the hall, he smiled and said to himself: "Now if there were one anigh who
would not have me enter alive, and he with a weapon in his hand, soon
were all the tale told."  But he got into the hall unsmitten, and stood
on the floor thereof, and spake: "The sele of the day to whomsoever is
herein!  Will any man speak to the new comer?"

But none answered or gave him greeting; and as his eyes got used to the
dusk of the hall, he looked about him, and neither on the floor or the
high seat nor in any ingle could he see a man; and there was silence
there, save for the crackling of the flickering flame on the hearth
amidmost, and the running of the rats behind the panelling of the walls.

On one side of the hall was a row of shut-beds, and Hallblithe deemed
that there might be men therein; but since none had greeted him he
refrained him from searching them for fear of a trap, and he thought, "I
will abide amidst the floor, and if there be any that would deal with me,
friend or foe, let him come hither to me."

So he fell to walking up and down the hall from buttery to dais, and his
war-gear rattled upon him.  At last as he walked he thought he heard a
small thin peevish voice, which yet was too husky for the squeak of a
rat.  So he stayed his walk and stood still, and said: "Will any man
speak to Hallblithe, a newcomer, and a stranger in this Stead?"

Then that small voice made a word and said: "Why paceth the fool up and
down our hall, doing nothing, even as the Ravens flap croaking about the
crags, abiding the war-mote and the clash of the fallow blades?"

Said Hallblithe, and his voice sounded big in the hall: "Who calleth
Hallblithe a fool and mocketh at the sons of the Raven?"

Spake the voice: "Why cometh not the fool to the man that may not go to
him?"

Then Hallblithe bent forward to hearken, and he deemed that the voice
came from one of the shut-beds, so he leaned his spear against a pillar,
and went into the shut-bed he had noted, and saw where there lay along in
it a man exceeding old by seeming, sore wasted, with long hair as white
as snow lying over the bed-clothes.

When the elder saw Hallblithe, he laughed a thin cracked laugh as if in
mockery and said: "Hail newcomer! wilt thou eat?"

"Yea," said Hallblithe.

"Go thou into the buttery then," said the old carle, "and there shalt
thou find on the cupboard cakes and curds and cheese: eat thy fill, and
when thou hast done, look in the ingle, and thou shalt see a cask of mead
exceeding good, and a stoup thereby, and two silver cups; fill the stoup
and bring it hither with the cups; and then may we talk amidst of
drinking, which is good for an old carle.  Hasten thou! or I shall deem
thee a double fool who will not fare to fetch his meat, though he be
hungry."

Then Hallblithe laughed, and went down the hall into the buttery and
found the meat, and ate his fill, and came away with the drink back to
the Long-hoary man, who chuckled as he came and said: "Fill up now for
thee and for me, and call a health to me and wish me somewhat."

"I wish thee luck," said Hallblithe, and drank.  Said the elder: "And I
wish thee more wits; is luck all that thou mayst wish me?  What luck may
an outworn elder have?"

"Well then," quoth Hallblithe, "what shall I wish thee?  Wouldst thou
have me wish thee youth?"

"Yea, certes," said the Long-hoary, "that and nought else."

"Youth then I wish thee, if it may avail thee aught," said Hallblithe,
and he drank again therewith.

"Nay, nay," said the old carle peevishly, "take a third cup, and wish me
youth with no idle words tacked thereto."

Said Hallblithe raising the cup: "Herewith I wish thee youth!" and he
drank.

"Good is the wish," said the elder; "now ask thou the old carle whatso
thou wilt."

Said Hallblithe: "What is this land called?"

"Son," said the other, "hast thou heard it called the Isle of Ransom?"

"Yea," said Hallblithe, "but what wilt thou call it?"

"By no other name," said the hoary carle.

"It is far from other lands?" said Hallblithe.

"Yea," said the carle, "when the light winds blow, and the ships sail
slow."

"What do ye who live here?" said Hallblithe.  "How do ye live, what work
win ye?"

"We win diverse work," said the elder, "but the gainfullest is robbing
men by the high hand."

"Is it ye who have stolen from me the Hostage of the Rose?" said
Hallblithe.

Said the Long-hoary, "Maybe; I wot not; in diverse ways my kinsmen
traffic, and they visit many lands.  Why should they not have come to
Cleveland also?"

"Is she in this Isle, thou old runagate?" said Hallblithe.

"She is not, thou young fool," said the elder.  Then Hallblithe flushed
red and spake: "Knowest thou the Puny Fox?"

"How should I not?" said the carle, "since he is the son of one of my
sons."

"Dost thou call him a liar and a rogue?" said Hallblithe.

The elder laughed; "Else were I a fool," said he; "there are few bigger
liars or bigger rogues than the Puny Fox!"

"Is he here in this Isle?" said Hallblithe; "may I see him?"

The old man laughed again, and said: "Nay, he is not here, unless he hath
turned fool since yesterday: why should he abide thy sword, since he hath
done what he would and brought thee hither?"

Then he laughed, as a hen cackles a long while, and then said: "What more
wilt thou ask me?"

But Hallblithe was very wroth: "It availeth nought to ask," he said; "and
now I am in two minds whether I shall slay thee or not."

"That were a meet deed for a Raven, but not for a man," said the carle,
"and thou that hast wished me luck!  Ask, ask!"

But Hallblithe was silent a long while.  Then the carle said, "Another
cup for the longer after youth!"

Hallblithe filled, and gave to him, and the old man drank and said: "Thou
deemest us all liars in the Isle of Ransom because of thy beguiling by
the Puny Fox: but therein thou errest.  The Puny Fox is our chiefest
liar, and doth for us the more part of such work as we need: therefore,
why should we others lie.  Ask, ask!"

"Well then," said Hallblithe, "why did the Puny Fox bewray me, and at
whose bidding?"

Said the elder: "I know, but I will not tell thee.  Is this a lie?"

"Nay, I deem it not," said Hallblithe: "But, tell me, is it verily true
that my trothplight is not here, that I may ransom her?"

Said the Long-hoary: "I swear it by the Treasure of the Sea, that she is
not here: the tale was but a lie of the Puny Fox."




CHAPTER VII: A FEAST IN THE ISLE OF RANSOM


Hallblithe pondered his answer awhile with downcast eyes and said at
last: "Have ye a mind to ransom me, now that I have walked into the
trap?"

"There is no need to talk of ransom," said the elder; "thou mayst go out
of this house when thou wilt, nor will any meddle with thee if thou
strayest about the Isle, when I have set a mark on thee and given thee a
token: nor wilt thou be hindered if thou hast a mind to leave the Isle,
if thou canst find means thereto; moreover as long as thou art in the
Isle, in this house mayst thou abide, eating and drinking and resting
with us."

"How then may I leave this Isle?" said Hallblithe.

The elder laughed: "In a ship," said he.

"And when," said Hallblithe, "shall I find a ship that shall carry me?"

Said the old carle, "Whither wouldest thou my son?"  Hallblithe was
silent a while, thinking what answer he should make; then he said: "I
would go to the land of the Glittering Plain."

"Son, a ship shall not be lacking thee for that voyage," said the elder.
"Thou mayst go to-morrow morn.  And I bid thee abide here to-night, and
thy cheer shall not be ill.  Yet if thou wilt believe my word, it will be
well for thee to say as little as thou mayst to any man here, and that
little as little proud as maybe: for our folk are short of temper and
thou knowest there is no might against many.  Indeed it is not unlike
that they will not speak one word to thee, and if that be so, thou hast
no need to open thy mouth to them.  And now I will tell thee that it is
good that thou hast chosen to go to the Glittering Plain.  For if thou
wert otherwise minded, I wot not how thou wouldest get thee a keel to
carry thee, and the wings have not yet begun to sprout on thy shoulders,
raven though thou be.  Now I am glad that thou art going thy ways to the
Glittering Plain to-morrow; for thou wilt be good company to me on the
way: and I deem that thou wilt be no churl when thou art glad."

"What," said Hallblithe, "art thou wending thither, thou old man?"

"Yea," said he, "nor shall any other be on the ship save thou and I, and
the mariners that waft us; and they forsooth shall not go aland there.
Why should not I go, since there are men to bear me aboard?"

Said Hallblithe, "And when thou art come aland there, what wilt thou do?"

"Thou shalt see, my son," said the Long-hoary.  "It may be that thy good
wishes shall be of avail to me.  But now since all this may only be if I
live through this night, and since my heart hath been warmed by the good
mead, and thy fellowship, and whereas I am somewhat sleepy, and it is
long past noon, go forth into the hall, and leave me to sleep, that I may
be as sound as eld will let me to-morrow.  And as for thee, folk, both
men and women, shall presently come into the hall, and I deem not that
any shall meddle with thee; but if so be that any challenge thee,
whatsoever may be his words, answer thou to him, 'THE HOUSE OF THE
UNDYING,' and there will be an end of it.  Only look thou to it that no
naked steel cometh out of thy scabbard.  Go now, and if thou wilt, go out
of doors; yet art thou safer within doors and nigher unto me."

So Hallblithe went back into the main hall, and the sun had gotten round
now, and was shining into the hall, through the clerestory windows, so
that he saw clearly all that was therein.  And he deemed the hall fairer
within than without; and especially over the shut-beds were many stories
carven in the panelling, and Hallblithe beheld them gladly.  But of one
thing he marvelled, that whereas he was in an island of the
strong-thieves of the waters, and in their very home and chiefest
habitation, there were no ships or seas pictured in that imagery, but
fair groves and gardens, with flowery grass and fruited trees all about.
And there were fair women abiding therein, and lovely young men, and
warriors, and strange beasts and many marvels, and the ending of wrath
and beginning of pleasure and the crowning of love.  And amidst these was
pictured oft and again a mighty king with a sword by his side and a crown
on his head; and ever was he smiling and joyous, so that Hallblithe, when
he looked on him, felt of better heart and smiled back on the carven
image.

So while Hallblithe looked on these things, and pondered his case
carefully, all alone as he was in that alien hall, he heard a noise
without of talking and laughter, and presently the pattering of feet
therewith, and then women came into the hall, a score or more, some
young, some old, some fair enough, and some hard-featured and uncomely,
but all above the stature of the women whom he had seen in his own land.

So he stood amidst the hall-floor and abided them; and they saw him and
his shining war-gear, and ceased their talking and laughter, and drew
round about him, and gazed at him; but none said aught till an old crone
came forth from the ring, and said "Who art thou, standing under weapons
in our hall?"

He knew not what to answer, and held his peace; and she spake again:
"Whither wouldest thou, what seekest thou?"

Then answered Hallblithe: "THE HOUSE OF THE UNDYING."

None answered, and the other women all fell away from him at once, and
went about their business hither and thither through the hall.  But the
old crone took him by the hand, and led him up to the dais, and set him
next to the midmost high-seat.  Then she made as if she would do off his
war-gear, and he would not gainsay her, though he deemed that foes might
be anear; for in sooth he trusted in the old carle that he would not
bewray him, and moreover he deemed it would be unmanly not to take the
risks of the guesting, according to the custom of that country.

So she took his armour and his weapons and bore them off to a shut-bed
next to that wherein lay the ancient man, and she laid the gear within
it, all save the spear, which she laid on the wall-pins above; and she
made signs to him that therein he was to lie; but she spake no word to
him.  Then she brought him the hand-washing water in a basin of latten,
and a goodly towel therewith, and when he had washed she went away from
him, but not far.

This while the other women were busy about the hall; some swept the floor
down, and when it was swept strawed thereon rushes and handfuls of wild
thyme: some went into the buttery and bore forth the boards and the
trestles: some went to the chests and brought out the rich hangings, the
goodly bankers and dorsars, and did them on the walls: some bore in the
stoups and horns and beakers, and some went their ways and came not back
a while, for they were busied about the cooking.  But whatever they did,
none hailed him, or heeded him more than if he had been an image, as he
sat there looking on.  None save the old woman who brought him the fore-
supper, to wit a great horn of mead, and cakes and dried fish.

So was the hall arrayed for the feast very fairly, and Hallblithe sat
there while the sun westered and the house grew dim, and dark at last,
and they lighted the candles up and down the hall.  But a little after
these were lit, a great horn was winded close without, and thereafter
came the clatter of arms about the door, and exceeding tall weaponed men
came in, one score and five, and strode two by two up to the foot of the
dais, and stood there in a row.  And Hallblithe deemed their war-gear
exceeding good; they were all clad in ring-locked byrnies, and had steel
helms on their heads with garlands of gold wrought about them and they
bore spears in their hands, and white shields hung at their backs.  Now
came the women to them and unarmed them; and under their armour their
raiment was black; but they had gold rings on their arms, and golden
collars about their necks.  So they strode up to the dais and took their
places on the high-seat, not heeding Hallblithe any more than if he were
an image of wood.  Nevertheless that man sat next to him who was the
chieftain of all and sat in the midmost high-seat; and he bore his
sheathed sword in his hand and laid it on the board before him, and he
was the only man of those chieftains who had a weapon.

But when these were set down there was again a noise without, and there
came in a throng of men armed and unarmed who took their places on the
end-long benches up and down the hall; with these came women also, who
most of them sat amongst the men, but some busied them with the serving:
all these men were great of stature, but none so big as the chieftains on
the high-seat.

Now came the women in from the kitchen bearing the meat, whereof no
little was flesh-meat, and all was of the best.  Hallblithe was duly
served like the others, but still none spake to him or even looked on
him; though amongst themselves they spoke in big, rough voices so that
the rafters of the hall rang again.

When they had eaten their fill the women filled round the cups and the
horns to them, and those vessels were both great and goodly.  But ere
they fell to drinking uprose the chieftain who sat furthest from the
midmost high-seat on the right and cried a health: "THE TREASURE OF THE
SEA!"  Then they all stood up and shouted, women as well as men, and
emptied their horns and cups to that health.  Then stood up the man
furthest on the left and cried out, "Drink a health to the Undying King!"
And again all men rose up and shouted ere they drank.  Other healths they
drank, as the "Cold Keel," the "Windworn Sail," the "Quivering Ash" and
the "Furrowed Beach."  And the wine and mead flowed like rivers in that
hall of the Wild Men.  As for Hallblithe, he drank what he would but
stood not up, nor raised his cup to his lips when a health was drunk; for
he knew not whether these men were his friends or his foes, and he deemed
it would be little-minded to drink to their healths, lest he might be
drinking death and confusion to his own kindred.

But when men had drunk a while, again a horn blew at the nether end of
the hall, and straightway folk arose from the endlong tables, and took
away the boards and trestles, and cleared the floor and stood against the
wall; then the big chieftain beside Hallblithe arose and cried out: "Now
let man dance with maid, and be we merry!  Music, strike up!"  Then flew
the fiddle-bows and twanged the harps, and the carles and queens stood
forth on the floor; and all the women were clad in black raiment, albeit
embroidered with knots and wreaths of flowers.  A while they danced and
then suddenly the music fell, and they all went back to their places.
Then the chieftain in the high-seat arose and took a horn from his side,
and blew a great blast on it that filled the hall; then he cried in a
loud voice: "Be we merry!  Let the champions come forth!"

Men shouted gleefully thereat, and straightway ran into the hall from out
the screens three tall men clad all in black armour with naked swords in
their hands, and stood amidst the hall-floor, somewhat on one side, and
clashed their swords on their shields and cried out: "Come forth ye
Champions of the Raven!"

Then leapt Hallblithe from his seat and set his hand to his left side,
but no sword was there; so he sat down again, remembering the warning of
the Elder, and none heeded him.

Then there came into the hall slowly and mournfully three men-at-arms,
clad and weaponed like the warriors of his folk, with the image of the
Raven on their helms and shields.  So Hallblithe refrained him, for
besides that this seemed like to be a fair battle of three against three,
he doubted some snare, and he determined to look on and abide.

So the champions fell to laying on strokes that were no child's play,
though Hallblithe doubted if the edges bit, and it was but a little while
before the Champions of the Raven fell one after another before the Wild
Men, and folk drew them by the heels out into the buttery.  Then arose
great laughter and jeering, and exceeding wroth was Hallblithe; howbeit
he refrained him because he remembered all he had to do.  But the three
Champions of the Sea strode round the hall, tossing up their swords and
catching them as they fell, while the horns blew up behind them.

After a while the hall grew hushed, and the chieftain arose and cried:
"Bring in now some sheaves of the harvest we win, we lads of the oar and
the arrow!"  Then was there a stir at the screen doors, and folk pressed
forward to see, and, lo, there came forward a string of women, led in by
two weaponed carles; and the women were a score in number, and they were
barefoot and their hair hung loose and their gowns were ungirt, and they
were chained together wrist to wrist; yet had they gold at arm and neck:
there was silence in the hall when they stood amidst of the floor.

Then indeed Hallblithe could not refrain himself, and he leapt from his
seat and on to the board, and over it, and ran down the hall, and came to
those women and looked them in the face one by one, while no man spake in
the hall.  But the Hostage was not amongst them; nay forsooth, they none
of them favoured of the daughters of his people, though they were comely
and fair; so that again Hallblithe doubted if this were aught but a feast-
hall play done to anger him; whereas there was but little grief in the
faces of those damsels, and more than one of them smiled wantonly in his
face as he looked on them.

So he turned about and went back to his seat, having said no word, and
behind him arose much mocking and jeering; but it angered him little now;
for he remembered the rede of the elder and how that he had done
according to his bidding, so that he deemed the gain was his.  So sprang
up talk in the hall betwixt man and man, and folk drank about and were
merry, till the chieftain arose again and smote the board with the flat
of his sword, and cried out in a loud and angry voice, so that all could
hear: "Now let there be music and minstrelsy ere we wend bedward!"

Therewith fell the hubbub of voices, and there came forth three men with
great harps, and a fourth man with them, who was the minstrel; and the
harpers smote their harps so that the roof rang therewith, and the noise,
though it was great, was tuneable, and when they had played thus a little
while, they abated their loudness somewhat, and the minstrel lifted his
voice and sang:

         The land lies black
         With winter's lack,
         The wind blows cold
         Round field and fold;
         All folk are within,
         And but weaving they win.
   Where from finger to finger the shuttle flies fast,
   And the eyes of the singer look fain on the cast,
   As he singeth the story of summer undone
   And the barley sheaves hoary ripe under the sun.

         Then the maidens stay
         The light-hung sley,
         And the shuttles bide
         By the blue web's side,
         While hand in hand
         With the carles they stand.
   But ere to the measure the fiddles strike up,
   And the elders yet treasure the last of the cup,
   There stand they a-hearkening the blast from the lift,
   And e'en night is a-darkening more under the drift.

         There safe in the hall
         They bless the wall,
         And the roof o'er head,
         Of the valiant stead;
         And the hands they praise
         Of the olden days.
   Then through the storm's roaring the fiddles break out,
   And they think not of warring, but cast away doubt,
   And, man before maiden, their feet tread the floor,
   And their hearts are unladen of all that they bore.

         But what winds are o'er-cold
         For the heart of the bold?
         What seas are o'er-high
         For the undoomed to die?
         Dark night and dread wind,
         But the haven we find.
   Then ashore mid the flurry of stone-washing surf!
   Cloud-hounds the moon worry, but light lies the turf;
   Lo the long dale before us! the lights at the end,
   Though the night darkens o'er us, bid whither to wend.

         Who beateth the door
         By the foot-smitten floor?
         What guests are these
         From over the seas?
         Take shield and sword
         For their greeting-word.
   Lo, lo, the dance ended!  Lo, midst of the hall
   The fallow blades blended!  Lo, blood on the wall!
   Who liveth, who dieth?  O men of the sea,
   For peace the folk crieth; our masters are ye.

         Now the dale lies grey
         At the dawn of day;
         And fair feet pass
         O'er the wind-worn grass;
         And they turn back to gaze
         On the roof of old days.
   Come tread ye the oaken-floored hall of the sea!
   Be your hearts yet unbroken; so fair as ye be,
   That kings are abiding unwedded to gain
   The news of our riding the steeds of the main.

Much shouting and laughter arose at the song's end; and men sprang up and
waved their swords above the cups, while Hallblithe sat scowling down on
their merriment.  Lastly arose the chieftain and called out loudly for
the good-night cup, and it went round and all men drank.  Then the horn
blew for bed, and the chieftains went to their chambers, and the others
went to the out-bowers or laid them down on the hall-floor, and in a
little while none stood upright thereon.  So Hallblithe arose, and went
to the shut-bed appointed for him, and laid him down and slept
dreamlessly till the morning.




CHAPTER VIII: HALLBLITHE TAKETH SHIP AGAIN AWAY FROM THE ISLE OF RANSOM


When he awoke, the sun shone into the hall by the windows above the
buttery, and there were but few folk left therein.  But so soon as
Hallblithe was clad, the old woman came to him, and took him by the hand,
and led him to the board, and signed to him to eat of what was thereon;
and he did so; and by then he was done, came folk who went into the shut-
bed where lay the Long-hoary, and they brought him forth bed and all and
bare him out a-doors.  Then the crone brought Hallblithe his arms and he
did on byrny and helm, girt his sword to his side, took his spear in his
hand and went out a-doors; and there close by the porch lay the
Long-hoary upon a horse-litter.  So Hallblithe came up to him and gave
him the sele of the day: and the elder said: "Good morrow, son, I am glad
to see thee.  Did they try thee hard last night?"

And Hallblithe saw two of the carles that had borne out the elder, that
they were talking together, and they looked on him and laughed mockingly;
so he said to the elder: "Even fools may try a wise man, and so it befell
last night.  Yet, as thou seest, mumming hath not slain me."

Said the old man: "What thou sawest was not all mumming; it was done
according to our customs; and well nigh all of it had been done, even
hadst thou not been there.  Nay, I will tell thee; at some of our feasts
it is not lawful to eat either for the chieftains or the carles, till a
champion hath given forth a challenge, and been answered and met, and the
battle fought to an end.  But ye men, what hindereth you to go to the
horses' heads and speed on the road the chieftain who is no longer way-
worthy?"

So they ran to the horses and set down the dale by the riverside, and
just as Hallblithe was going to follow afoot, there came a swain from
behind the house leading a red horse which he brought to Hallblithe as
one who bids mount.  So Hallblithe leapt into the saddle and at once
caught up with the litter of the Long-hoary down along the river.  They
passed by no other house, save here and there a cot beside some fold or
byre; they went easily, for the way was smooth by the river-side; so in
less than two hours they came where the said river ran into the sea.
There was no beach there, for the water was ten fathom deep close up to
the lip of the land; but there was a great haven land-locked all but a
narrow outgate betwixt the sheer black cliffs.  Many a great ship might
have lain in that haven; but as now there was but one lying there, a
round-ship not very great, but exceeding trim and meet for the sea.

There without more ado the carles took the elder from the litter and bore
him aboard, and Hallblithe followed him as if he had been so appointed.
They laid the old man adown on the poop under a tilt of precious web, and
so went aback by the way that they had come; and Hallblithe went and sat
down beside the Long-hoary, who spake to him and said: "Seest thou, son,
how easy it is for us twain to be shipped for the land whither we would
go?  But as easy as it is for thee to go thither whereas we are going,
just so hard had it been for thee to go elsewhere.  Moreover I must tell
thee that though many an one of the Isle of Ransom desireth to go this
voyage, there shall none else go, till the world is a year older, and he
who shall go then shall be likest to me in all ways, both in eld and in
feebleness, and in gibing speech, and all else; and now that I am gone,
his name shall be the same as that whereby ye may call me to-day, and
that is Grandfather.  Art thou glad or sorry, Hallblithe?"

"Grandfather," said Hallblithe, "I can scarce tell thee: I move as one
who hath no will to wend one way or other.  Meseems I am drawn to go
thither whereas we are going; therefore I deem that I shall find my
beloved on the Glittering Plain: and whatever befalleth afterward, let it
be as it will!"

"Tell me, my son," said the Grandfather, "how many women are there in the
world?"

"How may I tell thee?" said Hallblithe.

"Well, then," said the elder, "how many exceeding fair women are there?"

Said Hallblithe, "Indeed I wot not."

"How many of such hast thou seen?" said the Grandfather.

"Many," said Hallblithe; "the daughters of my folk are fair, and there
will be many other such amongst the aliens."

Then laughed the elder, and said: "Yet, my son, he who had been thy
fellow since thy sundering from thy beloved, would have said that in thy
deeming there is but one woman in the world; or at least one fair woman:
is it not so?"

Then Hallblithe reddened at first, as though he were angry; then he said:
"Yea, it is so."

Said the Grandfather in a musing way: "I wonder if before long I shall
think of it as thou dost."

Then Hallblithe gazed at him marvelling, and studied to see wherein lay
the gibe against himself; and the Grandfather beheld him, and laughed as
well as he might, and said: "Son, son; didst thou not wish me youth?"

"Yea," said Hallblithe, "but what ails thee to laugh so?  What is it I
have said or done?"

"Nought, nought," said the elder, laughing still more, "only thou lookest
so mazed.  And who knoweth what thy wish may bring forth?"

Thereat was Hallblithe sore puzzled; but while he set himself to consider
what the old carle might mean, uprose the hale and how of the mariners;
they cast off the hawsers from the shore, ran out the sweeps, and drave
the ship through the haven-gates.  It was a bright sunny day; within, the
green water was oily-smooth, without the rippling waves danced merrily
under a light breeze, and Hallblithe deemed the wind to be fair; for the
mariners shouted joyously and made all sail on the ship; and she lay over
and sped through the waves, casting off the seas from her black bows.
Soon were they clear of those swart cliffs, and it was but a little
afterwards that the Isle of Ransom was grown deep blue behind them and
far away.




CHAPTER IX: THEY COME TO THE LAND OF THE GLITTERING PLAIN


As in the hall, so in the ship, Hallblithe noted that the folk were merry
and of many words one with another, while to him no man cast a word save
the Grandfather.  As to Hallblithe, though he wondered much what all this
betokened, and what the land was whereto he was wending, he was no man to
fear an unboded peril; and he said to himself that whatever else betid,
he should meet the Hostage on the Glittering Plain; so his heart rose and
he was of good cheer, and as the Grandfather had foretold, he was a merry
faring-fellow to him.  Many a gibe the old man cast at him, and whiles
Hallblithe gave him back as good as he took, and whiles he laughed as the
stroke went home and silenced him; and whiles he understood nought of
what the elder said.  So wore the day and still the wind held fair,
though it was light; and the sun set in a sky nigh cloudless, and there
was nowhere any forecast of peril.  But when night was come, Hallblithe
lay down on a fair bed, which was dight for him in the poop, and he soon
fell asleep and dreamed not save such dreams as are but made up of bygone
memories, and betoken nought, and are not remembered.

When he awoke, day lay broad on the sea, and the waves were little, the
sky had but few clouds, the sun shone bright, and the air was warm and
sweet-breathed.

He looked aside and saw the old man sitting up in his bed, as ghastly as
a dead man dug up again: his bushy eyebrows were wrinkled over his
bleared old eyes, the long white hair dangled forlorn from his gaunt
head: yet was his face smiling and he looked as happy as the soul within
him could make the half-dead body.  He turned now to Hallblithe and said:

"Thou art late awake: hadst thou been waking earlier, the sooner had
thine heart been gladdened.  Go forward now, and gaze thy fill and come
and tell me thereof."

"Thou art happy, Grandfather," said Hallblithe, "what good tidings hath
morn brought us?"

"The Land! the Land!" said the Long-hoary; "there are no longer tears in
this old body, else should I be weeping for joy."

Said Hallblithe: "Art thou going to meet some one who shall make thee
glad before thou diest, old man?"

"Some one?" said the elder; "what one?  Are they not all gone? burned,
and drowned, and slain and died abed?  Some one, young man?  Yea,
forsooth some one indeed!  Yea, the great warrior of the Wasters of the
Shore; the Sea-eagle who bore the sword and the torch and the terror of
the Ravagers over the coal-blue sea.  It is myself, MYSELF that I shall
find on the Land of the Glittering Plain, O young lover!"

Hallblithe looked on him wondering as he raised his wasted arms towards
the bows of the ship pitching down the slope of the sunlit sea, or
climbing up it.  Then again the old man fell back on his bed and
muttered: "What fool's work is this! that thou wilt draw me on to talk
loud, and waste my body with lack of patience.  I will talk with thee no
more, lest my heart swell and break, and quench the little spark of life
within me."

Then Hallblithe arose to his feet, and stood looking at him, wondering so
much at his words, that for a while he forgat the land which they were
nearing, though he had caught glimpses of it, as the bows of the round-
ship fell downward into the hollow of the sea.  The wind was but light,
as hath been said, and the waves little under it, but there was still a
smooth swell of the sea which came of breezes now dead, and the ship
wallowed thereon and sailed but slowly.

In a while the old man opened his eyes again, and said in a low peevish
voice: "Why standest thou staring at me? why hast thou not gone forward
to look upon the land?  True it is that ye Ravens are short of wits."

Said Hallblithe: "Be not wrath, chieftain; I was wondering at thy words,
which are exceeding marvellous; tell me more of this land of the
Glittering Plain."

Said the Grandfather: "Why should I tell it thee? ask of the mariners.
They all know more than thou dost."

"Thou knowest," said Hallblithe, "that these men speak not to me, and
take no more heed of me than if I were an image which they were carrying
to sell to the next mighty man they may hap on.  Or tell me, thou old
man," said he fiercely, "is it perchance a thrall-market whereto they are
bringing me?  Have they sold her there, and will they sell me also in the
same place, but into other hands."

"Tush!" said the Grandfather somewhat feebly, "this last word of thine is
folly; there is no buying or selling in the land whereto we are bound.  As
to thine other word, that these men have no fellowship with thee, it is
true: thou art my fellow and the fellow of none else aboard.  Therefore
if I feel might in me, maybe I will tell thee somewhat."

Then he raised his head a little and said: "The sun grows hot, the wind
faileth us, and slow and slow are we sailing."

Even as he spoke there was a stir amidships, and Hallblithe looked and
beheld the mariners handling the sweeps, and settling themselves on the
rowing-benches.  Said the elder: "There is noise amidships, what are they
doing?"

The old man raised himself a little again, and cried out in his shrill
voice: "Good lads! brave lads!  Thus would we do in the old time when we
drew anear some shore, and the beacons were sending up smoke by day, and
flame benights; and the shore-abiders did on their helms and trembled.
Thrust her through, lads!  Thrust her along!"  Then he fell back again,
and said in a weak voice: "Make no more delay, guest, but go forward and
look upon the land, and come back and tell me thereof, and then the tale
may flow from me.  Haste, haste!"  So Hallblithe went down from the poop,
and in to the waist, where now the rowers were bending to their oars, and
crying out fiercely as they tugged at the quivering ash; and he clomb on
to the forecastle and went forward right to the dragon-head, and gazed
long upon the land, while the dashing of the oar-blades made the
semblance of a gale about the ship's black sides.  Then he came back
again to the Sea-eagle, who said to him: "Son, what hast thou seen?"

"Right ahead lieth the land, and it is still a good way off.  High rise
the mountains there, but by seeming there is no snow on them; and though
they be blue they are not blue like the mountains of the Isle of Ransom.
Also it seemed to me as if fair slopes of woodland and meadow come down
to the edge of the sea.  But it is yet far away."

"Yea," said the elder, "is it so?  Then will I not wear myself with
making words for thee.  I will rest rather, and gather might.  Come again
when an hour hath worn, and tell me what thou seest; and may happen then
thou shalt have my tale!"  And he laid him down therewith and seemed to
be asleep at once.  And Hallblithe might not amend it; so he waited
patiently till the hour had worn, and then went forward again, and looked
long and carefully, and came back and said to the Sea-eagle, "The hour is
worn."

The old chieftain turned himself about and said "What hast thou seen?"

Said Hallblithe: "The mountains are pale and high, and below them are
hills dark with wood, and betwixt them and the sea is a fair space of
meadowland, and methought it was wide."

Said the old man: "Sawest thou a rocky skerry rising high out of the sea
anigh the shore?"

"Nay," said Hallblithe, "if there be, it is all blended with the meadows
and the hills."

Said the Sea-eagle: "Abide the wearing of another hour, and come and tell
me again, and then I may have a gainful word for thee."  And he fell
asleep again.  But Hallblithe abided, and when the hour was worn, he went
forward and stood on the forecastle.  And this was the third shift of the
rowers, and the stoutest men in the ship now held the oars in their
hands, and the ship shook through all her length and breadth as they
drave her over the waters.

So Hallblithe came aft to the old man and found him asleep; so he took
him by the shoulder, and shook him and said: "Awake, faring-fellow, for
the land is a-nigh."

So the old man sat up and said: "What hast thou seen?"

Said Hallblithe: "I have seen the peaks and cliffs of the far-off
mountains; and below them are hills green with grass and dark with woods,
and thence stretch soft green meadows down to the sea-strand, which is
fair and smooth, and yellow."

"Sawest thou the skerry?" said the Sea-eagle.

"Yea, I saw it," said Hallblithe, "and it rises sheer from out the sea
about a mile from the yellow strand; but its rocks are black, like the
rocks of the Isle of Ransom."

"Son," said the elder, "give me thine hands and raise me up a little."  So
Hallblithe took him and raised him up, so that he sat leaning against the
pillows; and he looked not on Hallblithe, but on the bows of the ship,
which now pitched but a little up and down, for the sea was laid quiet
now.  Then he cried in his shrill, piping voice: "It is the Land!  It is
the Land!"

But after a little while he turned to Hallblithe and spake: "Short is the
tale to tell: thou hast wished me youth, and thy wish hath thriven; for
to-day, ere the sun goes down, thou shalt see me as I was in the days
when I reaped the harvest of the sea with sharp sword and hardy heart.
For this is the land of the Undying King, who is our lord and our gift-
giver; and to some he giveth the gift of youth renewed, and life that
shall abide here the Gloom of the Gods.  But none of us all may come to
the Glittering Plain and the King Undying without turning the back for
the last time on the Isle of Ransom: nor may any men of the Isle come
hither save those who are of the House of the Sea-eagle, and few of
those, save the chieftains of the House, such as are they who sat by thee
on the high-seat that even.  Of these once in a while is chosen one of
us, who is old and spent and past battle, and is borne to this land and
the gift of the Undying.  Forsooth some of us have no will to take the
gift, for they say they are liefer to go to where they shall meet more of
our kindred than dwell on the Glittering Plain and the Acre of the
Undying; but as for me I was ever an overbearing and masterful man, and
meseemeth it is well that I meet as few of our kindred as may be: for
they are a strifeful race."

Hereat Hallblithe marvelled exceedingly, and he said: "And what am I in
all this story?  Why am I come hither with thy furtherance?"

Said the Sea-eagle: "We had a charge from the Undying King concerning
thee, that we should bring thee hither alive and well, if so be thou
camest to the Isle of Ransom.  For what cause we had the charge, I know
not, nor do I greatly heed."

Said Hallblithe: "And shall I also have that gift of undying youth, and
life while the world of men and gods endureth?"

"I must needs deem so," said the Sea-eagle, "so long as thou abidest on
the Glittering Plain; and I see not how thou mayst ever escape thence."

Now Hallblithe heard him, how he said "escape," and thereat he was
somewhat ill at ease, and stood and pondered a little.  At last he said:
"Is this then all that thou hast to tell me concerning the Glittering
Plain?"

"By the Treasure of the Sea!" said the elder, "I know no more of it.  The
living shall learn.  But I suppose that thou mayst seek thy troth-plight
maiden there all thou wilt.  Or thou mayst pray the Undying King to have
her thither to thee.  What know I?  At least, it is like that there shall
be no lack of fair women there: or else the promise of youth renewed is
nought and vain.  Shall this not be enough for thee?"

"Nay," said Hallblithe.

"What," said the elder, "must it be one woman only?"

"One only," said Hallblithe.

The old man laughed his thin mocking laugh, and said: "I will not assure
thee but that the land of the Glittering Plain shall change all that for
thee so soon as it touches the soles of thy feet."

Hallblithe looked at him steadily and smiled, and said: "Well is it then
that I shall find the Hostage there; for then shall we be of one mind,
either to sunder or to cleave together.  It is well with me this day."

"And with me it shall be well ere long," said the Sea-eagle.

But now the rowers ceased rowing and lay on their oars, and the shipmen
cast anchor; for they were but a bowshot from the shore, and the ship
swung with the tide and lay side-long to the shore.  Then said the Sea-
eagle: "Look forth, shipmate, and tell me of the land."

And Hallblithe looked and said: "The yellow beach is sandy and
shell-strewn, as I deem, and there is no great space of it betwixt the
sea and the flowery grass; and a bowshot from the strand I see a little
wood amidst which are fair trees blossoming."

"Seest thou any folk on the shore?" said the old man.  "Yea," said
Hallblithe, "close to the edge of the sea go four; and by seeming three
are women, for their long gowns flutter in the wind.  And one of these is
clad in saffron colour, and another in white, and another in watchet; but
the carle is clad in dark red; and their raiment is all glistening as
with gold and gems; and by seeming they are looking at our ship as though
they expected somewhat."

Said the Sea-eagle: "Why now do the shipmen tarry and have not made ready
the skiff?  Swillers and belly-gods they be; slothful swine that forget
their chieftain."

But even as he spake came four of the shipmen, and without more ado took
him up, bed and all, and bore him down into the waist of the ship,
whereunder lay the skiff with four strong rowers lying on their oars.
These men made no sign to Hallblithe, nor took any heed of him; but he
caught up his spear, and followed them and stood by as they lowered the
old man into the boat.  Then he set his foot on the gunwale of the ship
and leapt down lightly into the boat, and none hindered or helped him;
and he stood upright in the boat, a goodly image of battle with the sun
flashing back from his bright helm, his spear in his hand, his white
shield at his back, and thereon the image of the Raven; but if he had
been but a salt-boiling carle of the sea-side none would have heeded him
less.




CHAPTER X: THEY HOLD CONVERSE WITH FOLK OF THE GLITTERING PLAIN


Now the rowers lifted the ash-blades, and fell to rowing towards shore:
and almost with the first of their strokes, the Sea-eagle moaned out:

"Would we were there, oh, would we were there!  Cold groweth eld about my
heart.  Raven's Son, thou art standing up; tell me if thou canst see what
these folk of the land are doing, and if any others have come thither?"

Said Hallblithe: "There are none others come, but kine and horses are
feeding down the meadows.  As to what those four are doing, the women are
putting off their shoon, and girding up their raiment, as if they would
wade the water toward us; and the carle, who was barefoot before, wendeth
straight towards the sea, and there he standeth, for very little are the
waves become."

The old man answered nothing, and did but groan for lack of patience; but
presently when the water was yet waist deep the rowers stayed the skiff,
and two of them slipped over the gunwale into the sea, and between them
all they took up the chieftain on his bed and got him forth from the boat
and went toward the strand with him; and the landsfolk met them where the
water was shallower, and took him from their hands and bore him forth on
to the yellow sand, and laid him down out of reach of the creeping ripple
of the tide.  Hallblithe withal slipped lightly out of the boat and waded
the water after them.  But the shipmen rowed back again to their ship,
and presently Hallblithe heard the hale and how, as they got up their
anchor.

But when Hallblithe was come ashore, and was drawn near the folk of the
land, the women looked at him askance, and they laughed and said:
"Welcome to thee also, O young man!"  And he beheld them, and saw that
they were of the stature of the maidens of his own land; they were
exceeding fair of skin and shapely of fashion, so that the nakedness of
their limbs under their girded gowns, and all glistening with the sea,
was most lovely and dainty to behold.  But Hallblithe knelt by the Sea-
eagle to note how he fared, and said: "How is it with thee, O chieftain?"

The old man answered not a word, and he seemed to be asleep, and
Hallblithe deemed that his cheeks were ruddier and his skin less wasted
and wrinkled than aforetime.  Then spake one of those women: "Fear not,
young man; he is well and will soon be better."  Her voice was as sweet
as a spring bird in the morning; she was white-skinned and dark-haired,
and full sweetly fashioned; and she laughed on Hallblithe, but not
mockingly; and her fellows also laughed, as though it was strange for him
to be there.  Then they did on their shoon again, and with the carle laid
their hands to the bed whereon the old man lay, and lifted him up, and
bore him forth on to the grass, turning their faces toward the flowery
wood aforesaid; and they went a little way and then laid him down again
and rested; and so on little by little, till they had brought him to the
edge of the wood, and still he seemed to be asleep.  Then the damsel who
had spoken before, she with the dark hair, said to Hallblithe, "Although
we have gazed on thee as if with wonder, this is not because we did not
look to meet thee, but because thou art so fair and goodly a man: so
abide thou here till we come back to thee from out of the wood."

Therewith she stroked his hand, and with her fellows lifted the old man
once more, and they bore him out of sight into the thicket.

But Hallblithe went to and fro a dozen paces from the wood, and looked
across the flowery meads and deemed he had never seen any so fair.  And
afar off toward the hills he saw a great roof arising, and thought he
could see men also; and nigher to him were kine pasturing, and horses
also, whereof some drew anear him and stretched out their necks and gazed
at him; and they were goodly after their kind; and a fair stream of water
came round the corner out of the wood and down the meadows to the sea;
and Hallblithe went thereto and could see that there was but little ebb
and flow of the tide on that shore; for the water of the stream was clear
as glass, and the grass and flowers grew right down to its water; so he
put off his helm and drank of the stream and washed his face and his
hands therein, and then did on his helm again and turned back again
toward the wood, feeling very strong and merry; and he looked out seaward
and saw the Ship of the Isle of Ransom lessening fast; for a little land
wind had arisen and they had spread their sails to it; and he laid down
on the grass till the four folk of the country came out of the wood
again, after they had been gone somewhat less than an hour, but the Sea-
eagle was not with them: and Hallblithe rose up and turned to them, and
the carle saluted him and departed, going straight toward that far-away
roof he had seen; and the women were left with Hallblithe, and they
looked at him and he at them as he stood leaning on his spear.

Then said the black-haired damsel: "True it is, O Spearman, that if we
did not know of thee, our wonder would be great that a man so young and
lucky-looking should have sought hither."

"I wot not why thou shouldest wonder," said Hallblithe; "I will tell thee
presently wherefore I come hither.  But tell me, is this the Land of the
Glittering Plain?"

"Even so," said the damsel, "dost thou not see how the sun shineth on it?
Just so it shineth in the season that other folks call winter."

"Some such marvel I thought to hear of," said he; "for I have been told
that the land is marvellous; and fair though these meadows be, they are
not marvellous to look on now: they are like other lands, though it
maybe, fairer."

"That may be," she said; "we have nought but hearsay of other lands.  If
we ever knew them we have forgotten them."

Said Hallblithe, "Is this land called also the Acre of the Undying?"

As he spake the words the smile faded from the damsel's face; she and her
fellows grew pale, and she said: "Hold thy peace of such words!  They are
not lawful for any man to utter here.  Yet mayst thou call it the Land of
the Living."

He said: "I crave pardon for the rash word."

Then they smiled again, and drew near to him, and caressed him with their
hands, and looked on him lovingly; but he drew a little aback from them
and said: "I have come hither seeking something which I have lost, the
lack whereof grieveth me."

Quoth the damsel, drawing nearer to him again, "Mayst thou find it, thou
lovely man, and whatsoever else thou desirest."

Then he said: "Hath a woman named the Hostage been brought hither of late
days?  A fair woman, bright-haired and grey-eyed, kind of countenance,
soft of speech, yet outspoken and nought timorous; tall according to our
stature, but very goodly of fashion; a woman of the House of the Rose,
and my troth-plight maiden."

They looked on each other and shook their heads, and the black-haired
damsel spake: "We know of no such a woman, nor of the kindred which thou
namest."

Then his countenance fell, and became piteous with desire and grief, and
he bent his brows upon them, for they seemed to him light-minded and
careless, though they were lovely.

But they shrank from him trembling, and drew aback; for they had all been
standing close to him, beholding him with love, and she who had spoken
most had been holding his left hand fondly.  But now she said: "Nay, look
not on us so bitterly!  If the woman be not in the land, this cometh not
of our malice.  Yet maybe she is here.  For such as come hither keep not
their old names, and soon forget them what they were.  Thou shalt go with
us to the King, and he shall do for thee what thou wilt; for he is
exceeding mighty."

Then was Hallblithe appeased somewhat; and he said: "Are there many women
in the land?"

"Yea, many," said that damsel.

"And many that are as fair as ye be?" said he.  Then they laughed and
were glad, and drew near to him again and took his hands and kissed them;
and the black-haired damsel said: "Yea, yea, there be many as fair as we
be, and some fairer," and she laughed.

"And that King of yours," said he, "how do ye name him?"

"He is the King," said the damsel.

"Hath he no other name?" said Hallblithe.

"We may not utter it," she said; "but thou shalt see him soon, that there
is nought but good in him and mightiness."




CHAPTER XI: THE SEA-EAGLE RENEWETH HIS LIFE


But while they spake together thus, came a man from out of the wood very
tall of stature, red-bearded and black-haired, ruddy-cheeked,
full-limbed, most joyous of aspect; a man by seeming of five and thirty
winters.  He strode straight up to Hallblithe, and cast his arms about
him, and kissed his cheek, as if he had been an old and dear friend newly
come from over seas.

Hallblithe wondered and laughed, and said: "Who art thou that deemest me
so dear?"

Said the man: "Short is thy memory, Son of the Raven, that thou in so
little space hast forgotten thy shipmate and thy faring-fellow; who gave
thee meat and drink and good rede in the Hall of the Ravagers."  Therewith
he laughed joyously and turned about to the three maidens and took them
by the hands and kissed their lips, while they fawned upon him lovingly.

Then said Hallblithe: "Hast thou verily gotten thy youth again, which
thou badest me wish thee?"

"Yea, in good sooth," said the red-bearded man; "I am the Sea-eagle of
old days; and I have gotten my youth, and love therewithal, and somewhat
to love moreover."

Therewith he turned to the fairest of the damsels, and she was
white-skinned and fragrant as the lily, rose-cheeked and slender, and the
wind played with the long locks of her golden hair, which hung down below
her knees; so he cast his arms about her and strained her to his bosom,
and kissed her face many times, and she nothing loth, but caressing him
with lips and hand.  But the other two damsels stood by smiling and
joyous: and they clapped their hands together and kissed each other for
joy of the new lover; and at last fell to dancing and skipping about them
like young lambs in the meadows of Spring-tide.  But amongst them all,
stood up Hallblithe leaning on his spear with smiling lips and knitted
brow; for he was pondering in his mind in what wise he might further his
quest.

But after they had danced a while the Sea-eagle left his love that he had
chosen and took a hand of either of the two damsels, and led them
tripping up to Hallblithe, and cried out: "Choose thou, Raven's baby,
which of these twain thou wilt have to thy mate; for scarcely shalt thou
see better or fairer."

But Hallblithe looked on them proudly and sternly, and the black-haired
damsel hung down her head before him and said softly: "Nay, nay,
sea-warrior; this one is too lovely to be our mate.  Sweeter love abides
him, and lips more longed for."

Then stirred Hallblithe's heart within him and he said: "O Eagle of the
Sea, thou hast thy youth again: what then wilt thou do with it?  Wilt
thou not weary for the moonlit main, and the washing of waves and the
dashing of spray, and thy fellows all glistening with the brine?  Where
now shall be the alien shores before thee, and the landing for fame, and
departure for the gain of goods?  Wilt thou forget the ship's black side,
and the dripping of the windward oars, as the squall falleth on when the
sun hath arisen, and the sail tuggeth hard on the sheet, and the ship
lieth over and the lads shout against the whistle of the wind?  Has the
spear fallen from thine hand, and hast thou buried the sword of thy
fathers in the grave from which thy body hath escaped?  What art thou, O
Warrior, in the land of the alien and the King?  Who shall heed thee or
tell the tale of thy glory, which thou hast covered over with the hand of
a light woman, whom thy kindred knoweth not, and who was not born in a
house wherefrom it hath been appointed thee from of old to take the
pleasure of woman?  Whose thrall art thou now, thou lifter of the spoil,
thou scarer of the freeborn?  The bidding of what lord or King wilt thou
do, O Chieftain, that thou mayst eat thy meat in the morning and lie soft
in thy bed in the evening?"

"O Warrior of the Ravagers, here stand I, Hallblithe of the Raven, and I
am come into an alien land beset with marvels to seek mine own, and find
that which is dearest to mine heart; to wit, my troth-plight maiden the
Hostage of the Rose, the fair woman who shall lie in my bed, and bear me
children, and stand by me in field and fold, by thwart and gunwale,
before the bow and the spear, by the flickering of the cooking-fire, and
amidst the blaze of the burning hall, and beside the bale-fire of the
warrior of the Raven.  O Sea-eagle, my guester amongst the foemen, my
fellow-farer and shipmate, say now once for all whether thou wilt help me
in my quest, or fall off from me as a dastard?"

Again the maidens shrank before his clear and high-raised voice, and they
trembled and grew pale.

But the Sea-eagle laughed from a countenance kind with joy, and said:
"Child of the Raven, thy words are good and manly: but it availeth nought
in this land, and I wot not how thou wilt fare, or why thou hast been
sent amongst us.  What wilt thou do?  Hadst thou spoken these words to
the Long-hoary, the Grandfather, yesterday, his ears would have been deaf
to them; and now that thou speakest them to the Sea-eagle, this joyous
man on the Glittering Plain, he cannot do according to them, for there is
no other land than this which can hold him.  Here he is strong and stark,
and full of joy and love; but otherwhere he would be but a gibbering
ghost drifting down the wind of night.  Therefore in whatsoever thou
mayst do within this land I will stand by thee and help thee; but not one
inch beyond it may my foot go, whether it be down into the brine of the
sea, or up into the clefts of the mountains which are the wall of this
goodly land.

"Thou hast been my shipmate and I love thee, I am thy friend; but here in
this land must needs be the love and the friendship.  For no ghost can
love thee, no ghost may help thee.  And as to what thou sayest concerning
the days gone past and our joys upon the tumbling sea, true it is that
those days were good and lovely; but they are dead and gone like the lads
who sat on the thwart beside us, and the maidens who took our hands in
the hall to lead us to the chamber.  Other days have come in their stead,
and other friends shall cherish us.  What then?  Shall we wound the
living to pleasure the dead, who cannot heed it?  Shall we curse the
Yuletide, and cast foul water on the Holy Hearth of the winter feast,
because the summer once was fair and the days flit and the times change?
Now let us be glad!  For life liveth."

Therewith he turned about to his damsel and kissed her on the mouth.  But
Hallblithe's face was grown sad and stern, and he spake slowly and
heavily: "So is it, shipmate, that whereas thou sayest that the days
flit, for thee they shall flit no more; and the day may come for thee
when thou shalt be weary, and know it, and long for the lost which thou
hast forgotten.  But hereof it availeth nought for me to speak any
longer, for thine ears are deaf to these words, and thou wilt not hear
them.  Therefore I say no more save that I thank thee for thy help
whatsoever it may be; and I will take it, for the day's work lieth before
me, and I begin to think that it may be heavy enough."

The women yet looked downcast, and as if they would be gone out of
earshot; but the Sea-eagle laughed as one who is well content, and said:
"Thou thyself wilt make it hard for thyself after the wont of thy proud
and haughty race; but for me nothing is hard any longer; neither thy
scorn nor thy forebodings of evil.  Be thou my friend as much as thou
canst, and I will be thine wholly.  Now ye women, whither will ye lead
us?  For I am ready to see any new thing ye will show us."

Said his damsel: "We will take you to the King, that your hearts may be
the more gladdened.  And as for thy friend the Spearman, O Sea-warrior,
let not his heart be downcast.  Who wotteth but that these two desires,
the desire of his heart, and the desire of a heart for him, may not be
one and the same desire, so that he shall be fully satisfied?"  As she
spoke she looked sidelong at Hallblithe, with shy and wheedling eyes; and
he wondered at her word, and a new hope sprang up in his heart that he
was presently to be brought face to face with the Hostage, and that this
was that love, sweeter than their love, which abode in him, and his heart
became lighter, and his visage cleared.




CHAPTER XII: THEY LOOK ON THE KING OF THE GLITTERING PLAIN


So now the women led them along up the stream, and Hallblithe went side
by side by the Sea-eagle; but the women had become altogether merry
again, and played and ran about them as gamesome as young goats; and they
waded the shallows of the clear bright stream barefoot to wash their
limbs of the sea-brine, and strayed about the meadows, plucking the
flowers and making them wreaths and chaplets, which they did upon
themselves and the Sea-eagle; but Hallblithe they touched not, for still
they feared him.  They went on as the stream led them up toward the
hills, and ever were the meads about them as fair and flowery as might
be.  Folk they saw afar off, but fell in with none for a good while,
saving a man and a maid clad lightly as for mid-summer days, who were
wandering together lovingly and happily by the stream-side, and who gazed
wonderingly on the stark Sea-eagle, and on Hallblithe with his glittering
spear.  The black-haired damsel greeted these twain and spake something
to them, and they laughed merrily, and the man stooped down amongst the
grasses and blossoms of the bank, and drew forth a basket, and spread
dainty victuals on the grass under a willow-tree, and bade them be his
guests that fair afternoon.  So they sat down there above the glistering
stream and ate and drank and were merry.  Thereafter the new-comers and
their way-leaders departed with kind words, and still set their faces
towards the hills.

At last they saw before them a little wooded hill, and underneath it
something red and shining, and other coloured things gleaming in the sun
about it.  Then said the Sea-eagle: "What have we yonder?"

Said his damsel: "That is the pavilion of the King; and about it are the
tents and tilts of our folk who are of his fellowship: for oft he abideth
in the fields with them, though he hath houses and halls as fair as the
heart of man can conceive."

"Hath he no foemen to fear?" said the Sea-eagle.

"How should that be?" said the damsel.  "If perchance any came into this
land to bring war upon him, their battle-anger should depart when once
the bliss of the Glittering Plain had entered into their souls, and they
would ask for nought but leave to abide here and be happy.  Yet I trow
that if he had foemen he could crush them as easily as I set my foot on
this daisy."

So as they went on they fell in with many folk, men and women, sporting
and playing in the fields; and there was no semblance of eld on any of
them, and no scar or blemish or feebleness of body or sadness of
countenance; nor did any bear a weapon or any piece of armour.  Now some
of them gathered about the new-corners, and wondered at Hallblithe and
his long spear and shining helm and dark grey byrny; but none asked
concerning them, for all knew that they were folk new come to the bliss
of the Glittering Plain.  So they passed amidst these fair folk little
hindered by them, and into Hallblithe's thoughts it came how joyous the
fellowship of such should be and how his heart should be raised by the
sight of them, if only his troth-plight maiden were by his side.

Thus then they came to the King's pavilion, where it stood in a bight of
the meadow-land at the foot of the hill, with the wood about it on three
sides.  So fair a house Hallblithe deemed he had never seen; for it was
wrought all over with histories and flowers, and with hems sewn with
gold, and with orphreys of gold and pearl and gems.

There in the door of it sat the King of the Land in an ivory chair; he
was clad in golden gown, girt with a girdle of gems, and had his crown on
his head and his sword by his side.  For this was the hour wherein he
heard what any of his folk would say to him, and for that very end he sat
there in the door of his tent, and folk were standing before him, and
sitting and lying on the grass round about; and now one, now another,
came up to him and spoke before him.

His face shone like a star; it was exceeding beauteous, and as kind as
the even of May in the gardens of the happy, when the scent of the
eglantine fills all the air.  When he spoke his voice was so sweet that
all hearts were ravished, and none might gainsay him.

But when Hallblithe set eyes on him, he knew at once that this was he
whose carven image he had seen in the Hall of the Ravagers, and his heart
beat fast, and he said to himself: "Hold up thine head now, O Son of the
Raven, strengthen thine heart, and let no man or god cow thee.  For how
can thine heart change, which bade thee go to the house wherefrom it was
due to thee to take the pleasure of woman, and there to pledge thy faith
and troth to her that loveth thee most, and hankereth for thee day by day
and hour by hour, so that great is the love that we twain have builded
up."

Now they drew nigh, for folk fell back before them to the right and left,
as before men who are new come and have much to do; so that there was
nought between them and the face of the King.  But he smiled upon them so
that he cheered their hearts with the hope of fulfilment of their
desires, and he said: "Welcome, children!  Who be these whom ye have
brought hither for the increase of our joy?  Who is this tall,
ruddy-faced, joyous man so meet for the bliss of the Glittering Plain?
And who is this goodly and lovely young man, who beareth weapons amidst
our peace, and whose face is sad and stern beneath the gleaming of his
helm?"

Said the dark-haired damsel: "O King!  O Gift-giver and assurer of joy!
this tall one is he who was once oppressed by eld, and who hath come
hither to thee from the Isle of Ransom, according to the custom of the
land."

Said the King: "Tall man, it is well that thou art come.  Now are thy
days changed and thou yet alive.  For thee battle is ended, and therewith
the reward of battle, which the warrior remembereth not amidst the hard
hand-play: peace hath begun, and thou needest not be careful for the
endurance thereof: for in this land no man hath a lack which he may not
satisfy without taking aught from any other.  I deem not that thine heart
may conceive a desire which I shall not fulfil for thee, or crave a gift
which I shall not give thee."

Then the Sea-eagle laughed for joy, and turned his head this way and
that, so that he might the better take to him the smiles of all those
that stood around.

Then the King said to Hallblithe: "Thou also art welcome; I know thee who
thou art: meseemeth great joy awaiteth thee, and I will fulfil thy desire
to the uttermost."

Said Hallblithe: "O great King of a happy land, I ask of thee nought save
that which none shall withhold from me uncursed."

"I will give it to thee," said the King, "and thou shalt bless me.  But
what is it which thou wouldst?  What more canst thou have than the Gifts
of the land?"

Said Hallblithe: "I came hither seeking no gifts, but to have mine own
again; and that is the bodily love of my troth-plight maiden.  They stole
her from me, and me from her; for she loved me.  I went down to the sea-
side and found her not, nor the ship which had borne her away.  I sailed
from thence to the Isle of Ransom, for they told me that there I should
buy her for a price; neither was her body there.  But her image came to
me in a dream of the night, and bade me seek to her hither.  Therefore, O
King, if she be here in the land, show me how I shall find her, and if
she be not here, show me how I may depart to seek her otherwhere.  This
is all my asking."

Said the King: "Thy desire shall be satisfied; thou shalt have the woman
who would have thee, and whom thou shouldst have."

Hallblithe was gladdened beyond measure by that word; and now did the
King seem to him a comfort and a solace to every heart, even as he had
deemed of his carven image in the Hall of the Ravagers; and he thanked
him, and blessed him.

But the King bade him abide by him that night, and feast with him.  "And
on the morrow," said he, "thou shalt go thy ways to look on her whom thou
oughtest to love."

Therewith was come the eventide and beginning of night, warm and fragrant
and bright with the twinkling of stars, and they went into the King's
pavilion, and there was the feast as fair and dainty as might be; and
Hallblithe had meat from the King's own dish, and drink from his cup; but
the meat had no savour to him and the drink no delight, because of the
longing that possessed him.

And when the feast was done, the damsels led Hallblithe to his bed in a
fair tent strewn with gold about his head like the starry night, and he
lay down and slept for sheer weariness of body.




CHAPTER XIII: HALLBLITHE BEHOLDETH THE WOMAN WHO LOVETH HIM


But on the morrow the men arose, and the Sea-eagle and his damsel came to
Hallblithe; for the other two damsels were departed, and the Sea-eagle
said to him:

"Here am I well honoured and measurelessly happy; and I have a message
for thee from the King."

"What is it?" said Hallblithe; but he deemed that he knew what it would
be, and he reddened for the joy of his assured hope.

Said the Sea-eagle: "Joy to thee, O shipmate!  I am to take thee to the
place where thy beloved abideth, and there shalt thou see her, but not so
as she can see thee; and thereafter shalt thou go to the King, that thou
mayst tell him if she shall accomplish thy desire."

Then was Hallblithe glad beyond measure, and his heart danced within him,
and he deemed it but meet that the others should be so joyous and blithe
with him, for they led him along without any delay, and were glad at his
rejoicing; and words failed him to tell of his gladness.

But as he went, the thoughts of his coming converse with his beloved
curled sweetly round his heart, so that scarce anything had seemed so
sweet to him before; and he fell a-pondering what they twain, he and the
Hostage, should do when they came together again; whether they should
abide on the Glittering Plain, or go back again to Cleveland by the Sea
and dwell in the House of the Kindred; and for his part he yearned to
behold the roof of his fathers and to tread the meadow which his scythe
had swept, and the acres where his hook had smitten the wheat.  But he
said to himself, "I will wait till I hear her desire hereon."

Now they went into the wood at the back of the King's pavilion and
through it, and so over the hill, and beyond it came into a land of hills
and dales exceeding fair and lovely; and a river wound about the dales,
lapping in turn the feet of one hill-side or the other; and in each dale
(for they passed through two) was a goodly house of men, and tillage
about it, and vineyards and orchards.  They went all day till the sun was
near setting, and were not weary, for they turned into the houses by the
way when they would, and had good welcome and meat and drink and what
they would of the folk that dwelt there.  Thus anigh sunset they came
into a dale fairer than either of the others, and nigh to the end where
they had entered it was an exceeding goodly house.  Then said the damsel:

"We are nigh-hand to our journey's end; let us sit down on the grass by
this river-side whilst I tell thee the tale which the King would have
thee know."

So they sat down on the grass beside the brimming river, scant two
bowshots from that fair house, and the damsel said, reading from a scroll
which she drew from her bosom:

"O Spearman, in yonder house dwelleth the woman foredoomed to love thee:
if thou wouldst see her, go thitherward, following the path which turneth
from the river-side by yonder oak-tree, and thou shalt presently come to
a thicket of bay-trees at the edge of an apple-orchard, whose trees are
blossoming; abide thou hidden by the bay-leaves, and thou shalt see
maidens come into the orchard, and at last one fairer than all the
others.  This shall be thy love fore-doomed, and none other; and thou
shalt know her by this token, that when she hath set her down on the
grass beside the bay-tree, she shall say to her maidens 'Bring me now the
book wherein is the image of my beloved, that I may solace myself with
beholding it before the sun goes down and the night cometh.'"

Now Hallblithe was troubled when she read out these words, and he said:
"What is this tale about a book?  I know not of any book that lieth
betwixt me and my beloved."

"O Spearman," said the damsel, "I may tell thee no more, because I know
no more.  But keep up thine heart!  For dost thou know any more than I do
what hath befallen thy beloved since thou wert sundered from her? and why
should not this matter of the book be one of the things that hath
befallen her?  Go now with joy, and come again blessing us."

"Yea, go, faring-fellow," said the Sea-eagle, "and come back joyful, that
we may all be merry together.  And we will abide thee here."

Hallblithe foreboded evil, but he held his peace and went his ways down
the path by the oak-tree; and they abode there by the water-side, and
were very merry talking of this and that (but no whit of Hallblithe), and
kissing and caressing each other; so that it seemed but a little while to
them ere they saw Hallblithe coming back by the oak-tree.  He went
slowly, hanging his head like a man sore-burdened with grief: thus he
came up to them, and stood there above them as they lay on the fragrant
grass, and he saying no word and looking so sad and sorry, and withal so
fell, that they feared his grief and his anger, and would fain have been
away from him; so that they durst not ask him a question for a long
while, and the sun sank below the hill while they abided thus.

Then all trembling the damsel spake to the Sea-eagle: "Speak to him, dear
friend, else must I flee away, for I fear his silence."

Quoth the Sea-eagle: "Shipmate and friend, what hath betided?  How art
thou?  May we hearken, and mayhappen amend it?"

Then Hallblithe cast himself adown on the grass and said: "I am accursed
and beguiled; and I wander round and round in a tangle that I may not
escape from.  I am not far from deeming that this is a land of dreams
made for my beguiling.  Or has the earth become so full of lies, that
there is no room amidst them for a true man to stand upon his feet and go
his ways?"

Said the Sea-eagle: "Thou shalt tell us of what hath betid, and so ease
the sorrow of thy soul if thou wilt.  Or if thou wilt, thou shalt nurse
thy sorrow in thine heart and tell no man.  Do what thou wilt; am I not
become thy friend?"

Said Hallblithe: "I will tell you twain the tidings, and thereafter ask
me no more concerning them.  Hearken.  I went whereas ye bade me, and hid
myself in the bay-tree thicket; and there came maidens into the
blossoming orchard and made a resting-place with silken cushions close to
where I was lurking, and stood about as though they were looking for some
one to come.  In a little time came two more maidens, and betwixt them
one so much fairer than any there, that my heart sank within me: whereas
I deemed because of her fairness that this would be the fore-doomed love
whereof ye spake, and lo, she was in nought like to my troth-plight
maiden, save that she was exceeding beauteous: nevertheless, heart-sick
as I was, I determined to abide the token that ye told me of.  So she lay
down amidst those cushions, and I beheld her that she was sad of
countenance; and she was so near to me that I could see the tears welling
into her eyes, and running down her cheeks; so that I should have grieved
sorely for her had I not been grieving so sorely for myself.  For
presently she sat up and said 'O maiden, bring me hither the book wherein
is the image of my beloved, that I may behold it in this season of sunset
wherein I first beheld it; that I may fill my heart with the sight
thereof before the sun is gone and the dark night come.'

"Then indeed my heart died within me when I wotted that this was the love
whereof the King spake, that he would give to me, and she not mine own
beloved, yet I could not choose but abide and look on a while, and she
being one that any man might love beyond measure.  Now a maiden went away
into the house and came back again with a book covered with gold set with
gems; and the fair woman took it and opened it, and I was so near to her
that I saw every leaf clearly as she turned the leaves.  And in that book
were pictures of many things, as flaming mountains, and castles of war,
and ships upon the sea, but chiefly of fair women, and queens, and
warriors and kings; and it was done in gold and azure and cinnabar and
minium.  So she turned the leaves, till she came to one whereon was
pictured none other than myself, and over against me was the image of
mine own beloved, the Hostage of the Rose, as if she were alive, so that
the heart within me swelled with the sobbing which I must needs refrain,
which grieved me like a sword-stroke.  Shame also took hold of me as the
fair woman spoke to my painted image, and I lying well-nigh within touch
of her hand; but she said: 'O my beloved, why dost thou delay to come to
me?  For I deemed that this eve at least thou wouldst come, so many and
strong as are the meshes of love which we have cast about thy feet.  Oh
come to-morrow at the least and latest, or what shall I do, and wherewith
shall I quench the grief of my heart?  Or else why am I the daughter of
the Undying King, the Lord of the Treasure of the Sea?  Why have they
wrought new marvels for me, and compelled the Ravagers of the Coasts to
serve me, and sent false dreams flitting on the wings of the night?  Yea,
why is the earth fair and fruitful, and the heavens kind above it, if
thou comest not to-night, nor to-morrow, nor the day after?  And I the
daughter of the Undying, on whom the days shall grow and grow as the
grains of sand which the wind heaps up above the sea-beach.  And life
shall grow huger and more hideous round about the lonely one, like the
ling-worm laid upon the gold, that waxeth thereby, till it lies all
around about the house of the queen entrapped, the moveless unending ring
of the years that change not.'

"So she spake till the weeping ended her words, and I was all abashed
with shame and pale with anguish.  I stole quietly from my lair unheeded
of any, save that one damsel said that a rabbit ran in the hedge, and
another that a blackbird stirred in the thicket.  Behold me, then, that
my quest beginneth again amidst the tangle of lies whereinto I have been
entrapped."




CHAPTER XIV: HALLBLITHE HAS SPEECH WITH THE KING AGAIN


He stood up when he had made an end, as a man ready for the road; but
they lay there downcast and abashed, and had no words to answer him.  For
the Sea-eagle was sorry that his faring-fellow was hapless, and was sorry
that he was sorry; and as for the damsel, she had not known but that she
was leading the goodly Spearman to the fulfilment of his heart's desire.
Albeit after a while she spake again and said:

"Dear friends, day is gone and night is at hand; now to-night it were ill
lodging at yonder house; and the next house on our backward road is over
far for wayworn folk.  But hard by through the thicket is a fair little
wood-lawn, by the lip of a pool in the stream wherein we may bathe us to-
morrow morning; and it is grassy and flowery and sheltered from all winds
that blow, and I have victual enough in my wallet.  Let us sup and rest
there under the bare heaven, as oft is the wont of us in this land; and
on the morrow early we will arise and get us back again to Wood-end,
where yet the King abideth, and there shalt thou talk to him again, O
Spearman."

Said Hallblithe: "Take me whither ye will; but now nought availeth.  I am
a captive in a land of lies, and here most like shall I live betrayed and
die hapless."

"Hold thy peace, dear friend, of such words as those last," said she, "or
I must needs flee from thee, for they hurt me sorely.  Come now to this
pleasant place."

She took him by the hand and looked kindly on him, and the Sea-eagle
followed him, murmuring an old song of the harvest-field, and they went
together by a path through a thicket of white-thorn till they came unto a
grassy place.  There then they sat them down, and ate and drank what they
would, sitting by the lip of the pool till a waning moon was bright over
their heads.  And Hallblithe made no semblance of content; but the Sea-
eagle and his damsel were grown merry again, and talked and sang together
like autumn stares, with the kissing and caressing of lovers.

So at last those twain lay down amongst the flowers, and slept in each
other's arms; but Hallblithe betook him to the brake a little aloof, and
lay down, but slept not till morning was at hand, when slumber and
confused dreams overtook him.

He was awaked from his sleep by the damsel, who came pushing through the
thicket all fresh and rosy from the river, and roused him, and said:

"Awake now, Spearman, that we may take our pleasure in the sun; for he is
high in the heavens now, and all the land laughs beneath him."

Her eyes glittered as she spoke, and her limbs moved under her raiment as
though she would presently fall to dancing for very joy.  But Hallblithe
arose wearily, and gave her back no smile in answer, but thrust through
the thicket to the water, and washed the night from off him, and so came
back to the twain as they sat dallying together over their breakfast.  He
would not sit down by them, but ate a morsel of bread as he stood, and
said: "Tell me how I can soonest find the King: I bid you not lead me
thither, but let me go my ways alone.  For with me time presses, and with
you meseemeth time is nought.  Neither am I a meet fellow for the happy."

But the Sea-eagle sprang up, and swore with a great oath that he would
nowise leave his shipmate in the lurch.  And the damsel said: "Fair man,
I had best go with thee; I shall not hinder thee, but further thee
rather, so that thou shalt make one day's journey of two."

And she put forth her hand to him, and caressed him smiling, and fawned
upon him, and he heeded it little, but hung not aback from them since
they were ready for the road: so they set forth all three together.

They made such diligence on the backward road that the sun was not set by
then they came to Wood-end; and there was the King sitting in the door of
his pavilion.  Thither went Hallblithe straight, and thrust through the
throng, and stood before the King; who greeted him kindly, and was no
less sweet of face than on that other day.

Hallblithe hailed him not, but said: "King, look on my anguish, and if
thou art other than a king of dreams and lies, play no longer with me,
but tell me straight out if thou knowest of my troth-plight maiden,
whether she is in this land or not."

Then the King smiled on him and said: "True it is that I know of her; yet
know I not whether she is in this land or not."

"King," said Hallblithe, "wilt thou bring us together and stay my heart's
bleeding?"

Said the King: "I cannot, since I know not where she is."

"Why didst thou lie to me the other day?" said Hallblithe.

"I lied not," said the King; "I bade bring thee to the woman that loved
thee, and whom thou shouldst love; and that is my daughter.  And look
thou!  Even as I may not bring thee to thine earthly love, so couldst
thou not make thyself manifest before my daughter, and become her
deathless love.  Is it not enough?"

He spake sternly for all that he smiled, and Hallblithe said: "O King,
have pity on me!"

"Yea," said the King; "pity thee I do: but I will live despite thy
sorrow; my pity of thee shall not slay me, or make thee happy.  Even in
such wise didst thou pity my daughter."

Said Hallblithe: "Thou art mighty, O King, and maybe the mightiest.  Wilt
thou not help me?"

"How can I help thee?" said the King, "thou who wilt not help thyself.
Thou hast seen what thou shouldst do: do it then and be holpen."

Then said Hallblithe: "Wilt thou not slay me, O King, since thou wilt not
do aught else?"

"Nay," said the King, "thy slaying wilt not serve me nor mine: I will
neither help nor hinder.  Thou art free to seek thy love wheresoever thou
wilt in this my realm.  Depart in peace!"

Hallblithe saw that the King was angry, though he smiled upon him; yet so
coldly, that the face of him froze the very marrow of Hallblithe's bones:
and he said within himself: "This King of lies shall not slay me, though
mine anguish be hard to bear: for I am alive, and it may be that my love
is in this land, and I may find her here, and how to reach another land I
know not."

So he turned from before the face of the King as the sun was setting, and
he went down the land southward betwixt the mountains and the sea, not
heeding whether it were night or day; and he went on till it was long
past midnight, and then for mere weariness laid him down under a tree,
not knowing where he was, and fell asleep.

And in the morning he woke up to the bright sun, and found folk standing
round about him, both men and women, and their sheep were anigh them, for
they were shepherd folk.  So when they saw that he was awake, they
greeted him, and were blithe with him and made much of him: and they took
him home to their house, and gave him to eat and to drink, and asked him
what he would that they might serve him.  And they seemed to him to be
kind and simple folk, and though he loathed to speak the words, so sick
at heart he was, yet he told them how he was seeking his troth-plight
maiden, his earthly love, and asked them to say if they had seen any
woman like her.

They heard him kindly and pitied him, and told him how they had heard of
a woman in the land, who sought her beloved even as he sought his.  And
when he heard that, his heart leapt up, and he asked them to tell him
more concerning this woman.  Then they said that she dwelt in the hill-
country in a goodly house, and had set her heart on a lovely man, whose
image she had seen in a book, and that no man but this one would content
her; and this, they said, was a sad and sorry matter, such as was unheard
of hitherto in the land.

So when Hallblithe heard this, as heavily as his heart fell again, he
changed not countenance, but thanked the kind folk and departed, and went
on down the land betwixt the mountains and the sea, and before nightfall
he had been into three more houses of folk, and asked there of all comers
concerning a woman who was sundered from her beloved; and at none of them
gat he any answer to make him less sorry than yesterday.  At the last of
the three he slept, and on the morrow early there was the work to begin
again; and the next day was the same as the last, and the day after
differed not from it.  Thus he went on seeking his beloved betwixt the
mountains and the plain, till the great rock-wall came down to the side
of the sea and made an end of the Glittering Plain on that side.  Then he
turned about and went back by the way he had come, and up the country
betwixt the mountains and the plain northward, until he had been into
every house of folk in those parts and asked his question.

Then he went up into that fair country of the dales, and even anigh to
where dwelt the King's Daughter, and otherwhere in the land and
everywhere, quartering the realm of the Glittering Plain as the heron
quarters the flooded meadow when the waters draw aback into the river.  So
that now all people knew him when he came, and they wondered at him; but
when he came to any house for the third or fourth time, they wearied of
him, and were glad when he departed.

Ever it was one of two answers that he had: either folk said to him,
"There is no such woman; this land is happy, and nought but happy people
dwell herein;" or else they told him of the woman who lived in sorrow,
and was ever looking on a book, that she might bring to her the man whom
she desired.

Whiles he wearied and longed for death, but would not die until there was
no corner of the land unsearched.  Whiles he shook off weariness, and
went about his quest as a craftsman sets about his work in the morning.
Whiles it irked him to see the soft and merry folk of the land, who had
no skill to help him, and he longed for the house of his fathers and the
men of the spear and the plough; and thought, "Oh, if I might but get me
back, if it were but for an hour and to die there, to the meadows of the
Raven, and the acres beneath the mountains of Cleveland by the Sea.  Then
at least should I learn some tale of what is or what hath been, howsoever
evil the tidings were, and not be bandied about by lies for ever."




CHAPTER XV: YET HALLBLITHE SPEAKETH WITH THE KING


So wore the days and the moons; and now were some six moons worn since
first he came to the Glittering Plain; and he was come to Wood-end again,
and heard and knew that the King was sitting once more in the door of his
pavilion to hearken to the words of his people, and he said to himself:
"I will speak yet again to this man, if indeed he be a man; yea, though
he turn me into stone."

And he went up toward the pavilion; and on the way it came into his mind
what the men of the kindred were doing that morning; and he had a vision
of them as it were, and saw them yoking the oxen to the plough, and
slowly going down the acres, as the shining iron drew the long furrow
down the stubble-land, and the light haze hung about the elm-trees in the
calm morning, and the smoke rose straight into the air from the roof of
the kindred.  And he said: "What is this? am I death-doomed this morning
that this sight cometh so clearly upon me amidst the falseness of this
unchanging land?"

Thus he came to the pavilion, and folk fell back before him to the right
and the left, and he stood before the King, and said to him: "I cannot
find her; she is not in thy land."

Then spake the King, smiling upon him, as erst: "What wilt thou then?  Is
it not time to rest?"

He said: "Yea, O King; but not in this land."

Said the King: "Where else than in this land wilt thou find rest?  Without
is battle and famine, longing unsatisfied, and heart-burning and fear;
within it is plenty and peace and good will and pleasure without cease.
Thy word hath no meaning to me."

Said Hallblithe: "Give me leave to depart, and I will bless thee."

"Is there nought else to do?" said the King.

"Nought else," said Hallblithe.

Therewith he felt that the King's face changed though he still smiled on
him, and again he felt his heart grow cold before the King.

But the King spake and said: "I hinder not thy departure, nor will any of
my folk.  No hand will be raised against thee; there is no weapon in all
the land, save the deedless sword by my side and the weapons which thou
bearest."

Said Hallblithe: "Dost thou not owe me a joy in return for my beguiling?"

"Yea," said the King, "reach out thine hand to take it."

"One thing only may I take of thee," said Hallblithe; "my troth-plight
maiden or else the speeding of my departure."

Then said the King, and his voice was terrible though yet he smiled: "I
will not hinder; I will not help.  Depart in peace!"

Then Hallblithe turned away dizzy and half fainting, and strayed down the
field, scarce knowing where he was; and as he went he felt his sleeve
plucked at, and turned about, and lo! he was face to face with the Sea-
eagle, no less joyous than aforetime.  He took Hallblithe in his arms and
embraced him and kissed him, and said: "Well met, faring-fellow!  Whither
away?"

"Away out of this land of lies," said Hallblithe.

The Sea-eagle shook his head, and quoth he: "Art thou still seeking a
dream?  And thou so fair that thou puttest all other men to shame."

"I seek no dream," said Hallblithe, "but rather the end of dreams."

"Well," said the Sea-eagle, "we will not wrangle about it.  But hearken.
Hard by in a pleasant nook of the meadows have I set up my tent; and
although it be not as big as the King's pavilion, yet is it fair enough.
Wilt thou not come thither with me and rest thee to-night; and to-morrow
we will talk of this matter?"

Now Hallblithe was weary and confused, and downhearted beyond his wont,
and the friendly words of the Sea-eagle softened his heart, and he smiled
on him and said: "I give thee thanks; I will come with thee: thou art
kind, and hast done nought to me save good from the time when I first saw
thee lying in thy bed in the Hall of the Ravagers.  Dost thou remember
the day?"

The Sea-eagle knitted his brow as one striving with a troublous memory,
and said: "But dimly, friend, as if it had passed in an ugly dream:
meseemeth my friendship with thee began when I came to thee from out of
the wood, and saw thee standing with those three damsels; that I remember
full well ye were fair to look on."

Hallblithe wondered at his words, but said no more about it, and they
went together to a flowery nook nigh a stream of clear water where stood
a silken tent, green like the grass which it stood on, and flecked with
gold and goodly colours.  Nigh it on the grass lay the Sea-eagle's
damsel, ruddy-cheeked and sweet-lipped, as fair as aforetime.  She turned
about when she heard men coming, and when she saw Hallblithe a smile came
into her face like the sun breaking out on a fair but clouded morning,
and she went up to him and took him by the hands and kissed his cheek,
and said: "Welcome, Spearman! welcome back!  We have heard of thee in
many places, and have been sorry that thou wert not glad, and now are we
fain of thy returning.  Shall not sweet life begin for thee from
henceforward?"

Again was Hallblithe moved by her kind welcome; but he shook his head and
spake: "Thou art kind, sister; yet if thou wouldst be kinder thou wilt
show me a way whereby I may escape from this land.  For abiding here has
become irksome to me, and meseemeth that hope is yet alive without the
Glittering Plain."

Her face fell as she answered: "Yea, and fear also, and worse, if aught
be worse.  But come, let us eat and drink in this fair place, and gather
for thee a little joyance before thou departest, if thou needs must
depart."

He smiled on her as one not ill-content, and laid himself down on the
grass, while the twain busied themselves, and brought forth fair cushions
and a gilded table, and laid dainty victual thereon and good wine.

So they ate and drank together, and the Sea-eagle and his mate became
very joyous again, and Hallblithe bestirred himself not to be a
mar-feast; for he said within himself: "I am departing, and after this
time I shall see them no more; and they are kind and blithe with me, and
have been aforetime; I will not make their merry hearts sore.  For when I
am gone I shall be remembered of them but a little while."




CHAPTER XVI: THOSE THREE GO THEIR WAYS TO THE EDGE OF THE GLITTERING
PLAIN


So the evening wore merrily; and they made Hallblithe lie in an ingle of
the tent on a fair bed, and he was weary, and slept thereon like a child.
But in the morning early they waked him; and while they were breaking
their fast they began to speak to him of his departure, and asked him if
he had an inkling of the way whereby he should get him gone, and he said:
"If I escape it must needs be by way of the mountains that wall the land
about till they come down to the sea.  For on the sea is no ship and no
haven; and well I wot that no man of the land durst or can ferry me over
to the land of my kindred, or otherwhere without the Glittering Plain.
Tell me therefore (and I ask no more of you), is there any rumour or
memory of a way that cleaveth yonder mighty wall of rock to other lands?"

Said the damsel: "There is more than a memory or a rumour: there is a
road through the mountains known to all men.  For at whiles the earthly
pilgrims come into the Glittering Plain thereby; and yet but seldom, so
many are the griefs and perils which beset the wayfarers on that road.
Whereof thou hadst far better bethink thee in time, and abide here and be
happy with us and others who long sore to make thee happy."

"Nay," said Hallblithe, "there is nought to do but tell me of the way,
and I will depart at once, blessing you."

Said the Sea-eagle: "More than that at least will we do.  May I lose the
bliss whereto I have attained, if I go not with thee to the very edge of
the land of the Glittering Plain.  Shall it not be so, sweetheart?"

"Yea, at least we may do that," said the damsel; and she hung her head as
if she were ashamed, and said: "And that is all that thou wilt get from
us at most."

Said Hallblithe: "It is enough, and I asked not so much."

Then the damsel busied herself, and set meat and drink in two wallets,
and took one herself and gave the other to the Sea-eagle, and said: "We
will be thy porters, O Spearman, and will give thee a full wallet from
the last house by the Desert of Dread, for when thou hast entered
therein, thou mayst well find victual hard to come by: and now let us
linger no more since the road is dear to thee."

So they set forth on foot, for in that land men were slow to feel
weariness; and turning about the hill of Wood-end, they passed by some
broken country, and came at even to a house at the entrance of a long
valley, with high and steeply-sloping sides, which seemed, as it were, to
cleave the dale country wherein they had fared aforetime.  At that house
they slept well-guested by its folk, and the next morning took their way
down the valley, and the folk of the house stood at the door to watch
their departure; for they had told the wayfarers that they had fared but
a little way thitherward and knew of no folk who had used that road.

So those three fared down the valley southward all day, ever mounting
higher as they went.  The way was pleasant and easy, for they went over
fair, smooth, grassy lawns betwixt the hill-sides, beside a clear
rattling stream that ran northward; at whiles were clumps of tall trees,
oak for the most part, and at whiles thickets of thorn and eglantine and
other such trees: so that they could rest well shaded when they would.

They passed by no house of men, nor came to any such in the even, but lay
down to sleep in a thicket of thorn and eglantine, and rested well, and
on the morrow they rose up betimes and went on their ways.

This second day as they went, the hill-sides on either hand grew lower,
till at last they died out into a wide plain, beyond which in the
southern offing the mountains rose huge and bare.  This plain also was
grassy and beset with trees and thickets here and there.  Hereon they saw
wild deer enough, as hart and buck, and roebuck and swine: withal a lion
came out of a brake hard by them as they went, and stood gazing on them,
so that Hallblithe looked to his weapons, and the Sea-eagle took up a big
stone to fight with, being weaponless; but the damsel laughed, and
tripped on her way lightly with girt-up gown, and the beast gave no more
heed to them.

Easy and smooth was their way over this pleasant wilderness, and clear to
see, though but little used, and before nightfall, after they had gone a
long way, they came to a house.  It was not large nor high, but was built
very strongly and fairly of good ashlar: its door was shut, and on the
jamb thereof hung a slug-horn.  The damsel, who seemed to know what to
do, set her mouth to the horn, and blew a blast; and in a little while
the door was opened, and a big man clad in red scarlet stood therein: he
had no weapons, but was somewhat surly of aspect: he spake not, but stood
abiding the word: so the damsel took it up and said: "Art thou not the
Warden of the Uttermost House?"

He said: "I am."

Said the damsel: "May we guest here to-night?"

He said: "The house lieth open to you with all that it hath of victual
and plenishing: take what ye will, and use what ye will."

They thanked him; but he heeded not their thanks, and withdrew him from
them.  So they entered and found the table laid in a fair hall of stone
carven and painted very goodly; so they ate and drank therein, and
Hallblithe was of good heart, and the Sea-eagle and his mate were merry,
though they looked softly and shyly on Hallblithe because of the
sundering anigh; and they saw no man in the house save the man in
scarlet, who went and came about his business, paying no heed to them.  So
when the night was deep they lay down in the shut-bed off the hall, and
slept, and the hours were tidingless to them until they woke in the
morning.

On the morrow they arose and broke their fast, and thereafter the damsel
spake to the man in scarlet and said: "May we fill our wallets with
victual for the way?"

Said the Warden: "There lieth the meat."

So they filled their wallets, while the man looked on; and they came to
the door when they were ready, and he unlocked it to them, saying no
word.  But when they turned their faces towards the mountains he spake at
last, and stayed them at the first step.  Quoth he: "Whither away?  Ye
take the wrong road!"

Said Hallblithe: "Nay, for we go toward the mountains and the edge of the
Glittering Plain."

"Ye shall do ill to go thither," said the Warden, "and I bid you
forbear."

"O Warden of the Uttermost House, wherefore should we forbear?" said the
Sea-eagle.

Said the scarlet man: "Because my charge is to further those who would go
inward to the King, and to stay those who would go outward from the
King."

"How then if we go outward despite thy bidding?" said the Sea-eagle,
"wilt thou then hinder us perforce?"

"How may I," said the man, "since thy fellow hath weapons?"

"Go we forth, then," said the Sea-eagle.

"Yea," said the damsel, "we will go forth.  And know, O Warden, that this
weaponed man only is of mind to fare over the edge of the Glittering
Plain; but we twain shall come back hither again, and fare inwards."

Said the Warden: "Nought is it to me what ye will do when you are past
this house.  Nor shall any man who goeth out of this garth toward the
mountains ever come back inwards save he cometh in the company of new-
corners to the Glittering Plain."

"Who shall hinder him?" said the Sea-eagle.

"The KING," said the Warden.

Then there was silence awhile, and the man said:

"Now do as ye will."  And therewith he turned back into the house and
shut the door.

But the Sea-eagle and the damsel stood gazing on one another, and at
Hallblithe; and the damsel was downcast and pale; but the Sea-eagle cried
out:

"Forward now, O Hallblithe, since thou willest it, and we will go with
thee and share whatever may befall thee; yea, right up to the very edge
of the Glittering Plain.  And thou, O beloved, why dost thou delay?  Why
dost thou stand as if thy fair feet were grown to the grass?"

But the damsel gave a lamentable cry, and cast herself down on the
ground, and knelt before the Sea-eagle, and took him by the knees, and
said betwixt sobbing and weeping: "O my lord and love, I pray thee to
forbear, and the Spearman, our friend, shall pardon us.  For if thou
goest, I shall never see thee more, since my heart will not serve me to
go with thee.  O forbear!  I pray thee!"

And she grovelled on the earth before him; and the Sea-eagle waxed red,
and would have spoken but Hallblithe cut his speech across, and said
"Friends, be at peace!  For this is the minute that sunders us.  Get ye
back at once to the heart of the Glittering Plain, and live there and be
happy; and take my blessing and thanks for the love and help that ye have
given me.  For your going forward with me should destroy you and profit
me nothing.  It would be but as the host bringing his guests one field
beyond his garth, when their goal is the ends of the earth; and if there
were a lion in the path, why should he perish for courtesy's sake?"

Therewith he stooped down to the damsel, and lifted her up and kissed her
face; and he cast his arms about the Sea-eagle and said to him:
"Farewell, shipmate!"

Then the damsel gave him the wallet of victual, and bade him farewell,
weeping sorely; and he looked kindly on them for a moment of time, and
then turned away from them and fared on toward the mountains, striding
with great strides, holding his head aloft.  But they looked no more on
him, having no will to eke their sorrow, but went their ways back again
without delay.




CHAPTER XVII: HALLBLITHE AMONGST THE MOUNTAINS


So strode on Hallblithe; but when he had gone but a little way his head
turned, and the earth and heavens wavered before him, so that he must
needs sit down on a stone by the wayside, wondering what ailed him.  Then
he looked up at the mountains, which now seemed quite near to him at the
plain's ending, and his weakness increased on him; and lo! as he looked,
it was to him as if the crags rose up in the sky to meet him and overhang
him, and as if the earth heaved up beneath him, and therewith he fell
aback and lost all sense, so that he knew not what was become of the
earth and the heavens and the passing of the minutes of his life.

When he came to himself he knew not whether he had lain so a great while
or a little; he felt feeble, and for a while he lay scarce moving, and
beholding nought, not even the sky above him.  Presently he turned about
and saw hard stone on either side, so he rose wearily and stood upon his
feet, and knew that he was faint with hunger and thirst.  Then he looked
around him, and saw that he was in a narrow valley or cleft of the
mountains amidst wan rocks, bare and waterless, where grew no blade of
green; but he could see no further than the sides of that cleft, and he
longed to be out of it that he might see whitherward to turn.  Then he
bethought him of his wallet, and set his hand to it and opened it,
thinking to get victual thence; but lo! it was all spoilt and wasted.
None the less, for all his feebleness, he turned and went toiling slowly
along what seemed to be a path little trodden leading upward out of the
cleft; and at last he reached the crest thereof, and sat him down on a
rock on the other side; yet durst not raise his eyes awhile and look on
the land, lest he should see death manifest therein.  At last he looked,
and saw that he was high up amongst the mountain-peaks: before him and on
either hand was but a world of fallow stone rising ridge upon ridge like
the waves of the wildest of the winter sea.  The sun not far from its
midmost shone down bright and hot on that wilderness; yet was there no
sign that any man had ever been there since the beginning of the world,
save that the path aforesaid seemed to lead onward down the stony slope.

This way and that way and all about he gazed, straining his eyes if
perchance he might see any diversity in the stony waste; and at last
betwixt two peaks of the rock-wall on his left hand he descried a streak
of green mingling with the cold blue of the distance; and he thought in
his heart that this was the last he should see of the Glittering Plain.
Then he spake aloud in that desert, and said, though there was none to
hear: "Now is my last hour come; and here is Hallblithe of the Raven
perishing, with his deeds undone and his longing unfulfilled, and his
bridal-bed acold for ever.  Long may the House of the Raven abide and
flourish, with many a man and maiden, valiant and fair and fruitful!  O
kindred, cast thy blessing on this man about to die here, doing none
otherwise than ye would have him!"

He sat there a little while longer, and then he said to himself: "Death
tarries; were it not well that I go to meet him, even as the cot-carle
preventeth the mighty chieftain?"

Then he arose, and went painfully down the slope, steadying himself with
the shaft of his gleaming spear; but all at once he stopped; for it
seemed to him that he heard voices borne on the wind that blew up the
mountain-side.  But he shook his head and said: "Now forsooth beginneth
the dream which shall last for ever; nowise am I beguiled by it."  None
the less he strove the more eagerly with the wind and the way and his
feebleness; yet did the weakness wax on him, so that it was but a little
while ere he faltered and reeled and fell down once more in a swoon.

When he came to himself again he was no longer alone: a man was kneeling
down by him and holding up his head, while another before him, as he
opened his eyes, put a cup of wine to his lips.  So Hallblithe drank and
was refreshed; and presently they gave him bread, and he ate, and his
heart was strengthened, and the happiness of life returned to it, and he
lay back, and slept sweetly for a season.

When he awoke from that slumber he found that he had gotten back much of
his strength again, and he sat up and looked around him, and saw three
men sitting anigh, armed and girt with swords, yet in evil array, and
sore travel-worn.  One of these was very old, with long white hair
hanging down; and another, though he was not so much stricken in years,
still looked an old man of over sixty winters.  The third was a man some
forty years old, but sad and sorry and drooping of aspect.

So when they saw him stirring, they all fixed their eyes upon him, and
the oldest man said: "Welcome to him who erst had no tidings for us!"  And
the second said: "Tell us now thy tidings."  But the third, the sorry
man, cried out aloud, saying: "Where is the Land?  Where is the Land?"

Said Hallblithe: "Meseemeth the land which ye seek is the land which I
seek to flee from.  And now I will not hide that meseemeth I have seen
you before, and that was at Cleveland by the Sea when the days were
happier."

Then they all three bowed their heads in yea-say, and spake: "'Where is
the Land?  Where is the Land?"

Then Hallblithe arose to his feet, and said: "Ye have healed me of the
sickness of death, and I will do what I may to heal you of your sickness
of sorrow.  Come up the pass with me, and I will show you the land afar
off."

Then they arose like young and brisk men, and he led them over the brow
of the ridge into the little valley wherein he had first come to himself:
there he showed them that glimpse of a green land betwixt the two peaks,
which he had beheld e'en now; and they stood a while looking at it and
weeping for joy.

Then spake the oldest of the seekers: "Show us the way to the land."

"Nay," said Hallblithe, "I may not; for when I would depart thence, I
might not go by mine own will, but was borne out hither, I wot not how.
For when I came to the edge of the land against the will of the King, he
smote me, and then cast me out.  Therefore since I may not help you, find
ye the land for yourselves, and let me go blessing you, and come out of
this desert by the way whereby ye entered it.  For I have an errand in
the world."

Spake the youngest of the seekers: "Now art thou become the yoke-fellow
of Sorrow, and thou must wend, not whither thou wouldst, but whither she
will: and she would have thee go forward toward life, not backward toward
death."

Said the midmost seeker: "If we let thee go further into the wilderness
thou shalt surely die: for hence to the peopled parts, and the City of
Merchants, whence we come, is a month's journey: and there is neither
meat nor drink, nor beast nor bird, nor any green thing all that way; and
since we have found thee famishing, we may well deem that thou hast no
victual.  As to us we have but little; so that if it be much more than
three days' journey to the Glittering Plain, we may well starve and die
within sight of the Acre of the Undying.  Nevertheless that little will
we share with thee if thou wilt help us to find that good land; so that
thou mayst yet put away Sorrow, and take Joy again to thy board and bed."

Hallblithe hung his head and answered nought; for he was confused by the
meshes of ill-hap, and his soul grew sick with the bitterness of death.
But the sad man spake again and said: "Thou hast an errand sayest thou?
is it such as a dead man may do?"

Hallblithe pondered, and amidst the anguish of his despair was borne in
on him a vision of the sea-waves lapping the side of a black ship, and a
man therein: who but himself, set free to do his errand, and his heart
was quickened within him, and he said: "I thank you, and I will wend back
with you, since there is no road for me save back again into the trap."

The three seekers seemed glad thereat, and the second one said: "Though
death is pursuing, and life lieth ahead, yet will we not hasten thee
unduly.  Time was when I was Captain of the Host, and learned how battles
were lost by lack of rest.  Therefore have thy sleep now, that thou mayst
wax in strength for our helping."

Said Hallblithe: "I need not rest; I may not rest; I will not rest."

Said the sad man: "It is lawful for thee to rest.  So say I, who was once
a master of law."

Said the long-hoary elder: "And I command thee to rest; I who was once
the king of a mighty folk."

In sooth Hallblithe was now exceeding weary; so he laid him down and
slept sweetly in the stony wilderness amidst those three seekers, the
old, the sad, and the very old.

When he awoke he felt well and strong again, and he leapt to his feet and
looked about him, and saw the three seekers stirring, and he deemed by
the sun that it was early morning.  The sad man brought forth bread and
water and wine, and they broke their fast; and when they had done he
spake and said: "Abideth now in wallet and bottle but one more full meal
for us, and then no more save a few crumbs and a drop or two of wine if
we husband it well."

Said the second elder: "Get we to the road, then, and make haste.  I have
been seeking, and meseemeth, though the way be long, it is not utterly
blind for us.  Or look thou, Raven-son, is there not a path yonder that
leadeth onward up to the brow of the ghyll again? and as I have seen, it
leadeth on again down from the said brow."

Forsooth there was a track that led through the stony tangle of the
wilderness; so they took to the road with a good heart, and went all day,
and saw no living thing, and not a blade of grass or a trickle of water:
nought save the wan rocks under the sun; and though they trusted in their
road that it led them aright, they saw no other glimpse of the Glittering
Plain, because there rose a great ridge like a wall on the north side,
and they went as it were down along a trench of the rocks, albeit it was
whiles broken across by ghylls, and knolls, and reefs.

So at sunset they rested and ate their victual, for they were very weary;
and thereafter they lay down, and slept as soundly as if they were in the
best of the halls of men.  On the morrow betimes they arose soberly and
went their ways with few words, and, as they deemed, the path still led
them onward.  And now the great ridge on the north rose steeper and
steeper, and their crossing it seemed not to be thought of; but their
half-blind track failed them not.  They rested at even, and ate and drank
what little they had left, save a mouthful or two of wine, and then went
on again by the light of the moon, which was so bright that they still
saw their way.  And it happened to Hallblithe, as mostly it does with men
very travel-worn, that he went on and on scarce remembering where he was,
or who his fellows were, or that he had any fellows.

So at midnight they lay down in the wilderness again, hungry and weary.
They rose at dawn and went forward with waning hope: for now the mountain
ridge on the north was close to their path, rising up along a sheer wall
of pale stone over which nothing might go save the fowl flying; so that
at first on that morning they looked for nothing save to lay their bones
in that grievous desert where no man should find them.

But, as beset with famine, they fared on heavily down the narrow track,
there came a hoarse cry from Hallblithe's dry throat and it was as if his
cry had been answered by another like to his; and the seekers turned and
beheld him pointing to the cliff-side, and lo! half-way up the pale sun-
litten crag stood two ravens in a cranny of the stone, flapping their
wings and croaking, with thrusting forth and twisting of their heads; and
presently they came floating on the thin pure air high up over the heads
of the wayfarers, croaking for the pleasure of the meeting, as though
they laughed thereat.

Then rose the heart of Hallblithe, and he smote his palms together, and
fell to singing an old song of his people, amidst the rocks whereas few
men had sung aforetime.

   Whence are ye and whither, O fowl of our fathers?
   What field have ye looked on, what acres unshorn?
   What land have ye left where the battle-folk gathers,
   And the war-helms are white o'er the paths of the corn?

   What tale do ye bear of the people uncraven,
   Where amidst the long hall-shadow sparkle the spears;
   Where aloft on the hall-ridge now flappeth the raven,
   And singeth the song of the nourishing years?

   There gather the lads in the first of the morning,
   While white lies the battle-day's dew on the grass,
   And the kind steeds trot up to the horn's voice of warning,
   And the winds wake and whine in the dusk of the pass.

   O fowl of our fathers, why now are ye resting?
   Come over the mountains and look on the foe.
   Full fair after fight won shall yet be your nesting;
   And your fledglings the sons of the kindred shall know.

Therewith he strode with his head upraised, and above him flew the
ravens, croaking as if they answered his song in friendly fashion.

It was but a little after this that the path turned aside sharp toward
the cliffs, and the seekers were abashed thereof, till Hallblithe running
forward beheld a great cavern in the face of the cliff at the path's
ending: so he turned and cried on his fellows, and they hastened up, and
presently stood before that cavern's mouth with doubt and joy mingled in
their minds; for now, mayhappen, they had reached the gate of the
Glittering Plain, or mayhappen the gate of death.

The sad man hung his head and spake: "Doth not some new trap abide us?
What do we here? is this aught save death?"

Spake the Elder of Elders: "Was not death on either hand e'en now, even
as treason besetteth the king upon his throne?"

And the second said: "Yea, we were as the host which hath no road save
through the multitude of foe-men."

But Hallblithe laughed and said: "Why do ye hang back, then?  As for me,
if death be here, soon is mine errand sped."  Therewith he led the way
into the dark of the cave, and the ravens hung about the crag overhead
croaking, as the men left the light.

So was their way swallowed up in the cavern, and day and its time became
nought to them; they went on and on, and became exceeding faint and
weary, but rested not, for death was behind them.  Whiles they deemed
they heard waters running, and whiles the singing of fowl; and to
Hallblithe it seemed that he heard his name called, so that he shouted
back in answer; but all was still when the sound of his voice had died
out.

At last, when they were pressing on again after a short while of resting,
Hallblithe cried out that the cave was lightening: so they hastened
onward, and the light grew till they could dimly see each other, and
dimly they beheld the cave that it was both wide and high.  Yet a little
further, and their faces showed white to one another, and they could see
the crannies of the rocks, and the bats hanging garlanded from the roof.
So then they came to where the day streamed down bright on them from a
break overhead, and lo! the sky and green leaves waving against it.

To those way-worn men it seemed hard to clamber out that way, and
especially to the elders: so they went on a little further to see if
there were aught better abiding them, but when they found the daylight
failing them again, they turned back to the place of the break in the
roof, lest they should waste their strength and perish in the bowels of
the mountain.  So with much ado they hove up Hallblithe till he got him
first on to a ledge of the rocky wall, and so, what by strength, what by
cunning, into the daylight through the rent in the roof.  So when he was
without he made a rope of his girdle and strips from his raiment, for he
was ever a deft craftsman, and made a shift to heave up therewith the sad
man, who was light and lithe of body; and then the two together dealt
with the elders one after another, till they were all four on the face of
the earth again.

The place whereto they had gotten was the side of a huge mountain, stony
and steep, but set about with bushes, which seemed full fair to those
wanderers amongst the rocks.  This mountain-slope went down towards a
fair green plain, which Hallblithe made no doubt was the outlying waste
of the Glittering Plain: nay, he deemed that he could see afar off
thereon the white walls of the Uttermost House.  So much he told the
seekers in few words; and then while they grovelled on the earth and wept
for pure joy, whereas the sun was down and it was beginning to grow dusk,
he went and looked around soberly to see if he might find water and any
kind of victual; and presently a little down the hillside he came upon a
place where a spring came gushing up out of the earth and ran down toward
the plain; and about it was green grass growing plentifully, and a little
thicket of bramble and wilding fruit-trees.  So he drank of the water,
and plucked him a few wilding apples somewhat better than crabs, and then
went up the hill again and fetched the seekers to that mountain hostelry;
and while they drank of the stream he plucked them apples and bramble-
berries.  For indeed they were as men out of their wits, and were dazed
by the extremity of their jog, and as men long shut up in prison, to whom
the world of men-folk hath become strange.  Simple as the victual was,
they were somewhat strengthened by it and by the plentiful water, and as
night was now upon them, it was of no avail for them to go further: so
they slept beneath the boughs of the thorn-bushes.




CHAPTER XVIII: HALLBLITHE DWELLETH IN THE WOOD ALONE


But on the morrow they arose betimes, and broke their fast on that
woodland victual, and then went speedily down the mountain-side; and
Hallblithe saw by the clear morning light that it was indeed the
Uttermost House which he had seen across the green waste.  So he told the
seekers; but they were silent and heeded nought, because of a fear that
had come upon them, lest they should die before they came into that good
land.  At the foot of the mountain they came upon a river, deep but not
wide, with low grassy banks, and Hallblithe, who was an exceeding strong
swimmer, helped the seekers over without much ado; and there they stood
upon the grass of that goodly waste.

Hallblithe looked on them to note if any change should come over them,
and he deemed that already they were become stronger and of more avail.
But he spake nought thereof, and strode on toward the Uttermost House,
even as that other day he had stridden away from it.

Such diligence they made, that it was but little after noon when they
came to the door thereof.  Then Hallblithe took the horn and blew upon
it, while his fellows stood by murmuring, "It is the Land!  It is the
Land!"

So came the Warden to the door, clad in red scarlet, and the elder went
up to him and said: "Is this the Land?"

"What land?" said the Warden.

"Is it the Glittering Plain?" said the second of the seekers.

"Yea, forsooth," said the Warden.  Said the sad man: "Will ye lead us to
the King?

"Ye shall come to the King," said the Warden.

"When, oh when?" cried they out all three.

"The morrow of to-morrow, maybe," said the Warden.

"Oh! if to-morrow were but come!" they cried.

"It will come," said the red man; "enter ye the house, and eat and drink
and rest you."

So they entered, and the Warden heeded Hallblithe nothing.  They ate and
drank and then went to their rest, and Hallblithe lay in a shut-bed off
from the hall, but the Warden brought the seekers otherwhere, so that
Hallblithe saw them not after he had gone to bed; but as for him he slept
and forgot that aught was.

In the morning when he awoke he felt very strong and well-liking; and he
beheld his limbs that they were clear of skin and sleek and fair; and he
heard one hard by in the hall carolling and singing joyously.  So he
sprang from his bed with the wonder of sleep yet in him, and drew the
curtains of the shut-bed and looked forth into the hall; and lo on the
high-seat a man of thirty winters by seeming, tall, fair of fashion, with
golden hair and eyes as grey as glass, proud and noble of aspect; and
anigh him sat another man of like age to look on, a man strong and burly,
with short curling brown hair and a red beard, and ruddy countenance, and
the mien of a warrior.  Also, up and down the hall, paced a man younger
of aspect than these two, tall and slender, black-haired and dark-eyed,
amorous of countenance; he it was who was singing a snatch of song as he
went lightly on the hall pavement: a snatch like to this

   Fair is the world, now autumn's wearing,
   And the sluggard sun lies long abed;
   Sweet are the days, now winter's nearing,
   And all winds feign that the wind is dead.

   Dumb is the hedge where the crabs hang yellow,
   Bright as the blossoms of the spring;
   Dumb is the close where the pears grow mellow,
   And none but the dauntless redbreasts sing.

   Fair was the spring, but amidst his greening
   Grey were the days of the hidden sun;
   Fair was the summer, but overweening,
   So soon his o'er-sweet days were done.

   Come then, love, for peace is upon us,
   Far off is failing, and far is fear,
   Here where the rest in the end hath won us,
   In the garnering tide of the happy year.

   Come from the grey old house by the water,
   Where, far from the lips of the hungry sea,
   Green groweth the grass o'er the field of the slaughter,
   And all is a tale for thee and me.

So Hallblithe did on his raiment and went into the hall; and when those
three saw him they smiled upon him kindly and greeted him; and the noble
man at the board said: "Thanks have thou, O Warrior of the Raven, for thy
help in our need: thy reward from us shall not be lacking."

Then the brown-haired man came up to him, and clapped him on the back and
said to him: "Brisk man of the Raven, good is thy help at need; even so
shall be mine to thee henceforward."

But the young man stepped up to him lightly, and cast his arms about him,
and kissed him, and said: "O friend and fellow, who knoweth but I may one
day help thee as thou hast holpen me? though thou art one who by seeming
mayst well help thyself.  And now mayst thou be as merry as I am to-day!"

Then they all three cried out joyously: "It is the Land!  It is the
Land!"

So Hallblithe knew that these men were the two elders and the sad man of
yesterday, and that they had renewed their youth.

Joyously now did those men break their fast: nor did Hallblithe make any
grim countenance, for he thought: "That which these dotards and
drivellers have been mighty enough to find, shall I not be mighty enough
to flee from?"  Breakfast done, the seekers made little delay, so eager
as they were to behold the King, and to have handsel of their new sweet
life.  So they got them ready to depart, and the once-captain said: "Art
thou able to lead us to the King, O Raven-son, or must we seek another
man to do so much for us?"

Said Hallblithe: "I am able to lead you so nigh unto Wood-end (where, as
I deem, the King abideth) that ye shall not miss him."

Therewith they went to the door, and the Warden unlocked to them, and
spake no word to them when they departed, though they thanked him kindly
for the guesting.

When they were without the garth, the young man fell to running about the
meadow plucking great handfuls of the rich flowers that grew about,
singing and carolling the while.  But he who had been king looked up and
down and round about, and said at last: "Where be the horses and the
men?"

But his fellow with the red beard said: "Raven-son, in this land when
they journey, what do they as to riding or going afoot?"

Said Hallblithe: "Fair fellows, ye shall wot that in this land folk go
afoot for the most part, both men and women; whereas they weary but
little, and are in no haste."

Then the once-captain clapped the once-king on the shoulder, and said:
"Hearken, lord, and delay no longer, but gird up thy gown, since here is
no mare's son to help thee: for fair is to-day that lies before us, with
many a new fair day beyond it."

So Hallblithe led the way inward, thinking of many things, yet but little
of his fellows.  Albeit they, and the younger man especially, were of
many words; for this black-haired man had many questions to ask, chiefly
concerning the women, what they were like to look on, and of what mood
they were.  Hallblithe answered thereto as long as he might, but at last
he laughed and said: "Friend, forbear thy questions now; for meseemeth in
a few hours thou shalt be as wise hereon as is the God of Love himself."

So they made diligence along the road, and all was tidingless till on the
second day at even they came to the first house off the waste.  There had
they good welcome, and slept.  But on the morrow when they arose,
Hallblithe spake to the Seekers, and said: "Now are things much changed
betwixt us since the time when we first met: for then I had all my
desire, as I thought, and ye had but one desire, and well nigh lacked
hope of its fulfilment.  Whereas now the lack hath left you and come to
me.  Wherefore even as time agone ye might not abide even one night at
the House of the Raven, so hard as your desire lay on you; even so it
fareth with me to-day, that I am consumed with my desire, and I may not
abide with you; lest that befall which befalleth betwixt the full man and
the fasting.  Wherefore now I bless you and depart."

They abounded in words of good-will to him, and the once-king said:
"Abide with us, and we shall see to it that thou have all the dignities
that a man may think of."

And the once-captain said: "Lo, here is mine hand that hath been mighty;
never shalt thou lack it for the accomplishment of thine uttermost
desire.  Abide with us."

Lastly said the young man: "Abide with us, Son of the Raven!  Set thine
heart on a fair woman, yea even were it the fairest; and I will get her
for thee, even were my desire set on her."

But he smiled on them, and shook his head, and said: "All hail to you!
but mine errand is yet undone."  And therewith he departed.

He skirted Wood-end and came not to it, but got him down to the side of
the sea, not far from where he first came aland, but somewhat south of
it.  A fair oak-wood came down close to the beach of the sea; it was some
four miles end-long and over-thwart.  Thither Hallblithe betook him, and
in a day or two got him wood-wright's tools from a house of men a little
outside the wood, three miles from the sea-shore.  Then he set to work
and built him a little frame-house on a lawn of the wood beside a clear
stream; for he was a very deft wood-wright.  Withal he made him a bow and
arrows, and shot what he would of the fowl and the deer for his
livelihood; and folk from that house and otherwhence came to see him, and
brought him bread and wine and spicery and other matters which he needed.
And the days wore, and men got used to him, and loved him as if he had
been a rare image which had been brought to that land for its adornment;
and now they no longer called him the Spearman, but the Wood-lover.  And
as for him, he took all in patience, abiding what the lapse of days
should bring forth.




CHAPTER XIX: HALLBLITHE BUILDS HIM A SKIFF


After Hallblithe had been housed a little while, and the time was again
drawing nigh to the twelfth moon since he had come to the Glittering
Plain, he went in the wood one day; and, pondering many things without
fixing on any one, he stood before a very great oak-tree and looked at
the tall straight bole thereof, and there came into his head the words of
an old song which was written round a scroll of the carving over the shut-
bed, wherein he was wont to lie when he was at home in the House of the
Raven: and thus it said:

   I am the oak-tree, and forsooth
   Men deal by me with little ruth;
   My boughs they shred, my life they slay,
   And speed me o'er the watery way.

He looked up into that leafy world for a little and then turned back
toward his house; but all day long, whether he were at work or at rest,
that posy ran in his head, and he kept on saying it over, aloud or not
aloud, till the day was done and he went to sleep.

Then in his sleep he dreamed that an exceeding fair woman stood by his
bedside, and at first she seemed to him to be an image of the Hostage.
But presently her face changed, and her body and her raiment; and, lo! it
was the lovely woman, the King's daughter whom he had seen wasting her
heart for the love of him.  Then even in his dream shame thereof overtook
him, and because of that shame he awoke, and lay awake a little,
hearkening the wind going through the woodland boughs, and the singing of
the owl who had her dwelling in the hollow oak nigh to his house.  Slumber
overcame him in a little while, and again the image of the King's
daughter came to him in his dream, and again when he looked upon her,
shame and pity rose so hotly in his heart that he awoke weeping, and lay
a while hearkening to the noises of the night.  The third time he slept
and dreamed; and once more that image came to him.  And now he looked,
and saw that she had in her hand a book covered outside with gold and
gems, even as he saw it in the orchard-close aforetime: and he beheld her
face that it was no longer the face of one sick with sorrow; but glad and
clear, and most beauteous.

Now she opened the book and held it before Hallblithe and turned the
leaves so that he might see them clearly; and therein were woods and
castles painted, and burning mountains, and the wall of the world, and
kings upon their thrones, and fair women and warriors, all most lovely to
behold, even as he had seen it aforetime in the orchard when he lay
lurking amidst the leaves of the bay-tree.

So at last she came to the place in the book wherein was painted
Hallblithe's own image over against the image of the Hostage; and he
looked thereon and longed.  But she turned the leaf, and, lo! on one side
the Hostage again, standing in a fair garden of the spring with the
lilies all about her feet, and behind her the walls of a house, grey,
ancient, and lovely: and on the other leaf over against her was painted a
sea rippled by a little wind and a boat thereon sailing swiftly, and one
man alone in the boat sitting and steering with a cheerful countenance;
and he, who but Hallblithe himself.  Hallblithe looked thereon for a
while and then the King's daughter shut the book, and the dream flowed
into other imaginings of no import.

In the grey dawn Hallblithe awoke, and called to mind his dream, and he
leapt from his bed and washed the night from off him in the stream, and
clad himself and went the shortest way through the wood to that House of
folk aforesaid: and as he went his face was bright and he sang the second
part of the carven posy; to wit:

   Along the grass I lie forlorn
   That when a while of time is worn,
   I may be filled with war and peace
   And bridge the sundering of the seas.

He came out of the wood and hastened over the flowery meads of the
Glittering Plain, and came to that same house when it was yet very early.
At the door he came across a damsel bearing water from the well, and she
spake to him and said: "Welcome, Wood-lover!  Seldom art thou seen in our
garth; and that is a pity of thee.  And now I look on thy face I see that
gladness hath come into thine heart, and that thou art most fair and
lovely.  Here then is a token for thee of the increase of gladness."
Therewith she set her buckets on the earth, and stood before him, and
took him by the ears, and drew down his face to hers and kissed him
sweetly.  He smiled on her and said: "I thank thee, sister, for the kiss
and the greeting; but I come here having a lack."

"Tell us," she said, "that we may do thee a pleasure."

He said: "I would ask the folk to give me timber, both beams and battens
and boards; for if I hew in the wood it will take long to season."

"All this is free for thee to take from our wood-store when thou hast
broken thy fast with us," said the damsel.  "Come thou in and rest thee."

She took him by the hand and they went in together, and she gave him to
eat and drink, and went up and down the house, saying to every one: "Here
is come the Wood-lover, and he is glad again; come and see him."

So the folk gathered about him, and made much of him.  And when they had
made an end of breakfast, the head man of the House said to him: "The
beasts are in the wain, and the timber abideth thy choosing; come and
see."

So he brought Hallblithe to the timber-bower, where he chose for himself
all that he needed of oak-timber of the best; and they loaded the wain
therewith, and gave him what he would moreover of nails and treenails and
other matters; and he thanked them; and they said to him: "Whither now
shall we lead thy timber?"

"Down to the sea-side," quoth he, "nighest to my dwelling."

So did they, and more than a score, men and women, went with him, some in
the wain, and some afoot.  Thus they came down to the sea-shore, and laid
the timber on the strand just above high-water mark; and straightway
Hallblithe fell to work shaping him a boat, for well he knew the whole
craft thereof; and the folk looked on wondering, till the tide had ebbed
the little it was wont to ebb, and left the moist sand firm and smooth;
then the women left watching Hallblithe's work, and fell to paddling
barefoot in the clear water, for there was scarce a ripple on the sea;
and the carles came and played with them so that Hallblithe was left
alone a while; for this kind of play was new to that folk, since they
seldom came down to the sea-side.  Thereafter they needs must dance
together, and would have had Hallblithe dance with them; and when he
naysaid them because he was fain of his work, in all playfulness they
fell to taking the adze out of his hand, whereat he became somewhat
wroth, and they were afraid and went and had their dance out without him.

By this time the sun was grown very hot, and they came to him again, and
lay down about him and watched his work, for they were weary.  And one of
the women, still panting with the dance, spake as she looked on the
loveliness of her limbs, which one of the swains was caressing:
"Brother," said she, "great strokes thou smitest; when wilt thou have
smitten the last of them, and come to our house again?"

"Not for many days, fair sister," said he, without looking up.

"Alas that thou shouldst talk so," said a carle, rising up from the warm
sand; "what shall all thy toil win thee?"

Spake Hallblithe: "Maybe a merry heart, or maybe death."

At that word they all rose up together, and stood huddled together like
sheep that have been driven to the croft-gate, and the shepherd hath left
them for a little and they know not whither to go.  Little by little they
got them to the wain and harnessed their beasts thereto, and departed
silently by the way that they had come; but in a little time Hallblithe
heard their laughter and merry speech across the flowery meadows.  He
heeded their departure little, but went on working, and worked the sun
down, and on till the stars began to twinkle.  Then he went home to his
house in the wood, and slept and dreamed not, and began again on the
morrow with a good heart.

To be short, no day passed that he wrought not his full tale of work, and
the days wore, and his ship-wright's work throve.  Often the folk of that
house, and from otherwhere round about, came down to the strand to watch
him working.  Nowise did they wilfully hinder him, but whiles when they
could get no talk from him, they would speak of him to each other,
wondering that he should so toil to sail upon the sea; for they loved the
sea but little, and it soon became clear to them that he was looking to
nought else: though it may not be said that they deemed he would leave
the land for ever.  On the other hand, if they hindered him not, neither
did they help, saving when he prayed them for somewhat which he needed,
which they would then give him blithely.

Of the Sea-eagle and his damsel, Hallblithe saw nought; whereat he was
well content, for he deemed it of no avail to make a second sundering of
it.

So he worked and kept his heart up, and at last all was ready; he had
made him a mast and a sail, and oars, and whatso-other gear there was
need of.  So then he thrust his skiff into the sea on an evening whenas
there were but two carles standing by; for there would often be a score
or two of folk.  These two smiled on him and bespake him kindly, but
would not help him when he bade them set shoulder to her bows and shove.
Albeit he got the skiff into the water without much ado, and got into
her, and brought her to where a stream running from out of his wood made
a little haven for her up from the sea.  There he tied her to a
tree-hole, and busied himself that even with getting the gear into her,
and victual and water withal, as much as he deemed he should need: and
so, being weary, he went to his house to sleep, thinking that he should
awake in the grey of the morning and thrust out into the deep sea.  And
he was the more content to abide, because on that eve, as oftenest betid,
the wind blew landward from the sea, whereas in the morning it oftenest
blew seaward from the land.  In any case he thought to be astir so timely
that he should come alone to his keel, and depart with no leave-takings.
But, as it fell out, he overslept himself, so that when he came out into
the wood clad in all his armour, with his sword girt to his side, and his
spear over his shoulder, he heard the voices of folk, and presently found
so many gathered about his boat that he had some ado to get aboard.

The folk had brought many gifts for him of such things as they deemed he
might need for a short voyage, as fruit and wine, and woollen cloths to
keep the cold night from him; he thanked them kindly as he stepped over
the gunwale, and some of the women kissed him: and one said (she it was,
who had met him at the stead that morning when he went to fetch timber):
"Thou wilt be back this even, wilt thou not, brother?  It is yet but
early, and thou shalt have time enough to take all thy pleasure on the
sea, and then come back to us to eat thy meat in our house at nightfall."

She spake, knitting her brows in longing for his return; but he knew that
all those deemed he would come back again soon; else had they deemed him
a rebel of the King, and might, as he thought, have stayed him.  So he
changed not countenance in any wise, but said only: "farewell, sister,
for this day, and farewell to all you till I come back."

Therewith he unmoored his boat, and sat down and took the oars, and rowed
till he was out of the little haven, and on the green sea, and the keel
rose and fell on the waves.  Then he stepped the mast and hoisted sail,
and sheeted home, for the morning wind was blowing gently from the
mountains over the meadows of the Glittering Plain, so the sail filled,
and the keel leapt forward and sped over the face of the cold sea.  And
it is to be said that whether he wotted or not, it was the very day
twelve months since he had come to that shore along with the Sea-eagle.
So that folk stood and watched the skiff growing less and less upon the
deep till they could scarce see her.  Then they turned about and went
into the wood to disport them, for the sun was growing hot.  Nevertheless,
there were some of them (and that damsel was one), who came back to the
sea-shore from time to time all day long; and even when the sun was down
they looked seaward under the rising moon, expecting to see Hallblithe's
bark come into the shining path which she drew across the waters round
about the Glittering Land.




CHAPTER XX: SO NOW SAILETH HALLBLITHE AWAY FROM THE GLITTERING PLAIN


But as to Hallblithe, he soon lost sight of the Glittering Plain and the
mountains thereof, and there was nought but sea all round about him, and
his heart swelled with joy as he sniffed the brine and watched the
gleaming hills and valleys of the restless deep; and he said to himself
that he was going home to his Kindred and the Roof of his Fathers of old
time.

He stood as near due north as he might; but as the day wore, the wind
headed him, and he deemed it not well to beat, lest he should make his
voyage overlong; so he ran on with the wind abeam, and his little craft
leapt merrily over the sea-hills under the freshening breeze.  The sun
set and the moon and stars shone out, and he still sailed on, and durst
not sleep, save as a dog does, with one eye.  At last came dawn, and as
the light grew it was a fair day with a falling wind, and a bright sky,
but it clouded over before sunset, and the wind freshened from the north
by east, and, would he, would he not, Hallblithe must run before it night-
long, till at sunrise it fell again, and all day was too light for him to
make much way beating to northward; nor did it freshen till after the
moon was risen some while after sunset.  And now he was so weary that he
must needs sleep; so he lashed the helm, and took a reef in the sail, and
ran before the wind, he sleeping in the stern.

But past the middle of the night, towards the dawning, he awoke with the
sound of a great shout in his ears.  So he looked over the dark waters,
and saw nought, for the night was cloudy again.  Then he trimmed his
craft, and went to sleep again, for he was over-burdened with slumber.

When he awoke it was broad daylight; so he looked to the tiller and got
the boat's head a little up to the wind, and then gazed about him with
the sleep still in his eyes.  And as his eyes took in the picture before
him he could not refrain a cry; for lo! there arose up great and grim
right ahead the black cliffs of the Isle of Ransom.  Straightway he got
to the sheet, and strove to wear the boat; but for all that he could do
she drifted toward the land, for she was gotten into a strong current of
the sea that set shoreward.  So he struck sail, and took the oars and
rowed mightily so that he might bear her off shore; but it availed
nothing, and still he drifted landward.  So he stood up from the oars,
and turned about and looked, and saw that he was but some three furlongs
from the shore, and that he was come to the very haven-mouth whence he
had set sail with the Sea-eagle a twelvemonth ago: and he knew that into
that haven he needs must get him, or be dashed to pieces against the high
cliffs of the land: and he saw how the waves ran on to the cliffs, and
whiles one higher than the others smote the rock-wall and ran up it, as
if it could climb over on to the grassy lip beyond, and then fell back
again, leaving a river of brine running down the steep.

Then he said that he would take what might befall him inside the haven.
So he hoisted sail again, and took the tiller, and steered right for the
midmost of the gate between the rocks, wondering what should await him
there.  Then it was but a few minutes ere his bark shot into the
smoothness of the haven, and presently began to lose way; for all the
wind was dead within that land-locked water.  Hallblithe looked steadily
round about seeking his foe; but the haven was empty of ship or boat; so
he ran his eye along the shore to see where he should best lay his keel
and as aforesaid there was no beach there, and the water was deep right
up to the grassy lip of the land; though the tides ran somewhat high, and
at low water would a little steep undercliff go up from the face of the
sea.  But now it was near the top of the tide, and there was scarce two
feet betwixt the grass and the dark-green sea.

Now Hallblithe steered toward an ingle of the haven; and beyond it, a
little way off, rose a reef of rocks out of the green grass, and thereby
was a flock of sheep feeding, and a big man lying down amongst them, who
seemed to be unarmed, as Hallblithe could not see any glint of steel
about him.  Hallblithe drew nigh the shore, and the big man stirred not;
nor did he any the more when the keel ran along the shore, and Hallblithe
leapt out and moored his craft to his spear stuck deep in the earth.  And
now Hallblithe deems that the man must be either dead or asleep: so he
drew his sword and had it in his right hand, and in his left a sharp
knife, and went straight up to the man betwixt the sheep, and found him
so lying on his side that he could not see his face; so he stirred him
with his foot, and cried out: "Awake, O Shepherd! for dawn is long past
and day is come, and therewithal a guest for thee!"

The man turned over and slowly sat up, and, lo! who should it be but the
Puny Fox?  Hallblithe started back at the sight of him, and cried out at
him, and said: "Have I found thee, O mine enemy?"

The Puny Fox sat up a little straighter, and rubbed his eyes and said:
"Yea, thou hast found me sure enough.  But as to my being thine enemy, a
word or two may be said about that presently."

"What!" said Hallblithe, "dost thou deem that aught save my sword will
speak to thee?"

"I wot not," said the Puny Fox, slowly rising to his feet, "but I suppose
thou wilt not slay me unarmed, and thou seest that I have no weapons."

"Get thee weapons, then," quoth Hallblithe, "and delay not; for the sight
of thee alive sickens me."

"Ill is that," said the Puny Fox, "but come thou with me at once, where I
shall find both the weapons and a good fighting-stead.  Hasten! time
presseth, now thou art come at last."

"And my boat?" said Hallblithe.

"Wilt thou carry her in thy pouch?" said the Puny Fox; "thou wilt not
need her again, whether thou slay me, or I thee."

Hallblithe knit his brows on him in his wrath; for he deemed that Fox's
meaning was to threaten him with the vengeance of the kindred.  Howbeit,
he said nought; for he deemed it ill to wrangle in words with one whom he
was presently to meet in battle; so he followed as the Puny Fox led.  Fox
brought him past the reef of rock aforesaid, and up a narrow cleft of the
cliffs overlooking the sea, whereby they came into a little grass-grown
meadow well nigh round in shape, as smooth and level as a hall-floor, and
fenced about by a wall of rock: a place which had once been the mouth of
an earth-fire, and a cauldron of molten stone.

When they stood on the smooth grass Fox said: "Hold thee there a little,
while I go to my weapon-chest, and then shall we see what is to be done."

Therewith he turned aside to a cranny of the rock, and going down on his
hands and knees, fell to creeping like a worm up a hole therein, which
belike led to a cavern; for after his voice had come forth from the
earth, grunting and groaning, and cursing this thing, and that, out he
comes again feet first, and casts down an old rusty sword without a
sheath; a helm no less rusty, and battered withal, and a round target,
curled up and outworn as if it would fall to pieces of itself.  Then he
stands up and stretches himself, and smiles pleasantly on Hallblithe and
says: "Now, mine enemy, when I have donned helm and shield and got my
sword in hand, we may begin the play: as to a hauberk I must needs go
lack; for I could not come by it; I think the old man must have chaffered
it away: he was ever too money-fain."

But Hallblithe looked on him angrily and said: "Hast thou brought me
hither to mock me?  Hast thou no better weapons wherewith to meet a
warrior of the Raven than these rusty shards, which look as if thou hadst
robbed a grave of the dead?  I will not fight thee so armed."

"Well," said the Puny Fox, "and from out of a grave come they verily: for
in that little hole lieth my father's grandsire, the great Sea-mew of the
Ravagers, the father of that Sea-eagle whom thou knowest.  But since thou
thinkest scorn of these weapons of a dead warrior, in go the old carle's
treasures again!  It is as well maybe; since he might be wrath beyond his
wont if he were to wake and miss them; and already this cold cup of the
once-boiling rock is not wholly safe because of him."

So he crept into the hole once more, and out of it presently, and stood
smiting his palms one against the other to dust them, like a man who has
been handling parchments long laid by; and Hallblithe stood looking at
him, still wrathful, but silent.

Then said the Puny Fox: "This at least was a wise word of thine, that
thou wouldst not fight me.  For the end of fighting is slaying; and it is
stark folly to fight without slaying; and now I see that thou desirest
not to slay me: for if thou didst, why didst thou refuse to fall on me
armed with the ghosts of weapons that I borrowed from a ghost?  Nay, why
didst thou not slay me as I crept out of yonder hole?  Thou wouldst have
had a cheap bargain of me either way.  It would be rank folly to fight
me."

Said Hallblithe hoarsely: "Why didst thou bewray me, and lie to me, and
lure me away from the quest of my beloved, and waste a whole year of my
life?"

"It is a long story," said the Puny Fox, "which I may tell thee some day.
Meantime I may tell thee this, that I was compelled thereto by one far
mightier than I, to wit the Undying King."

At that word the smouldering wrath blazed up in Hallblithe, and he drew
his sword hastily and hewed at the Puny Fox: but he leapt aside nimbly
and ran in on Hallblithe, and caught his sword-arm by the wrist, and tore
the weapon out of his hand, and overbore him by sheer weight and stature,
and drave him to the earth.  Then he rose up, and let Hallblithe rise
also, and took his sword and gave it into his hand again and said: "Crag-
nester, thou art wrathful, but little.  Now thou hast thy sword again and
mayst slay me if thou wilt.  Yet not until I have spoken a word to thee:
so hearken! or else by the Treasure of the Sea I will slay thee with my
bare hands.  For I am strong indeed in this place with my old kinsman
beside me.  Wilt thou hearken?"

"Speak," said Hallblithe, "I hearken."

Said the Puny Fox: "True it is that I lured thee away from thy quest, and
wore away a year of thy life.  Yet true it is also that I repent me
thereof, and ask thy pardon.  What sayest thou?"

Hallblithe spake not, but the heat died out of his face and he was become
somewhat pale.  Said the Puny Fox: "Dost thou not remember, O Raven, how
thou badest me battle last year on the sea-shore by the side of the
Rollers of the Raven? and how this was to be the prize of battle, that
the vanquished should serve the vanquisher year-long, and do all his
will?  And now this prize and more thou hast won without battle; for I
swear by the Treasure of the Sea, and by the bones of the great Sea-mew
yonder, that I will serve thee not year-long but life-long, and that I
will help thee in thy quest for thy beloved.  What sayest thou?"

Hallblithe stood speechless a moment, looking past the Puny Fox, rather
than at him.  Then the sword tumbled out of his hand on to the grass, and
great tears rolled down his cheeks and fell on to his raiment, and he
reached out his hand to the Puny Fox and said: "O friend, wilt thou not
bring me to her? for the days wear, and the trees are growing old round
about the Acres of the Raven."

Then the Puny Fox took his hand; and laughed merrily in his face, and
said: "Great is thine heart, O Carrion-biter!  But now that thou art my
friend I will tell thee that I have a deeming of the whereabouts of thy
beloved.  Or where deemest thou was the garden wherein thou sawest her
standing on the page of the book in that dream of the night?  So it is, O
Raven-son, that it is not for nothing that my grandsire's father lieth in
yonder hole of the rocks; for of late he hath made me wise in mighty
lore.  Thanks have thou, O kinsman!"  And he turned him toward the rock
wherein was the grave.

But Hallblithe said: "What is to do now?  Am I not in a land of foemen?"

"Yea, forsooth," said the Puny Fox, "and even if thou knewest where thy
love is, thou shouldst hardly escape from this isle unslain, save for
me."

Said Hallblithe: "Is there not my bark, that I might depart at once? for
I deem not that the Hostage is on the Isle of Ransom."

The Puny Fox laughed boisterously and said: "Nay, she is not.  But as to
thy boat, there is so strong a set of the flood-tide toward this end of
the isle, that with the wind blowing as now, from the north-north-east,
thou mayst not get off the shore for four hours at least, and I misdoubt
me that within that time we shall have tidings of a ship of ours coming
into the haven.  Thy bark they shall take, and thee also if thou art
therein; and then soon were the story told, for they know thee for a
rebel of the Undying King.  Hearken!  Dost thou not hear the horn's
voice?  Come up hither and we shall see what is towards."

So saying, he led hastily up a kind of stair in the rock-wall, until they
reached a cranny, whence through a hole in the cliff, they could see all
over the haven.  And lo! as they looked, in the very gate and entry of it
came a great ship heaving up her bows on the last swell of the outer sea
(where the wind had risen somewhat), and rolling into the smooth, land-
locked water.  Black was her sail, and the image of the Sea-eagle
enwrought thereon spread wide over it; and the banner of the Flaming
Sword streamed out from the stern.  Many men all-weaponed were on the
decks, and the minstrels high up on the poop were blowing a merry song of
return on their battle-horns.

"Lo, you," said the Puny Fox, "thy luck or mine hath served thee this
time, in that the Flaming Sword did not overhaul thee ere thou madest the
haven.  We are well here at least."

Said Hallblithe: "But may not some of them come up hither perchance?"

"Nay, nay," said the Puny Fox; "they fear the old man in the cleft
yonder; for he is not over guest-fain.  This mead is mine own, as for
other living men; it is my unroofed house, and I have here a house with a
roof also, which I will show thee presently.  For now since the Flaming
Sword hath come, there is no need for haste; nay, we cannot depart till
they have gone up-country.  So I will show thee presently what we shall
do to-night."

So there they sat and watched those men bring their ship to the shore and
moor her hard by Hallblithe's boat.  They cried out when they saw her,
and when they were aland they gathered about her to note her build, and
the fashion of the spear whereto she was tied.  Then in a while the more
part of them, some fourscore in number, departed up the valley toward the
great house and left none but a half dozen ship-warders behind.

"Seest thou, friend of the Ravens," said the Fox, "hadst thou been there,
they might have done with thee what they would.  Did I not well to bring
thee into my unroofed house?"

"Yea, verily," said Hallblithe; "but will not some of the ship-wards, or
some of the others returning, come up hither and find us?  I shall yet
lay my bones in this evil island."

The Puny Fox laughed, and said: "It is not so bad as thy sour looks would
have it; anyhow it is good enough for a grave, and at this present I may
call it a casket of precious things."

"What meanest thou?" said Hallblithe eagerly.

"Nay, nay," said the other, "nought but what thou knowest.  Art thou not
therein, and I myself? without reckoning the old carle in the hole
yonder.  But I promise thee thou shalt not die here this time, unless
thou wilt.  And as to folk coming up hither, I tell thee again they durst
not; because they fear my great-grandsire over much.  Not that they are
far wrong therein; for now he is dead, the worst of him seemeth to come
out of him, and he is not easily dealt with, save by one who hath some
share of his wisdom.  Thou thyself couldst see by my kinsman, the Sea-
eagle, how much of ill blood and churlish malice there may be in our
kindred when they wax old, and loneliness and dreariness taketh hold of
them.  For I must tell thee that I have oft heard my father say that his
father the Sea-eagle was in his youth and his prime blithe and buxom, a
great lover of women, and a very friendly fellow.  But ever, as I say, as
the men of our kind wax in years, they worsen; and thereby mayst thou
deem how bad the old man in yonder must be, since he hath lain so long in
the grave.  But now we will go to that house of mine on the other side of
the mead, over against my kinsman's."

Therewith he led Hallblithe down from the rock while Hallblithe said to
him: "What! art thou also dead that thou hast a grave here?"

"Nay, nay," said Fox, smiling, "am I so evil-conditioned then?  I am no
older than thou art."

"But tell me," said Hallblithe, "wilt thou also wax evil as thou growest
old?"

"Maybe not," said Fox, looking hard at him, "for in my mind it is that I
may be taken into another house, and another kindred, and amongst them I
shall be healed of much that might turn to ill."

Therewith were they come across the little meadow to a place where was a
cave in the rock closed with a door, and a wicket window therein.  Fox
led Hallblithe into it, and within it was no ill dwelling; for it was dry
and clean, and there were stools therein and a table, and shelves and
lockers in the wall.  When they had sat them down Fox said: "Here
mightest thou dwell safely as long as thou wouldst, if thou wouldst risk
dealings with the old carle.  But, as I wot well that thou art in haste
to be gone and get home to thy kindred, I must bring thee at dusk to-day
close up to our feast-hall, so that thou mayst be at hand to do what hath
to be done to-night, so that we may get us gone to-morrow.  Also thou
must do off thy Raven gear lest we meet any in the twilight as we go up
to the house; and here have I to hand home-spun raiment such as our war-
taken thralls wear, which shall serve thy turn well enough; but this thou
needst not do on till the time is at hand for our departure; and then I
will bring thee away, and bestow thee in a bower hard by the hall; and
when thou art within, I may so look to it that none shall go in there, or
if they do, they shall see nought in thee save a carle known to them by
name.  My kinsman hath learned me to do harder things than this.  But now
it is time to eat and drink."

Therewith he drew victual from out a locker and they fell to.  But when
they had eaten, Fox taught Hallblithe what he should do in the hall that
night, as shall be told hereafter.  And then, with much talk about many
things, they wore away the day in that ancient cup of the seething rock,
and a little before dusk set out for the hall, bearing with them
Hallblithe's gear bundled up together, as though it had been wares from
over sea.  So they came to the house before the tables were set, and the
Puny Fox bestowed Hallblithe in a bower which gave into the buttery, so
that it was easy to go straight into the mid-most of the hall.  There was
Hallblithe clad and armed in his Raven gear; but Fox gave him a vizard to
go over his face, so that none might know him when he entered therein.




CHAPTER XXI: OF THE FIGHT OF THE CHAMPIONS IN THE HALL OF THE RAVAGERS


Now it is to be told that the chieftains came into the hall that night
and sat down at the board on the dais, even as Hallblithe had seen them
do aforetime.  And the chieftain of all, who was called the Erne of the
Sea-eagles, rose up according to custom and said: "Hearken, folk! this is
a night of the champions, whereon we may not eat till the pale blades
have clashed together, and one hath vanquished and another been overcome.
Now let them stand forth and give out the prize of victory which the
vanquished shall pay to the vanquisher.  And let it be known, that,
whosoever may be the champion that winneth the battle, whether he be a
kinsman, or an alien, or a foeman declared; yea, though he have left the
head of my brother at the hall-door, he shall pass this night with us
safe from sword, safe from axe, safe from hand: he shall eat as we eat,
drink as we drink, sleep as we sleep, and depart safe from any hand or
weapon, and shall sail the sea at his pleasure in his own keel or in
ours, as to him and us may be meet.  Blow up horns for the champions!"

So the horns blew a cheerful strain, and when they were done, there came
into the hall a tall man clad in black, and with black armour and weapons
saving the white blade of his sword.  He had a vizard over his face, but
his hair came down from under his helm like the tail of a red horse.

So he stood amidst the floor and cried out: "I am the champion of the
Ravagers.  But I swear by the Treasure of the Sea that I will cross no
blade to-night save with an alien, a foeman of the kindred.  Hearest
thou, O chieftain, O Erne of the Sea-eagles?"

"Hear it I do," said the chieftain, "and I deem that thy meaning is that
we should go supperless to bed; and this cometh of thy perversity: for we
know thee despite thy vizard.  Belike thou deemest that thou shalt not be
met this even, and that there is no free alien in the island to draw
sword against thee.  But beware!  For when we came aland this morning we
found a skiff of the aliens tied to a great spear stuck in the bank of
the haven; so that there will be one foeman at least abroad in the
island.  But we said if we should come on the man, we would set his head
on the gable of the hall with the mouth open toward the North for a token
of reproach to the dwellers in the land over sea.  But now give out the
prize of victory, and I swear by the Treasure of the Sea that we will
abide by thy word."

Said the champion: "These are the terms and conditions of the battle;
that whichso of us is vanquished, he shall either die, or serve the
vanquisher for twelve moons, to fare with him at his will, to go his
errands, and do according to his commandment in all wise.  Hearest thou,
chieftain?"

"Yea," said he, "and by the Undying King, both thou and we shall abide by
this bargain.  So look to it that thou smite great strokes, lest our hall
lack a gable-knop.  Horns, blow up for the alien champion!"

So again the horns were winded; and ere their voice had died, in from the
buttery screens came a glittering image of war, and there stood the alien
champion over against the warrior of the sea; and he too had a vizard
over his face.

Now when the folk saw him, and how slim and light and small he looked
beside their champion, and they beheld the Raven painted on his white
shield, they hooted and laughed for scorn of him and his littleness.  But
he tossed his sword up lightly and caught it by the hilts as it fell, and
drew nigher to the champion of the sea and stood facing him within reach
of his sword.  Then the chieftain on the high-seat put his two hands to
his mouth and roared out: "Fall on, ye champions, fall on!"

But the folk in the hall were so eager that they stood on the benches and
the boards, and craned over each other's shoulders, so that they might
lose no whit of the hand-play.  Now flashed the blades in the candle-lit
hall, and the red-haired champion hove up his sword and smote two great
strokes to right and to left; but the alien gave way before him, and the
folk cried out at him in scorn and in joy of their champion, who fell to
raining down great strokes like the hail amidst the lightning.  But so
deft was the alien, that he stood amidst it unhurt, and laid many strokes
on his foeman, and did all so lightly and easily, that it seemed as if he
were dancing rather than fighting; and the folk held their peace and
began to doubt if their huge champion would prevail.  Now the red-haired
fetched a mighty stroke at the alien, who leapt aside lightly and gat his
sword in his left hand and dealt a great stroke on the other's head, and
the red-haired staggered, for he had over-reached himself; and again the
alien smote him a left-handed stroke so that he fell full length on the
floor with a mighty clatter, and the sword flew out of his hand: and the
folk were dumb-founded.

Then the alien threw himself on the sea-champion, and knelt upon him, and
shortened his sword as if to slay him with a thrust.  But thereon the man
overthrown cried out: "Hold thine hand, for I am vanquished!  Now give me
peace according to the bargain struck between us, that I shall serve thee
year-long, and follow thee wheresoever thou goest."

Therewith the alien champion arose and stood off from him, and the man of
the sea gat to his feet, and did off his helm, so that all men could see
that he was the Puny Fox.

Then the victorious champion unhelmed himself, and lo, it was Hallblithe!
And a shout arose in the hall, part of wonder, part of wrath.

Then cried out the Puny Fox: "I call on all men here to bear witness that
by reason of this battle, Hallblithe of the Ravens is free to come and go
as he will in the Isle of Ransom, and to take help of any man that will
help him, and to depart from the isle when he will and how he will,
taking me with him if so he will."

Said the chieftain: "Yea, this is right and due, and so shall it be.  But
now, since no freeman, who is not a foe of the passing hour, may abide in
our hall without eating of our meat, come up here, Hallblithe, and sit by
me, and eat and drink of the best we have, since the Norns would not give
us thine head for a gable-knop.  But what wilt thou do with thy thrall
the Puny Fox; and whereto in the hall wilt thou have him shown?  Or wilt
thou that he sit fasting in the darkness to-night, laid in gyves and
fetters?  Or shall he have the cheer of whipping and stripes, as
befitteth a thrall to whom the master oweth a grudge?  What is thy will
with him?"

Said Hallblithe: "My will is that thou give him a seat next to me,
whether that be high or low, or the bench of thy prison-house.  That he
eat of my dish, and drink of my cup, whatsoever the meat and drink may
be.  For to-morrow I mean that we twain shall go under the earth-collar
together, and that our blood shall run together and that we shall be
brothers in arms henceforward."  Then Hallblithe did on his helm again
and drew his sword, and looked aside to the Puny Fox to bid him do the
like, and he did so, and Hallblithe said: "Chieftain, thou hast bidden me
to table, and I thank thee; but I will not set my teeth in meat, out of
our own house and land, which hath not been truly given to me by one who
wotteth of me, unless I have conquered it as a prey of battle; neither
will I cast a lie into the loving-cup which shall pass from thy lips to
mine: therefore I will tell thee, that though I laid a stroke or two on
the Puny Fox, and those no light ones, yet was this battle nought true
and real, but a mere beguiling, even as that which I saw foughten in this
hall aforetime, when meseemeth the slain men rose up in time to drink the
good-night cup.  Therefore, O men of the Ravagers, and thou, O Puny Fox,
there is nought to bind your hands and refrain your hearts, and ye may
slay me if ye will without murder or dishonour, and may make the head of
Hallblithe a knop for your feast-hall.  Yet shall one or two fall to
earth before I fall."

Therewith he shook his sword aloft, and a great roar arose, and weapons
came down from the wall, and the candles shone on naked steel.  But the
Puny Fox came and stood by Hallblithe, and spake in his ear amidst the
uproar: "Well now, brother-in-arms, I have been trying to learn thee the
lore of lies, and surely thou art the worst scholar who was ever smitten
by master.  And the outcome of it is that I, who have lied so long and
well, must now pay for all, and die for a barren truth."

Said Hallblithe: "Let all be as it will!  I love thee, lies and all; but
as for me I cannot handle them.  Lo you! great and grim shall be the
slaying, and we shall not fall unavenged."

Said the Puny Fox: "Hearken! for still they hang back.  Belike it is I
that have drawn this death on thee and me.  My last lie was a fool's lie
and we die for it: for what wouldst thou have done hadst thou wotted that
thy beloved, the Hostage of the Rose--"  He broke off perforce; for
Hallblithe was looking to right and left and handling his sword, and
heard not that last word of his; and from both sides of the hall the
throng was drawing round about those twain, weapon in hand.  Then
Hallblithe set his eyes on a big man in front who was heaving up a heavy
short-sword and thought that he would at least slay this one.  But or
ever he might smite, the great horn blared out over the tumult, and men
forbore a while and fell somewhat silent.

Then came down to them the voice of the chieftain, a loud voice, but
clear and with mirth mingled with anger in it, and he said: "What do
these fools of the Ravagers cumbering the floor of the feast-hall, and
shaking weapons when there is no foeman anigh?  Are they dreaming-drunk
before the wine is poured?  Why do they not sit down in their places, and
abide the bringing in of the meat?  And ye women, where are ye, why do ye
delay our meat, when ye may well wot that our hearts are drooping for
hunger; and all hath been duly done, the battle of the champions fought
and won, and the prize of war given forth and taken?  How long, O folk,
shall your chieftains sit fasting?"

Then there arose great laughter in the hall, and men withdrew them from
those twain and went and sat them down in their places.

Then the chieftain said: "Come up hither, I say, O Hallblithe, and bring
thy war-thrall with thee if thou wilt.  But delay not, unless it be so
that thou art neither hungry nor thirsty; and good sooth thou shouldst be
both; for men say that the ravens are hard to satisfy.  Come then and
make good cheer with us!"

So Hallblithe thrust his sword into the sheath, and the Puny Fox did the
like, and they went both together up the hall to the high-seat.  And
Hallblithe sat down on the chieftain's right hand, and the Puny Fox next
to him; and the chieftain, the Erne, said: "O Hallblithe, dost thou need
thine armour at table; or dost thou find it handy to take thy meat clad
in thy byrny and girt with a sword?"

Then laughed Hallblithe and said: "Nay, meseemeth to-night I shall need
war-gear no more."  And he stood up and did off all his armour and gave
it, sword and all, into the hands of a woman, who bore it off, he knew
not whither.  And the Erne looked on him and said: "Well is that! and now
I see that thou art a fair young man, and it is no marvel though maidens
desire thee."

As he spake came in the damsels with the victual and the cheer was
exceeding good, and Hallblithe grew light-hearted.

But when the healths had been drunk as aforetime, and men had drunk a cup
or two thereafter, there rose a warrior from one of the endlong benches,
a big young man, black-haired and black-bearded, ruddy of visage, and he
said in a voice that was rough and fat: "O Erne, and ye other chieftains,
we have been talking here at our table concerning this guest of thine who
hath beguiled us, and we are not wholly at one with thee as to thy
dealings with him.  True it is, now that the man hath our meat in his
belly, that he must depart from amongst us with a whole skin, unless of
his own will he stand up to fight some man of us here.  Yet some of us
think that he is not so much our friend that we should help him to a keel
whereon to fare home to those that hate us: and we say that it would not
be unlawful to let the man abide in the isle, and proclaim him a wolf's-
head within a half-moon of to-day.  Or what sayest thou?"

Said the Erne: "Wait for my word a while, and hearken to another!  Is the
Grey-goose of the Ravagers in the hall?  Let him give out his word on
this matter."

Then arose a white-headed carle from a table nigh to the dais, whose
black raiment was well adorned with gold.  Despite his years his face was
fair and little wrinkled; a man with a straight nose and a well-fashioned
mouth, and with eyes still bright and grey.  He spake: "O folk, I find
that the Erne hath done well in cherishing this guest.  For first, if he
hath beguiled us, he did it not save by the furtherance and sleight of
our own kinsman; therefore if any one is to die for beguiling us, let it
be the Puny Fox.  Secondly, we may well wot that heavy need hath driven
the man to this beguilement; and I say that it was no unmanly deed for
him to enter our hall and beguile us with his sleight; and that he hath
played out the play right well and cunningly with the wisdom of a
warrior.  Thirdly, the manliness of him is well proven, in that having
overcome us in sleight, he hath spoken out the sooth concerning our
beguilement and hath made himself our foeman and captive, when he might
have sat down by us as our guest, freely and in all honour.  And this he
did, not as contemning the Puny Fox and his lies and crafty wiles (for he
hath told us that he loveth him); but so that he might show himself a man
in that which trieth manhood.  Moreover, ye shall not forget that he is
the rebel of the Undying King, who is our lord and master; therefore in
cherishing him we show ourselves great-hearted, in that we fear not the
wrath of our master.  Therefore I naysay the word of the War-brand that
we should make this man a wolf's-head; for in so doing we shall show
ourselves lesser-hearted than he is, and of no account beside of him; and
his head on our hall-gable should be to us a nithing-stake, and a tree of
reproach.  So I bid thee, O Erne, to make much of this man; and thou
shalt do well to give him worthy gifts, such as warriors may take, so
that he may show them at home in the House of the Raven, that it may be
the beginning of peace betwixt us and his noble kindred.  This is my say,
and later on I shall wax no wiser."

Therewith he sat down, and there arose a murmur and stir in the hall; but
the more part said that the Grey-goose had spoken well, and that it was
good to be at peace with such manly fellows as the new guest was.

But the Erne said: "One word will I lay hereto, to wit, that he who
desireth mine enmity let him do scathe to Hallblithe of the Ravens and
hinder him."

Then he bade fill round the cups, and called a health to Hallblithe, and
all men drank to him, and there was much joyance and merriment.

But when the night was well worn, the Erne turned to Hallblithe and said:
"That was a good word of the Grey-goose which he spake concerning the
giving of gifts: Raven-son, wilt thou take a gift of me and be my
friend?"

"Thy friend will I be," said Hallblithe, "but no gift will I take of thee
or any other till I have the gift of gifts, and that is my troth-plight
maiden.  I will not be glad till I can be glad with her."

Then laughed the Erne, and the Puny Fox grinned all across his wide face,
and Hallblithe looked from one to the other of them and wondered at their
mirth, and when they saw his wondering eyes, they did but laugh the more;
and the Erne said: "Nevertheless, thou shalt see the gift which I would
give thee; and then mayst thou take it or leave it as thou wilt.  Ho ye!
bring in the throne of the Eastland with them that minister to it!"

Certain men left the hall as he spake, and came back bearing with them a
throne fashioned most goodly of ivory, parcel-gilt and begemmed, and
adorned with marvellous craftsmanship: and they set it down amidst of the
hall-floor and went aback to their places, while the Erne sat and smiled
kindly on the folk and on Hallblithe.  Then arose the sound of fiddles
and the lesser harp, and the doors of the screen were opened, and there
flowed into the hall a company of fair damsels not less than a score,
each one with a rose on her bosom, and they came and stood in order
behind the throne of the Eastlands, and they strewed roses on the ground
before them: and when they were duly ranged they fell to singing:

         Now waneth spring,
         While all birds sing,
         And the south wind blows
         The earliest rose
         To and fro
         By the doors we know,
         And the scented gale
         Fills every dale.
   Slow now are brooks running because of the weed,
   And the thrush hath no cunning to hide her at need,
   So swift as she flieth from hedge-row to tree
   As one that toil trieth, and deedful must be.

         And O! that at last,
         All sorrows past,
         This night I lay
         'Neath the oak-beams grey!
         O, to wake from sleep,
         To see dawn creep
         Through the fruitful grove
         Of the house that I love!
   O! my feet to be treading the threshold once more,
   O'er which once went the leading of swords to the war!
   O! my feet in the garden's edge under the sun,
   Where the seeding grass hardens for haysel begun!

         Lo, lo! the wind blows
         To the heart of the Rose,
         And the ship lies tied
         To the haven side!
         But O for the keel
         The sails to feel!
         And the alien ness
         Growing less and less;
   As down the wind driveth and thrusts through the sea
   The sail-burg that striveth to turn and go free,
   But the lads at the tiller they hold her in hand,
   And the wind our well-willer drives fierce to the land.

         We shall wend it yet,
         The highway wet;
         For what is this
         That our bosoms kiss?
         What lieth sweet
         Before our feet?
         What token hath come
         To lead us home?
   'Tis the Rose of the garden walled round from the croft
   Where the grey roof its warden steep riseth aloft,
   'Tis the Rose 'neath the oaken-beamed hall, where they bide,
   The pledges unbroken, the hand of the bride.

Hallblithe heard the song, and half thought it promised him somewhat; but
then he had been so misled and mocked at, that he scarce knew how to
rejoice at it.

Now the Erne spake: "Wilt thou not take the chair and these dainty song-
birds that stand about it?  Much wealth might come into thine hall if
thou wert to carry them over sea to rich men who have no kindred, nor
affinity wherein to wed, but who love women as well as other men."

Said Hallblithe: "I have wealth enow were I once home again.  As to these
maidens, I know by the fashion of them that they are no women of the
Rose, as by their song they should be.  Yet will I take any of these
maidens that have will to go with me and be made sisters of my sisters,
and wed with the warriors of the Rose; or if they are of a kindred, and
long to sit each in the house of her folk, then will we send them home
over the sea with warriors to guard them from all trouble.  For this gift
I thank thee.  As to thy throne, I bid thee keep it till a keel cometh
thy way from our land, bringing fair gifts for thee and thine.  For we
are not so unwealthy."

Those that sat nearby heard his words and praised them; but the Erne
said: "All this is free to thee, and thou mayst do what thou wilt with
the gifts given to thee.  Yet shalt thou have the throne; and I have
thought of a way to make thee take it.  Or what sayst thou, Puny Fox?"

Said the Puny Fox: "Yea if thou wilt, thou mayst, but I thought it not of
thee that thou wouldst.  Now is all well."

Again Hallblithe looked from one to the other and wondered what they
meant.  But the Erne cried out: "Bring in now the sitter, who shall fill
the empty throne!"

Then again the screen-doors opened, and there came in two weaponed men,
leading between them a woman clad in gold and garlanded with roses.  So
fair was the fashion of her face and all her body, that her coming seemed
to make a change in the hall, as though the sun had shone into it
suddenly.  She trod the hall-floor with firm feet, and sat down on the
ivory chair.  But even before she was seated therein Hallblithe knew that
the Hostage was under that roof and coming toward him.  And the heart
rose in his breast and fluttered therein, so sore he yearned toward the
Daughter of the Rose, and his very speech-friend.  Then he heard the Erne
saying, "How now, Raven-son, wilt thou have the throne and the sitter
therein, or wilt thou gainsay me once more?"

Thereafter he himself spake, and the sound of his voice was strange to
him and as if he knew it not: "Chieftain, I will not gainsay thee, but
will take thy gift, and thy friendship therewith, whatsoever hath
betided.  Yet would I say a word or two unto the woman that sitteth
yonder.  For I have been straying amongst wiles and images, and mayhappen
I shall yet find this to be but a dream of the night, or a beguilement of
the day."  Therewith he arose from the table, and walked slowly down the
hall; but it was a near thing that he did not fall a-weeping before all
those aliens, so full his heart was.

He came and stood before the Hostage, and their eyes were upon each
other, and for a little while they had no words.  Then Hallblithe began,
wondering at his voice as he spake: "Art thou a woman and my
speech-friend?  For many images have mocked me, and I have been
encompassed with lies, and led astray by behests that have not been
fulfilled.  And the world hath become strange to me, and empty of
friends."

Then she said: "Art thou verily Hallblithe?  For I also have been
encompassed by lies, and beset by images of things unhelpful."

"Yea," said he, "I am Hallblithe of the Ravens, wearied with desire for
my troth-plight maiden."

Then came the rosy colour into the fairness of her face, as the rising
sun lighteth the garden of flowers in the June morning; and she said: "If
thou art Hallblithe, tell me what befell to the finger-gold-ring that my
mother gave me when we were both but little."

Then his face grew happy, and he smiled, and he said: "I put it for thee
one autumntide in the snake's hole in the bank above the river, amidst
the roots of the old thorn-tree, that the snake might brood it, and make
the gold grow greater; but when winter was over and we came to look for
it, lo! there was neither ring nor snake, nor thorn-tree: for the flood
had washed it all away."

Thereat she smiled most sweetly, and whereas she had been looking on him
hitherto with strained and anxious eyes, she now beheld him simply and
friendly; and she said: "O Hallblithe, I am a woman indeed, and thy
speech-friend.  This is the flesh that desireth thee, and the life that
is thine, and the heart which thou rejoicest.  But now tell me, who are
these huge images around us, amongst whom I have sat thus, once in every
moon this year past, and afterwards I was taken back to the women's
bower?  Are they men or mountain-giants?  Will they slay us, or shut us
up from the light and air?  Or hast thou made peace with them?  Wilt thou
then dwell with me here, or shall we go back again to Cleveland by the
Sea?  And when, oh when, shall we depart?"

He smiled and said: "Quick come thy questions, beloved.  These are the
folks of the Ravagers and the Sea-eagles: they be men, though fierce and
wild they be.  Our foes they have been, and have sundered us; but now are
they our friends, and have brought us together.  And to-morrow, O friend,
shall we depart across the waters to Cleveland by the Sea."

She leaned forward, and was about to speak softly to him, but suddenly
started back, and said: "There is a big, red-haired man, as big as any
here, behind thy shoulder.  Is he also a friend?  What would he with us?"

So Hallblithe turned about, and beheld the Puny Fox beside him, who took
up the word and spoke, smiling as a man in great glee: "O maiden of the
Rose, I am Hallblithe's thrall, and his scholar, to unlearn the craft of
lying, whereby I have done amiss towards both him and thee.  Whereof I
will tell thee all the tale soon.  But now I will say that it is true
that we depart to-morrow for Cleveland by the Sea, thou and he, and I in
company.  Now I would ask thee, Hallblithe, if thou wouldst have me
bestow this gift of thine in safe-keeping to-night, since there is an end
of her sitting in the hall like a graven image: and to-morrow the way
will be long and wearisome, What sayest thou?"

Said the Hostage: "Shall I trust this man and go with him?"

"Yea, thou shalt trust him," said Hallblithe, "for he is trusty.  And
even were he not, it is meet for us of the Raven and the Rose to do as
our worth biddeth us, and not to fear this folk.  And it behoveth us to
do after their customs since we are in their house."

"That is sooth," she said; "big man, lead me out of the hall to my place.
Farewell, Hallblithe, for a little while, and then shall there be no more
sundering for us."

Therewith she departed with the Puny Fox, and Hallblithe went back to the
high-seat and sat down by the Erne, who laughed on him and said: "Thou
hast taken my gift, and that is well: yet shall I tell thee that I would
not have given it to thee if I could have kept it for myself in such
plight as thou wilt have it.  But all I could do, and the Puny Fox to
help withal, availed me nought.  So good luck go with thine hands.  Now
will we to bed, and to-morrow I will lead thee out on thy way; for to say
sooth, there be some here who are not well pleased with either thee or
me; and thou knowest that words are wasted on wilful men, but that deeds
may avail somewhat."

Therewith he cried out for the cup of good-night, and when it was
drunken, Hallblithe was shown to a fair shut-bed; even that wherein he
had lain aforetime; and there he went to sleep in joy, and in good liking
with all men.




CHAPTER XXII: THEY GO FROM THE ISLE OF RANSOM AND COME TO CLEVELAND BY
THE SEA


In the morning early Hallblithe arose from his bed, and when he came into
the mid-hall, there was the Puny Fox and the Hostage with him; Hallblithe
kissed her and embraced her, and she him; yet not like lovers long
sundered, but as a man and maid betrothed are wont to do, for there were
folk coming and going about the hall.  Then spake the Puny Fox: "The Erne
is abiding us out in the meadow yonder; for now nought will serve him but
he must needs go under the earth-collar with us.  How sayest thou, is he
enough thy friend?"

Said Hallblithe, smiling on the Hostage: "What hast thou to say to it,
beloved?"

"Nought at all," she said, "if thou art friend to any of these men.  I
may deem that I have somewhat against the chieftain, whereof belike this
big man may tell thee hereafter; but even so much meseemeth I have
against this man himself, who is now become thy friend and scholar; for
he also strove for my beguilement, and that not for himself, but for
another."

"True it is," said the Fox, "that I did it for another; even as yesterday
I took thy mate Hallblithe out of the trap whereinto he had strayed, and
compassed his deliverance by means of the unfaithful battle; and even as
I would have stolen thee for him, O Rose-maiden, if need had been; yea,
even if I must have smitten into ruin the roof-tree of the Ravagers.  And
how could I tell that the Erne would give thee up unstolen?  Yea, thou
sayeth sooth, O noble and spotless maiden; all my deeds, both good and
ill, have I done for others; and so I deem it shall be while my life
lasteth."

Then Hallblithe laughed and said: "Art thou nettled, fellow-in-arms, at
the word of a woman who knoweth thee not?  She shall yet be thy friend, O
Fox.  But tell me, beloved, I deemed that thou hadst not seen Fox before;
how then can he have helped the Erne against thee?"

"Yet she sayeth sooth," said Fox, "this was of my sleight: for when I had
to come before her, I changed my skin, as I well know how; there are
others in this land who can do so much as that.  But what sayest thou
concerning the brotherhood with the Erne?"

"Let it be so," said Hallblithe, "he is manly and true, though masterful,
and is meet for this land of his.  I shall not fall out with him; for
seldom meseemeth shall I see the Isle of Ransom."

"And I never again," said the Puny Fox.

"Dost thou loathe it, then," said the Hostage, "because of the evil thou
hast done therein?"

"Nay," said he, "what is the evil, when henceforth I shall do but good?
Nay, I love the land.  Belike thou deemest it but dreary with its black
rocks and black sand, and treeless wind-swept dales; but I know it in
summer and winter, and sun and shade, in storm and calm.  And I know
where the fathers dwelt and the sons of their sons' sons have long lain
in the earth.  I have sailed its windiest firths, and climbed its
steepest crags; and ye may well wot that it hath a friendly face to me;
and the land-wights of the mountains will be sorry for my departure."

So he spake, and Hallblithe would have answered him, but by now were they
come to a grassy hollow amidst the dale, where the Erne had already made
the earth-yoke ready.  To wit, he had loosened a strip of turf all save
the two ends, and had propped it up with two ancient dwarf-wrought
spears, so that amidmost there was a lintel to go under.

So when he saw those others coming, he gave them the sele of the day, and
said to Hallblithe: "What is it to be? shall I be less than thy brother-
in-arms henceforward?"

Said Hallblithe: "Not a whit less.  It is good to have brothers in other
lands than one."

So they made no delay, but clad in all their war-gear, they went under
the earth-yoke one after the other; thereafter they stood together, and
each let blood in his arm, so that the blood of all three mingled
together fell down on the grass of the ancient earth; and they swore
friendship and brotherhood each to each.

But when all was done the Erne spake: "Brother Hallblithe, as I lay awake
in bed this morning I deemed that I would take ship with thee to
Cleveland by the Sea, that I might dwell there a while.  But when I came
out of the hall, and saw the dale lying green betwixt hill-side and hill-
side, and the glittering river running down amidmost, and the sheep and
kine and horses feeding up and down on either side the water: and I
looked up at the fells and saw how deep blue they stood up against the
snowy peaks, and I thought of all our deeds on the deep sea, and the
merry nights, in yonder abode of men: then I thought that I would not
leave the kindred, were it but for a while, unless war and lifting called
me.  So now I will ride with thee to the ship, and then farewell to
thee."

"It is good," said Hallblithe, "though not as good as it might be.  Glad
had we been with thee in the hall of the Ravens."

As he spoke drew anigh the carles leading the horses, and with them came
six of those damsels whom the Erne had given to Hallblithe the night
before; two of whom asked to be brought to their kindred over sea; but
the other four were fain to go with Hallblithe and the Hostage, and
become their sisters at Cleveland by the Sea.

So then they got to horse and rode down the dale toward the haven, and
the carles rode with them, so that of weaponed men they were a score in
company.  But when they were half-way to the haven they saw where hard by
three knolls on the way-side were men standing with their weapons and war-
gear glittering in the sun.  So the Erne laughed and said: "Shall we have
a word with War-brand then?"

But they rode steadily on their way, and when they came up to the knolls
they saw that it was War-brand indeed with a score of men at his back;
but they stirred not when they saw Erne's company that it was great.  Then
Erne laughed aloud and cried out in a big voice, "What, lads! ye ride
early this morning; are there foemen abroad in the Isle?"

They shrank back before him, but a carle of those who was hindermost
cried out: "Art thou coming back to us, Erne, or have thy new friends
bought thee to lead them in battle?"

"Fear it nought," quoth Erne, "I shall be back before the shepherd's
noon."

So they went their ways and came to the haven, and there lay the Flaming
Sword, and beside her a trim bark, not right great, all ready for sea:
and Hallblithe's skiff was made fast to her for an after-boat.

Then the Hostage and Hallblithe and the six damsels went aboard her, and
when the Erne had bidden them farewell, they cast off the hawsers and
thrust her out through the haven-mouth; but ere they had got midmost of
the haven, they saw the Erne, that he had turned about, and was riding up
the dale with his house-carles, and each man's weapon was shining in his
hand: and they wondered if he were riding to battle with War-brand; and
Fox said: "Meseemeth our brother-in-arms hath in his mind to give those
waylayers an evil minute, and verily he is the man to do the same."

So they gat them out of the haven, and the ebb-tide drave out seaward
strongly, and the wind was fair for Cleveland by the Sea; and they ran
speedily past the black cliffs of the Isle of Ransom, and soon were they
hull down behind them.  But on the afternoon of the next day they hove up
the land of the kindreds, and by sunset they beached their ship on the
sand by the Rollers of the Raven, and went ashore without more ado.  And
the strand was empty of all men, even as on the day when Hallblithe first
met the Puny Fox.  So then in the cool of the evening they went up toward
the House of the Raven.  Those damsels went together hand in hand two by
two, and Hallblithe held the Hostage by the hand; but the Puny Fox went
along beside them, gleeful and of many words; telling them tales of his
wiles and his craft, and his skin-changing.

"But now," quoth he, "I have left all that behind me in the Isle of
Ransom, and have but one shape, and I would for your behoof that it were
a goodlier one: and but one wisdom have I, even that which dwelleth in
mine own head-bone.  Yet it may be that this may avail you one time or
other.  But lo you! though I am thy thrall, have I not the look of a
thrall-huckster from over sea leading up my wares to the cheaping-stead?"
They laughed at his words and were merry, and much love there was amongst
them as they went up to the House of the Raven.

But when they came thither they went into the garth, and there was no man
therein, for it was now dusk, and the windows of the long hall were
yellow with candle-light.  Then said Fox: "Abide ye here a little; for I
would go into the hall alone and see the conditions of thy people, O
Hallblithe."

"Go thou, then," said Hallblithe, "but be not rash.  I counsel thee; for
our folk are not over-patient when they deem they have a foe before
them."

The Puny Fox laughed, and said: "So it is then the world over, that happy
men are wilful and masterful."

Then he drew his sword and smote on the door with the pommel, and the
door opened to him and in he went: and he found that fair hall full of
folk and bright with candles; and he stood amidst the floor; all men
looked on him, and many knew him at once to be a man of the Ravagers, and
silence fell upon the hall, but no man stirred hand against him.  Then he
said: "Will ye hearken to the word of an evil man, a robber of the
folks?"

Spake the chieftain from the dais: "Words will not hurt us, sea-warrior;
and thou art but one among many; wherefore thy might this eve is but as
the might of a new-born baby.  Speak, and afterwards eat and drink, and
depart safe from amongst us!"

Spake the Puny Fox: "What is gone with Hallblithe, a fair young man of
your kindred, and with the Hostage of the Rose, his troth-plight maiden?"

Then was the hush yet greater in the hall, so that you might have heard a
pin drop; and the chieftain said: "It is a grief of ours that they are
gone, and that none hath brought us back their dead bodies that we might
lay them in the Acre of the Fathers."

Then leapt up a man from the end-long table nigh to Fox, and cried out:
"Yea, folk! they are gone, and we deem that runagates of thy kindred, O
new-come man, have stolen them from us; wherefor they shall one day pay
us."

Then laughed the Puny Fox and said: "Some would say that stealing
Hallblithe was like stealing a lion, and that he might take care of
himself; though he was not as big as I am."

Said the last speaker: "Did thy kin or didst thou steal him, O evil man?"

"Yea, I stole him," quoth Fox, "but by sleight, and not by might."

Then uprose great uproar in the hall, but the chieftain on the high-seat
cried out: "Peace, peace!" and the noise abated, and the chieftain said:
"Dost thou mean that thou comest hither to give us thine head for making
away with Hallblithe and the Hostage?"

"I mean to ask rather," said the Fox, "what thou wilt give me for the
bodies of these twain?"

Said the chieftain: "A boat-load of gold were not too much if thou
shouldst live a little longer."

Quoth the Puny Fox: "Well, in anywise I will go and bring in the bodies
aforesaid, and leave my reward to the goodwill of the Ravens."

Therewith he turned about to go, but lo! there already in the door stood
Hallblithe holding the Hostage by the hand; and many in the hall saw
them, for the door was wide.  Then they came in and stood by the side of
the Puny Fox, and all men in the hall arose and shouted for joy.  But
when the tumult was a little abated, the Puny Fox cried out: "O
chieftain, and all ye folk! if a boat-load of gold were not too much
reward for the bringing back the dead bodies of your friends, what reward
shall he have who hath brought back their bodies and the souls therein?"

Said the chieftain: "The man shall choose his own reward."  And the men
in the hall shouted their yeasay.

Then said the Puny Fox: "Well, then, this I choose, that ye make me one
of your kindred before the fathers of old time."

They all cried out that he had chosen wisely and manfully; but Hallblithe
said: "I bid you do for him no less than this; and ye shall wot that he
is already my sworn brother-in-arms."

Now the chieftain cried out: "O Wanderers from over the sea, come up
hither and sit with us and be merry at last!"

So they went up to the dais, Hallblithe and the Hostage, and the Puny Fox
and the six maidens withal.  And since the night was yet young, the
supper of the men of the Ravens was turned into the wedding-feast of
Hallblithe and the Hostage, and that very night she became a wife of the
Ravens, that she might bear to the House the best of men and the fairest
of women.

But on the morrow they brought the Puny Fox to the mote-stead of the
kindreds that he might stand before the fathers and be made a son of the
kindred; and this they did because of the word of Hallblithe, and because
they believed in the tale which he told them of the Glittering Plain and
the Acre of the Undying.  The four maidens also were made sisters of the
House; and the other twain were sent home to their own kindred in all
honour.

Of the Puny Fox it is said that he soon lost and forgot all the lore
which he had learned of the ancient men, living and dead; and became as
other men and was no wizard.  Yet he was exceeding valiant and doughty;
and he ceased not to go with Hallblithe wheresoever he went; and many
deeds they did together, whereof the memory of men hath failed: but
neither they nor any man of the Ravens came any more to the Glittering
Plain, or heard any tidings of the folk that dwell there.

HEREWITH ENDETH THE TALE.

Printed by BALLANTYNE, HANSON & CO.
at Paul's Work, Edinburgh



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE STORY OF THE GLITTERING PLAIN***


******* This file should be named 2565.txt or 2565.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/2/5/6/2565



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
