The Project Gutenberg EBook of Police Your Planet, by Lester del Rey

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Police Your Planet

Author: Lester del Rey

Release Date: December 29, 2006 [EBook #20212]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK POLICE YOUR PLANET ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                             POLICE YOUR PLANET

                              By ERIC VAN LHIN




    SCIENCE FICTION
    AVALON BOOKS
    22 EAST 60TH STREET NEW YORK

    Copyright, 1956, by Eric van Lhin

    [Transcriber's note: This is a rule 6 clearance. A copyright
    renewal could not be found.]

    Library of Congress Catalogue Card Number: 56-13313

    PUBLISHED SIMULTANEOUSLY IN THE DOMINION OF CANADA
    BY THE RYERSON PRESS, TORONTO

    PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
    BY THE COLONIAL PRESS INC., CLINTON, MASSACHUSETTS




CONTENTS


       I One Way Ticket

      II Honest Izzy

     III The Graft Is Green

      IV Captain Murdoch

       V Recall

      VI Sealed Letter

     VII Electioneering

    VIII Vote Early and Often

      IX Contraband

       X Marriage of Convenience

      XI The Sky's the Limit

     XII Wife or Prisoner?

    XIII Arrest Mayor Wayne!

     XIV Full Circle

      XV Murdoch's Mantle

     XVI Get the Dome!

    XVII Security Payoff




POLICE YOUR PLANET




Chapter I

ONE WAY TICKET


There were ten passengers in the little pressurized cabin of the
electric bus that shuttled between the rocket field and Marsport. Ten
men, the driver--and Bruce Gordon.

He sat apart from the others, as he had kept to himself on the ten-day
trip between Earth and Mars, with the yellow stub of his ticket still
stuck defiantly in the band of his hat, proclaiming that Earth had paid
his passage without his permission being asked. His big, lean body was
slumped slightly in the seat. There was no expression on his face.

He listened to the driver explaining to a couple of firsters that they
were actually on what appeared to be one of the mysterious canals when
viewed from Earth. Every book on Mars gave the fact that the canals were
either an illusion or something which could not be detected on the
surface of the planet.

He glanced back toward the rocket that still pointed skyward back on the
field, and then forward toward the city of Marsport, sprawling out in a
mess of slums beyond the edges of the dome that had been built to hold
air over the central part. And at last he stirred and reached for the
yellow stub.

He grimaced at the ONE WAY stamped on it, then tore it into
bits and let the pieces scatter over the floor. He counted them as they
fell; thirty pieces, one for each year of his life. Little ones for the
two years he'd wasted as a cop. Shreds for the four years as a kid in
the ring before that--he'd never made the top. Bigger bits for two years
also wasted in trying his hand at professional gambling; and the six
final pieces that spelled his rise from a special reporter helping out
with a police shake-up coverage, through a regular leg-man turning up
rackets, and on up like a meteor until.... He'd made his big scoop, all
right. He'd dug up enough about the Mercury scandals to double
circulation.

And the government had explained what a fool he'd been for printing half
of a story that was never supposed to be printed until all could be
revealed. They'd given Bruce Gordon his final assignment.

He shrugged. He'd bought a suit of airtight coveralls and a helmet at
the field; he had some cash, and a set of reader cards in his pocket.
The supply house, Earthside, had assured him that this pattern had never
been exported to Mars. With them and the knife he'd selected, he might
get by.

The Solar Security office had given him the knife practice, to make sure
he could use it, just as they'd made sure he hadn't taken extra money
with him beyond the regulation amount.

"You're a traitor, and we'd like nothing better than seeing your guts
spilled," the Security man had told him. "That paper you swiped was
marked top secret. But we don't get many men with your background--cop,
tinhorn, fighter--who have brains enough for our work. So you're bound
for Mars, rather than the Mercury mines. If..."

It was a big _if_, and a vague one. They needed men on Mars who could
act as links in their information bureau, and be ready to work on their
side when the expected trouble came. They wanted men who could serve
them loyally, even without orders. If he did them enough service, they
might let him back to Earth. If he caused trouble enough, they could
still ship him to Mercury.

"And suppose nothing happens?" he asked.

"Then who cares? You're just lucky enough to be alive."

"And what makes you think I'm going to be a spy for Security?"

The other had shrugged. "Why not, Gordon? You've been a spy for a yellow
scandal sheet. Why not for us?"

Gordon had been smart enough to realize that perhaps Security was right.

They were in the slums around the city now. Marsport had been settled
faster than it was ready to receive. Temporary buildings had been thrown
up, and then had remained, decaying into deathtraps. It wasn't a pretty
view that visitors got as they first reached Mars. But nobody except the
romantic fools had ever thought frontiers were pretty.

The drummer who had watched Gordon tear up his yellow stub moved forward
now. "First time?" he asked.

Gordon nodded, mentally cataloguing the drummer as the cockroach type,
midway between the small-businessman slug and the petty-crook spider
types that weren't worth bothering with. But the other took it as
interest.

"Been here dozens of times, myself. Risking your life just to go into
Marsport. Why Congress doesn't clean it up, _I'll_ never know!"

Gordon's mind switched to the readers in his bag. The cards were
plastic, and should be good for a week or so of use before they showed
wear. During that time, by playing it carefully, he should have his
stake. Then, if the gaming tables here were as crudely run as an
oldtimer he'd known on Earth had said, he could try a coup.

"... be at Mother Corey's soon," the fat little drummer babbled on.
"Notorious--worst place on Mars. Take it from me, brother, that's
something! Even the cops are afraid to go in there. See it? There, to
your left!"

The name was vaguely familiar as one of the sore spots of Marsport.
Bruce Gordon looked, and spotted the ragged building, half a mile
outside the dome. It had been a rocket-maintenance hangar once, then had
been turned into temporary dwelling for the first deportees, when Earth
began flooding Mars. Now, seeming to stand by habit alone, it radiated
desolation and decay.

He stood up, grabbing for his bag, and spinning the drummer aside. He
jerked forward, and caught the driver's shoulder. "Getting off!"

The driver shrugged his hand away. "Don't be crazy, mister! They--" He
turned, saw it was Gordon, and his face turned blank. "It's your life,
buster," he said, and reached for the brake. "I'll give you five minutes
to get into coveralls and helmet and out through the airlock."

Gordon needed less than that; he'd practiced all the way from Earth. The
transparent plastic of the coveralls went on easily enough, and his
hands found the seals quickly. He slipped his few possessions into a bag
at his belt, slid the knife into a spring holster above his wrist, and
picked up the bowl-shaped helmet. It seated on a plastic seal, and the
little air compressor at his back began to hum, ready to turn the thin
wisp of Mars' atmosphere into a barely breathable pressure. He tested
the Marspeaker--an amplifier and speaker in another pouch, designed to
raise the volume of his voice to a level where it would carry through
even the air of Mars.

The driver swore at the lash of sound, and grabbed for the airlock
switch.

       *       *       *       *       *

Gordon moved down unpaved streets that zig-zagged along, thick with the
filth of garbage and poverty--the part of Mars never seen in the
newsreels, outside the shock movies. Thin kids with big eyes and sullen
mouths crowded the streets in their airsuits, yelling profanity. The
street was filled with people watching with a numbed hunger for any kind
of excitement.

It was late afternoon, obviously. Men were coming from the few bus
routes, lugging tools and lunch baskets, slumped and beaten from labor
in the atomic plants, the Martian conversion farms, and the industries
that had come inevitably where inefficiency was better than the high
prices of imports. The saloons were doing well enough, apparently, from
the number that streamed in through their airlock entrances. But Gordon
saw one of the bartenders paying money to a thickset person with an
arrogant sneer; he knew then that the few profits from the cheap beer
were never going home with the man. Storekeepers in the cheap little
shops had the same lines on their faces as they saw on those of their
customers.

Poverty and misery were the keynotes here, rather than the evil
half-world the drummer had babbled about. But to Gordon's trained eyes,
there was plenty of outright rottenness, too.

He grimaced, grateful that the supercharger on his airsuit filtered out
some of the smell which the thin air carried. He'd thought he was
familiar with human misery from his own Earth slum background. But there
was no attempt to disguise it here.

Ahead, Mother Corey's reared up--a huge, ugly half-cylinder of pitted
metal and native bricks, showing the patchwork of decades, before
repairs had been abandoned. There were no windows, though once there had
been; and the front was covered with a big sign that spelled out
_Condemned_. The airseal was filthy, and there was no bell.

Gordon kicked against the side, waited, and kicked again. A slit opened
and closed. He waited, then drew his knife and began prying at the worn
cement around the airseal, looking for the lock that had been there.

The seal suddenly quivered, indicating that metal inside had been
withdrawn. Gordon grinned tautly, stepped through, and pushed the blade
against the inner plastic.

"All right, all right," a voice whined out of the darkness. "You don't
have to puncture my seal. You're in."

"Then call them off!"

A wheezing chuckle answered him, and a phosphor bulb glowed weakly,
shedding some light on a filthy hall. "Okay, boys," the voice said,
"come on down. He's alone, anyhow. What's pushing, stranger?"

"A yellow ticket," Gordon told him, "and a government allotment that'll
last me two weeks in the dome. I figure on making it last six here, and
don't let my being a firster give you hot palms. My brother was Lanny
Gordon!"

It happened to be true, though Bruce Gordon hadn't seen his brother from
the time the man had left the family, as a young punk, to the day they
finally convicted him on his twenty-first murder. But here, if it was
like places he'd known on Earth, even second-hand contact with "muscle"
was useful.

It seemed to work. A huge man oozed out of the shadows, his gray face
contorting its doughy fat into a yellow-toothed grin, and a filthy hand
waved back the others. There were a few wisps of long, gray hair on the
head and face, and they quivered as he moved forward.

"Looking for a room?" he whined.

"I'm looking for Mother Corey."

"Then you're looking at him, cobber. Sleep on the floor, want a bunk,
squat with four, or room and duchess to yourself?"

There was a period of haggling, followed by a wait as Mother Corey
kicked four grumbling men out of a four-by-seven hole on the second
floor. Gordon's money had carried more weight than his brother's
reputation; for that, Corey humored his guest's wish for privacy. "All
yours, cobber, while your crackle's blue."

It was a filthy, dark place. In one corner was an unsheeted bed. There
was a rusty bucket for water, a hole kicked through the floor for waste
water. Plumbing, and such luxuries, apparently hadn't existed for
years--except for the small cistern and worn water-recovery plant in the
basement, beside the tired-looking weeds in the hydroponic tanks that
tried unsuccessfully to keep the air breathable.

"What about a lock on the door?" Gordon asked.

"What good would it do you? Got a different way here, we have. One
credit a week, and you get Mother Corey's word nobody busts in. And it
sticks, cobber--one way or the other."

Gordon paid, and tossed his pouch on the filthy bed. With a little work,
the place could be cleaned enough.

He pulled the cards out of his pouch, trying to be casual. Mother Corey
stood staring at the pack while Bruce Gordon changed out of his airsuit,
gagging faintly as the full effluvium of the place hit him. "Where does
a man eat around here?"

Mother Corey pried his eyes off the cards and ran a thick tongue over
heavy lips. "Eh? Oh. Eat. There's a place about ten blocks back. Cobber,
stop teasing me! With elections coming up, and the boys loaded with vote
money back in town--with a deck of cheaters like that--you want to
_eat_?"

He picked the deck up fondly, while a faraway look came into his clouded
eyes. "Same ones--same identical ones I wore out nigh twenty years ago.
Smuggled two decks up here. Set to clean up--and I did, for a while." He
shook his head sadly, and handed the deck back to Gordon. "Come on down.
For the sight of these, I'll give you the lay for your pitch. And when
your luck's made or broken, remember Mother Corey was your friend first,
and your old Mother can get longer use from them than you can."

He waddled off, telling of his plans to take Mars for a cleaning, once
long ago. Gordon followed him, staring at the surrounding filth.

His thoughts were churning so busily that he didn't see the blonde girl
until she had forced her way past them on the stairs. Then he turned
back, but she had vanished into one of the rooms.




Chapter II

HONEST IZZY


A lot could be done in ten days, when a man knew what he was after. It
was exactly ten days later. Bruce Gordon stood in the motley crowd
inside the barnlike room where Fats ran a bar along one wall, and filled
the rest of the space with assorted tables--all worn. Gordon was
sweating slightly as he stood at the roulette table, where both zero and
double-zero were reserved for the house.

The croupier was a little wizened man wanted on Earth. His eyes darted
down to the point of the knife that showed under Gordon's sleeve, and he
licked his lips, showing snaggled teeth. The wheel hesitated and came to
a halt, with the ball trembling in a pocket.

"Twenty-one wins again." He pushed chips toward Gordon, as if every one
of them came out of his own pay. "Place your bets."

Two others around the table watched narrowly as Gordon left his chips
where they were; they then exchanged looks and shook their heads. In a
Martian roulette game, numbers with that much riding just didn't turn
up. The croupier shifted his weight, then caught the wheel and spun it
savagely.

Gordon's leg ached from his strained position, but he shifted his weight
onto it more heavily, and sweat popped out on the croupier's face. His
eyes darted down, to where the full weight of Gordon seemed to rest on
the heel that was grinding into his instep. He tried to pull his foot
off the button that was concealed in the floor.

The heel ground harder, bringing a groan from him. And the ball hovered
over Twenty-one and came to rest there once more.

Slowly, painfully, the little man counted stacks of chips and moved them
across the table toward Gordon, his hands trembling.

Gordon straightened from his awkward position, drawing his foot back,
and reached out for the pile of chips. Then he scooped it up and nodded.
"Okay. I'm not greedy."

The strain of watching the games until he could spot the fix, and then
holding the croupier down, had left him momentarily weak, but Gordon
could still feel the tensing of the crowd. Now he let his eyes run over
them--the night citizens of Marsport, lower-dome section. Spacemen who'd
missed their ships; men who'd come here with dreams, and stayed without
them--the shopkeepers who couldn't meet their graft and were here to try
to win it on a last chance; street women and petty grifters. The air was
thick with their unwashed bodies--all Mars smelled, since water was
still too rare for frequent bathing--and their cheap perfume, and
clouded with cheap Marsweed cigarettes.

Gordon swung where their eyes pointed, until he saw Fats Eller sidling
through the groups, then let the knife slip into the palm of his hand as
the crowd seemed to hold its breath. Fats plucked a sheaf of Martian
bank notes from his pocket and tossed them to the croupier.

"Cash in his chips." Then his pouchy eyes turned to Gordon. "Get your
money, punk, and get out! And stay out!"

For a moment, as he began pocketing the bills, Gordon thought he was
going to get away that easily. Fats watched him dourly, then swung on
his heel, just as a shrill, strangled cry went up from someone in the
crowd.

The deportee let his glance jerk to it, then froze. His eyes caught the
sight of a hand pointing behind him, and he knew it was too crude a
trick to bother with. But he paused, shocked to see the girl he'd seen
on Mother Corey's stairs gazing at him in well-feigned warning. In spite
of his better judgment, she caught his eyes and drew them down over
curves and swells that would always be right for arousing a man's
passion.

He glanced back at Fats, who had started to turn again. Gordon took a
step backwards, preparing to duck. Again the girl's finger motioned
behind him; he disregarded it--and then realized it was a mistake.

It was the faintest swish in the air that caught his ear; he brought his
shoulders up and his head down. Fast as his reaction was, it was almost
too late. The weapon crunched against his shoulder and slammed over the
back of his neck, almost knocking him out.

His heel lashed back and caught the shin of the man behind him. Gordon's
other leg spun him around, still crouching; the knife in his hand
started coming up, sharp edge leading, and aimed for the belly of the
bruiser who confronted him. The pug saw the blade and tried to check his
lunge.

Gordon felt the blade strike; but he was already pulling his swing, and
it only gashed a long streak. The thug shrieked hoarsely and fell over.
That left the way clear to the door; Bruce Gordon was through it and
into the night in two soaring leaps. After only a few days on Mars, his
legs were still hardened to Earth gravity, and he had more than a double
advantage over the others.

Outside, it was the usual Martian night in the poorer section of the
dome, which meant near-darkness. Most of the street lights had never
been installed--graft had eaten up the appropriations, instead--and the
nearest one was around the corner, leaving the side of Fats' Place in
the shadow. Gordon checked his speed, threw himself flat, and rolled
back against the building, just beyond the steps that led to the street.

Feet pounded out of the door above as Fats and the bouncer broke
through. Gordon's hand had already knotted a couple of coins into his
kerchief; he waited until the two turned uncertainly up the street and
tossed it. It struck the wall near the corner, sailed on, and struck
again at the edge of the unpaved street with a muffled sound.

Fats and the other swung, just in time to see a bit of dust where it had
hit. "Around the corner!" Fats yelled. "After him, and shoot!"

In the shadows, Gordon jerked sharply. It was rare enough to have a gun
here; but to use one inside the dome was unthinkable. His eyes shot up,
to where the few dim lights were reflected off the great plastic sheet
that was held up by air pressure and reinforced with heavy webbing. It
was the biggest dome ever built--large enough to cover all of Marsport
before the slums sprawled out beyond it; it still covered half the city,
and made breathing possible here without a helmet. But the dome wasn't
designed to stand stray bullets; and having firearms inside it--except
for a few chosen men--was a crime punishable by death.

Fats had swung back, and was now herding the crowd inside his place. He
might have been only a small gambling-house owner, but within his own
circle his words carried weight.

Gordon got to his hands and knees and began crawling away from the
corner. He came to a dark alley, smelling of decay where garbage had
piled up without being carted away. Beyond lay a lighted street, and a
sign that announced _Mooney's Amusement Palace--Drinks Free to Patrons!_
He looked up and down the street, then walked briskly toward the
somewhat plusher gambling hall there. Fats couldn't touch him in a
competitor's place.

Inside Mooney's, he headed quickly for the dice table. He lost steadily
on small bets for half an hour, admiring the skilled palming of the
"odds" cubes. The loss was only a tiny dent in his new pile, but Gordon
bemoaned it properly--as if he were broke--and moved over to the bar.
This one had seats. The bartender had a consolation boilermaker waiting;
he gulped half of it before he realized it had been needled with ether.

Beside him, a cop was drinking the same slowly, watching another
policeman at a Canfield game. He was obviously winning, and now he got
up and came over to cash in his chips.

"You'd think they'd lose count once in a while," he complained to his
companion. "But nope--fifty even a night, no more ... Well, come on,
Pete. We'd better get back to Fats and tell him the swindler got away."

Gordon followed them out and turned south, down the street toward the
edge of the dome and the entrance where he'd parked his airsuit and
helmet. He kept glancing back, whenever he was in the thicker shadows,
but there seemed to be no one following him.

At the gate of the dome, he looked back again, then ducked into the
locker building. He threaded through the maze of the lockers with his
knife ready in his hand, trying not to attract suspicion. At this hour,
though, most of the place was empty. The crowds of foremen and
deliverymen who'd be going in and out through the day were lacking.

He found his suit and helmet and clamped them on quickly, transferring
the knife to its spring sheath outside the suit. He checked the tiny
batteries that were recharged by generators in the soles of the boots
with every step. Then he paid his toll for the opening of the private
slit and went through, into the darkness outside the dome.

Lights bobbed about--police in pairs, patrolling in the better streets,
walking as far from the houses as they could; a few groups, depending on
numbers for safety; some of the very poor, stumbling about and hoping
for a drink somehow; and probably hoods from the gangs that ruled the
nights here.

Gordon left his torch unlighted, and moved along; there was a little
illumination from the phosphorescent markers at some of the corners, and
from the stars. He could just make his way without marking himself with
a light.

Damn it, he should have hired a few of the younger bums from Mother
Corey's. Here he couldn't hear footsteps. He located a pair of
patrolling cops, and followed them down one street, until they swung
off. Then he was on his own again.

"Gov'nor!" The word barely reached him, and Bruce Gordon spun around,
the knife twitching into his hand. It was a thin kid of perhaps eighteen
behind him, carrying a torch that was filtered to bare visibility. It
swung up, and he saw a pock-marked face that was twisted in a smile
meant to be ingratiating.

"You've got a pad on your tail," the kid said, again as low as his
amplifier would permit. "Need a convoy?"

Gordon studied him briefly, and grinned. Then his grin wiped out as the
kid's arm flashed to his shoulder and back, a series of quick jerks that
seemed almost a blur. Four knives stood buried in the ground at Gordon's
feet, forming a square--and a fifth was in the kid's hand.

"How much?" he asked, as the kid scooped up the blades and shoved them
expertly back into shoulder sheaths. The kid's hand shaped a C quickly,
and Gordon slipped his arm through a self-sealing slit in the airsuit
and brought out two of them.

"Thanks, gov'nor," the kid said, stowing them away. "You won't regret
it." Gordon started to turn. Then the kid's voice rose sharply to a
yell. "Okay, honey, he's the Joe!"

Out of the darkness, ten to a dozen figures loomed up. The kid had
jumped aside with a lithe leap, and now stood between Gordon and the
group moving in for the kill. Gordon swung to run, and found himself
surrounded. His eyes flickered around, trying to spot something in the
darkness that would give him shelter.

A bludgeon was suddenly hurtling toward him, and he ducked it, his blood
thick in his throat and his ears ringing with the same pressure of fear
he'd always known just before he was kayoed in the ring. Then he
selected what he hoped was the thinnest section of the attackers and
leaped forward. With luck, he might jump over them, using his Earth
strength.

There was a flicker of dawnlight in the sky, now, however; and he made
out others behind, ready for just such a move. He changed his lunge in
mid-stride, and brought his arm back with the knife. It met a small
round shield on the arm of the man he had chosen, and was deflected at
once.

"Give 'em hell, gov'nor," the kid's voice yelled, and the little figure
was beside him, a shower of blades seeming to leap from his hand in the
glare of his bare torch. Shields caught them frantically, and then the
kid was in with a heavy club he'd torn from someone's hand.

Gordon had no time to consider his sudden traitor-ally. He bent to the
ground, seizing the first rocks he could find, and threw them. One of
the hoods dropped his club in ducking; Gordon caught it up and swung in
a single motion that stretched the other out.

Then it was a melée. The kid's open torch, stuck on his helmet, gave
them light enough, until Gordon could switch on his own. Then the kid
dropped behind him, fighting back-to-back. Here, in close quarters, the
attackers were no longer using knives. One might be turned on its owner,
and a slit suit meant death by asphyxiation.

Gordon saw the blonde girl on the outskirts, her face taut and glowing.
He tried to reach her with a thrown club wrested from another man, but
she leaped nimbly aside, shouting commands.

Two burly goons were suddenly working together. Gordon swung at one,
ducked a blow from the other, and then saw the first swinging again. He
tried to bring his club up--but knew it was too late. A dull weight hit
the side of his head, and he felt himself falling.

       *       *       *       *       *

It took only minutes for dawn to become day on Mars, and the sun was
lighting up the messy section of back street when Bruce Gordon's eyes
opened and the pain of sight struck his aching head. He groaned, then
looked frantically for the puff of escaping air. But his suit was still
sealed. Ahead of him, the kid lay sprawled out, blood trickling from an
ugly bruise along his jaw.

Then Gordon felt something on his suit, and his eyes darted to hands
just finishing an emergency patch. His eyes darted up and met those of
the blonde vixen!

Amazement kept him motionless for a second. There were tears in the eyes
of the girl, and a sniffling sound reached him through her Marspeaker.
Apparently, she hadn't noticed that he had revived, though her eyes were
on him. She finished the patch, and ran perma-sealer over it. Then she
began putting her supplies away, tucking them into a bag that held notes
that could only have been stolen from his pockets--her share of the
loot, apparently.

He was still thinking clumsily as she got to her feet and turned to
leave. She cast a glance back, hesitated, and then began to move off.

He got his feet under him slowly, but he was reviving enough to stand
the pain in his head. He came to his feet, and leaped after her. In the
thin air, his lunge was silent, and he was grabbing her before she knew
he was up.

She swung with a single gasp, and her hand darted down for her knife,
sweeping it up and toward him; he barely caught the wrist coming toward
him. Then he had her firmly, bringing her arm back and up, until the
knife fell from her fingers.

She screamed and began writhing, twisting her hard young body like a boa
constrictor in his hands. But he was stronger. He bent her back over his
knee, until a mangled moan was coming from her speaker; then his foot
kicked out, knocking her feet out from under her. He let her hit the
ground, caught both her wrists in his, and brought his knee down on her
throat, applying more pressure until she lay still. Then he reached for
the pouch.

"Damn you!" Her cry was more in anguish then it had been when he was
threatening to break her back. "You damned firster, I'll kill you if
it's the last thing I do. And after I saved your miserable life...."

"Thanks for that," he grunted. "Next time don't be a fool. When you kill
a man for his money, he doesn't feel very grateful for your reviving
him."

He started to count the money. About a tenth of what he had won--not
even enough to open a cheap poker den, let alone bribe his way back to
Earth.

The girl was out from under his knee at the first relaxation of
pressure. Her hand scooped up the knife, and she came charging toward
him, her mouth a taut slit across half-bared teeth. Gordon rolled out of
her swing, and brought his foot up. It caught her squarely under the
chin, and she went down and out.

He picked up the scattered money and her knife, then made sure she was
still breathing. He ran his hands over her, looking for a hiding place
for more money; there was none.

"Good work, gov'nor," the kid's thin voice approved, and Gordon swung to
see the other getting up painfully. The kid grinned, rubbing his bruise.
"No hard feelings, gov'nor, now! They paid me to stall you, so I did.
You bonused me to protect you, and I bloody well tried. Honest Izzy,
that's me. Gonna buy me a job as a cop. That's why I needed the scratch.
Okay, gov'nor?"

Gordon hauled back his hand to knock the other from his feet, and then
dropped it. A grin writhed onto his face, and broke into sudden grudging
laughter.

"Okay, Izzy," he admitted. "For this stinking planet, I guess you're
something of a saint. Come along, and we'll both apply for that
job--after I get my stuff."

He might as well join the law. Security had wanted him to police their
damned planet for them--and he might as well do it officially.

He tossed the girl's knife down beside her, motioned to Izzy, and began
heading for Mother Corey's.




Chapter III

THE GRAFT IS GREEN


Izzy seemed surprised when he found that Gordon was turning in to the
quasi-secret entrance to Mother Corey's. "Coming here myself," he
explained. "Mother got ahold of a load of snow, and sent me out to
contact a big pusher. Coming back, the goons picked me up and gave me
the job on you. Hey, Mother!"

Bruce Gordon didn't ask how Mother Corey had acquired the dope. When
Earth had deported all addicts two decades before, it had practically
begged for dope smuggling.

The gross hulk of Mother Corey appeared almost at once. "Izzy and Bruce.
Didn't know you'd met, cobbers. Contact, Izzy?"

"Ninety per cent for uncut," Izzy answered.

They went up to Gordon's hole-in-the-wall, with Mother Corey wheezing
behind, while the rotten wood of the stairs groaned under his grotesque
bulk. At his questions, Gordon told the story tersely.

Mother Corey nodded. "Same old angles, eh? Get enough to do the job,
they mug you. Stop halfway, and the halls are closed to you. Pretty
soon, they'll be trick-proof, anyhow; they're changing over to electric
eyes. Eh, you haven't forgotten me, cobber?"

Gordon hadn't. The old wreck had demanded five per cent of his winnings
for tipping him off. Mother Corey had too many cheap hoods among his
friends to be fooled with. Gordon counted out the money reluctantly,
while Izzy explained that they were going to be cops.

The old man shook his head, estimating what was left to Gordon. "Enough
to buy a corporal's job, pay for your suit, and maybe get by," he
decided. "Don't do it, cobber. You're the wrong kind. You take what
you're doing serious. When you set out to tinhorn a living, you're a
crook. Get you in a cop's outfit, and you'll turn honest. No place here
for an honest cop--not with elections coming up, cobber. Well, I guess
you gotta find out for yourself. Want a good room?"

Gordon's lips twitched. "Thanks, Mother, but I'll be staying inside the
dome, I guess."

"So'll I," the old man gloated. "Setting in a chair all day, being an
honest citizen. Cobber, I already own a joint there--a nice one, they
tell me. Lights. Two water closets. Big rooms, six-by-ten--fifty of
them, big enough for whole families. And strictly on the level, cobber.
It's no hide-out, like this."

He rolled the money in his greasy fingers. "Now, with what I get from
the pusher, I can buy off that hot spot on the police blotter. I can go
in the dome and walk around, just like you." His eyes watered, and a
tear went dripping down his nose. "I'm getting old. They'll be calling
me 'Grandmother' pretty soon. So I'm turning my Chicken House over to my
granddaughter and I'm going honest. Want a room?"

Gordon grinned, and nodded. Mother Corey knew the ropes, and could be
trusted. "Didn't know you had a granddaughter."

Izzy snorted, and Mother Corey grinned wolfishly. "You met her, cobber.
The blonde you shook down! Came up from Earth eight years ago, looking
for me. I sold her to the head of the East Point gang. Since she killed
him, she's been doing pretty well on her own. Mostly. Except when she
makes a fool of herself, like she did with you. But she'll come around
to where I'm proud of her, yet.... If you two want to carry in the snow,
collect, and turn it over to Commissioner Arliss for me--I can't pass
the dome till he gets it--I'll give you both rooms for six months free.
Except for the lights and water, of course."

Izzy nodded, and Gordon shrugged. On Mars, it didn't seem odd to begin
applying for a police job by carrying in narcotics. He wondered how
they'd go about contacting the commissioner.

But that turned out to be simple enough. After collecting, Izzy led the
way into a section marked "Special Taxes" and whispered a few casual
words. The man at the desk went into an office marked private, and came
back a few minutes later.

"Your friend has no record with us," he said in a routine voice. "I've
checked through his tax forms, and they're all in order. We'll confirm
officially, of course."

       *       *       *       *       *

In the Applications section of the big Municipal Building, at the center
of the dome, there was a long form to fill out at the desk; but the
captain there had already had answers typed in.

"Save time, boys," he said genially. "And time's valuable, ain't it? Ah,
yes." He took the sums they had ready--there was a standard price--and
stamped their forms. "And you'll want suits. Isaacs? Good, here's your
receipt. And you, Corporal Gordon. Right. Get your suits one floor down,
end of the hall. And report in eight tomorrow morning!"

It was as simple as that. Bruce Gordon was lucky enough to get a fair
fit in his suit. He'd almost forgotten what it felt like to be in
uniform.

Izzy was more businesslike. "Hope they don't give us too bad territory,
gov'nor," he remarked. "Pickings are always a little lean on the first
few beats, but you can work some fairly well."

Gordon's chest fell; this was Mars!

The room at the new Mother Corey's--an unkempt old building near the
edge of the dome--proved to be livable, though it was a shock to see
Mother Corey himself in a decent suit, and using perfume.

The beat was in a shabby section where clerks and skilled laborers
worked. It wasn't poor enough to offer the universal desperation that
gave the gang hoodlums protective coloring, nor rich enough to have
major rackets of its own.

Izzy was disgusted. "Cripes! Hope they've got a few cheap pushers around
that don't pay protection direct to the captain. You take that store;
I'll go in this one!"

The proprietor was a druggist who ran his own fountain where the
synthetics that replaced honest Earth foods were compounded into sweet
and sticky messes for the neighborhood kids. He looked up as Gordon came
in; then his face fell. "New cop, eh? No wonder Gable collected
yesterday, ahead of time. All right, you can look at my books. I've been
paying fifty, but you'll have to wait until Friday."

Gordon nodded and swung on his heel, surprised to find that his stomach
was turning. The man obviously couldn't afford fifty credits a week. But
it was the same all along the street. Even Izzy admitted finally that
they'd have to wait.

"That damned cop before us! He really tapped them! And we can't take
less, so I guess we gotta wait until Friday."

       *       *       *       *       *

The next day, Bruce Gordon made his first arrest. It was near the end of
his shift, just as darkness was falling and the few lights were going
on. He turned a corner and came to a short, heavy hoodlum backing out of
a small liquor store with a knife in throwing position. The crook
grunted as he started to turn and stumbled onto Gordon. His knife
flashed up.

Without the need to worry about an airsuit, Gordon moved in, his arm
jerking forward. He clipped the crook on the inside of the elbow, while
grabbing the wrist with his other hand. The man went sailing over
Gordon's head, to crash into the side of the building. He let out a
yell.

Gordon rifled the hood's pockets, and located a roll of bills stuffed
in. He dragged them out, before snapping cuffs on the man. Then he
pulled the crook inside the store.

A woman stood there, moaning over a pale man on the floor; blood oozed
from a welt on the back of his head. There was both gratitude and
resentment as she looked up at Gordon.

"You'd better call the hospital," he told her sharply. "He may have a
concussion. I've got the man who held you up."

"Hospital?" Her voice broke into another wail. "And who can afford
hospitals? All week we work, all hours. He's old, he can't handle the
cases. I do that. Me! And then you come, and you get your money. And
_he_ comes for his protection. Papa is sick. Sick, do you hear? He sees
a doctor, he buys medicine. Then Gable comes. This man comes. We can't
pay him! So what do we get--we get knifes in the faces, saps on the
head--a concussion, you tell me! And all the money--the money we had to
pay to get stocks to sell to pay off from the profits we don't make--all
of it, he wants! Hospitals! You think they give away at the hospitals
free?"

She fell to her knees, crying over the injured man.

Gordon tossed the roll of bills onto the floor beside her; the injury
seemed only a scalp wound, and the old man was already beginning to
groan. He opened his eyes and saw the bills in front of him, at which
the woman was staring unbelievingly. His hand darted out, clutching it.
"God!" he moaned softly, and his eyes turned up slowly to Gordon.

"In there!" It was a shout from outside. Gordon had just time to
straighten up before the doorway was filled with two knife-men and a
heavier one behind them.

His hands dropped to the handcuffed man on the floor, and he caught him
up with a jerk, slapping his body back against the counter. He took a
step forward, jerking his hands up and putting his Earth-adapted
shoulders behind it. The hood sailed up and struck the two knife-men
squarely.

There was a scream as their automatic attempts to save themselves buried
both knives in the body of their friend. Then they went crashing down,
and Gordon was over them.

       *       *       *       *       *

The desk captain at the precinct house groaned as they came in, then
shook his head. "Damn it," he said. "I suppose it can't be helped,
though; you're new, Gordon. Hennessy, get the corpse to the morgue, and
mark it down as a robbery attempt. I'm going to have to book you and
your men, Mr. Jurgens!"

The heavy leader of the two angry knife-men grinned. "Okay, Captain. But
it's going to slow down the work I'm doing on the Mayor's campaign for
re-election! Damn that Maxie--I told him to be discreet. Hey, you know
what you've got, though--a real considerate man! He gave the old guy his
money back!"

They took Bruce Gordon's testimony, and sent him home.

Jurgens was waiting for him when he came on the beat. From his look of
having slept well, he must have been out almost as soon as he was
booked. Two other men stood behind Gordon, while Jurgens explained that
he didn't like being interrupted on business calls "about the Mayor's
campaign, or anything else," and that next time there'd be real hard
feelings. Gordon was surprised when he wasn't beaten, but not when the
racketeer suggested that any money found at a crime was evidence and
should go to the police. The captain had told him the same.

By Friday, he had learned. He made his collections early. Gable had sold
him the list of what was expected, and he used it, though he cut down
the figures in a few cases. There was no sense in killing the geese that
laid the eggs.

The couple at the liquor store had their payment waiting, and they
handed it over, looking embarrassed. It wasn't until he was gone that he
found a small bottle of fairly good whiskey tucked into his pouch. He
started to throw it away, and then lifted it to his lips. Maybe they'd
known how he felt better than he had. Mother Corey's words about his
change of attitude came back. Damn it, he had to dig up enough money to
get back to Earth.

He collected, down to the last account. It was a nice haul; at that
rate, he'd have to stand it only for a few months. Then Gordon's lips
twisted, as he realized it wasn't all gravy. There were angles, or the
price of a corporalcy would have been higher.

One of the older men answered his questions. "Fifty per cent of the take
to the Orphan's and Widow's fund. Better make it more than Gable turned
in, if you want to get a better beat."

The envelopes were lying on a table marked "Voluntary Donations"; Gordon
filled his out, with a figure a bit higher than half of Gable's take,
and dropped it in the box. The captain, who had been watching him
carefully, settled back and smiled.

"Widows and Orphans sure appreciate a good man," he said. "I was kind of
worried about you, Gordon, but you got a nice touch. One of my new
boys--Isaacs, you know him--was out checking up after you, and the dopes
seem to like you."

Gordon had wondered why Izzy had been pulled off the beat. As he turned
to leave, the captain held up a hand. "Special meeting tomorrow. We
gotta see about getting out a good vote. Election only three weeks
away."

Gordon went home. He'd learned by now that the native Martians--those
who'd been here for at least thirty years, or had been born here--were
backing a reform candidate and new ticket. But Mayor Wayne had all of
the rest of the town in his hand. He'd been in twice, and had lifted the
graft take by a truly remarkable figure. From where Gordon stood, it
looked like a clear victory for the reformer, Nolan.

He went into the meeting willing to agree to anything. He applauded all
the speeches about how much Mayor Wayne had done for them, and signed
the pledge expressing his confidence, along with the implied duty he had
to make his beat vote right. Then he stopped, as the captain stood up.

"We gotta be neutral, boys," he boomed. "But it don't mean we can't show
how well we like the Mayor. Just remember, he got us our jobs! Now I
figure we can all kick in a little to help his campaign. I'm going to
start it off with five thousand credits, two thousand of them right
now."

They fell in line, though there was no cheering. The price might have
been fixed in advance. A thousand for a plain cop, fifteen hundred for a
corporal, and so on, each contributing a third of it now. Gordon
grimaced; he had six hundred left. This would take nearly all of it.

A man named Fell shook his head, fearfully. "Can't do a thing now. My
wife had a baby and an operation, and----"

"Okay, Fell," the captain said, without a sign of disapproval. "Freitag,
what about you? Fine, fine!"

Gordon's name came, and he shook his head. "I'm new--and I'm strapped
now. I'd like----"

"Quite all right, Gordon," the captain boomed. "Harwick!"

He finished the roll, and settled back, smiling. "I guess that's all,
boys. Thanks from the Mayor. And go on home.... Oh, Fell, Gordon,
Lativsky--stick around. I've got some overtime for you, since you need
extra money. The boys out in Ward Three are shorthanded. Afraid I'll
have to order you out there!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Ward Three was the hangout of a cheap gang of hoodlums, numbering some
four hundred, who went in for small crimes mostly. But they had recently
declared war on the cops.

After eight hours of overtime, Gordon reported in with every bone sore
from small missiles, and his suit filthy from assorted muck. He had a
beautiful shiner where a stone had clipped him.

The captain smiled. "Rough, eh? But I hear robbery went down on your
beat last night. Fine work, Gordon. We need men like you. Hate to do it,
but I'm afraid you'll have to take the next shift at Main and Broad,
directing traffic. The usual man is sick, and you're the only one I can
trust with the job!"

Gordon stuck it out, somehow, but it wasn't worth it. He reported back
to the precinct with the five hundred in his hand, and his pen itching
for the donation agreement.

The captain took it, and nodded. "I wasn't kidding about your being a
good man, Gordon. Go home and get some sleep, take the next day off.
After that, we've got a new job for you!"




Chapter IV

CAPTAIN MURDOCH


The new assignment was to the roughest section in all Marsport--the slum
area beyond the dome, out near the rocket field. Here all the riffraff
that had been unable to establish itself in better quarters had found
some sort of a haven. At one time, there had been a small dome and a
tiny city devoted to the rocket field. But Marsport had flourished
enough to kill it off. The dome had failed from neglect, and the
buildings inside had grown shabbier.

Bruce Gordon was trapped; he couldn't break his job with the police--if
he did, he'd be brought back as a criminal. Some of Mars' laws dated
from the time when law enforcement had been hampered by lack of men,
rather than by the type of men.

The Stonewall gang numbered perhaps five hundred. They hired out members
to other gangs, during the frequent wars. Between times, they picked up
what they could by mugging and theft, with a reasonable amount of murder
thrown in at a modest price.

Even derelicts and failures had to eat; there were stores and shops
throughout the district which eked out some kind of a marginal living.
They were safe from protection racketeers there--none bothered to come
so far out. And police had been taken off the beats there after it grew
unsafe even for men in pairs to patrol the area.

The shopkeepers, and some of the less unfortunate people there, had
protested loud enough to reach clear back to Earth. Marsport had hired a
man from Earth to come in and act as chief of the section. Captain
Murdoch was an unknown factor, and now was asking for more men. The
pressure was enough to get them for him.

Gordon reported for work with a sense of the bottom falling out, mixed
with a vague relief.

"You're going to be busy," Murdoch announced shortly in the dilapidated
building that had been hastily converted to a precinct house. "Damn it,
you're men, not sharks. I've got a free hand, and we're going to run
this the way we would on Earth. Your job is to protect the citizens
here--and that means everyone not breaking the laws--whether you feel
like it or not. No graft. The first man making a shakedown will get the
same treatment we're going to use on the Stonewall boys. You'll get
double pay here, and you can live on it!"

He opened up a box on his desk and pulled out six heavy wooden sticks,
each thirty inches long and nearly two inches in diameter. There was a
shaped grip on each, with a thong of leather to hold it over the wrist.

He picked out five of the men, including Gordon "You five will come with
me. I'm going to show how we operate. The rest of you can team up any
way you want tonight, pick any route that's open. Okay, men, let's go."

Bruce Gordon grinned slowly as he swung the stick, and Murdoch's eyes
fell on him. "Earth cop!"

"Two years," Gordon admitted.

"Then you should be ashamed to be in this mess. But whatever your
reasons, you'll be useful. Take those two and give them some lessons,
while I do the same with these."

For a second, Gordon cursed himself. Murdoch had fixed it so he'd be a
squad leader, and that meant he'd be unable to step out of line. At
double standard pay, with normal Mars expenses, he might be able to pay
for passage back to Earth in three years--if Security let him.
Otherwise, it would take thirty.

He began wondering about Security, then. Nobody had tried to get in
touch with him. Were they waiting for him to get up on a soapbox?

There was a crude lighting system here, put up by the citizens. At the
front of each building, a dim phosphor bulb glowed; when darkness fell,
they would have nothing else to see by.

Murdoch bunched them together. "A good clubbing beats hanging," he told
them. "But it has to be _good_. Go in for business, and don't stop just
because the other guy quits. Give them hell!"

Moving in two groups of threes, at opposite sides of the street, they
began their beat. They were covering an area of six blocks one way, and
two the other.

They had traveled the six blocks and were turning down a side street
when they found their first case; it was still daylight. Two of the
Stonewall boys were working over a tall man in a newer airsuit. As the
police swung around, one of the thugs casually ripped the airsuit open.

A thin screech like a whistle came from Murdoch's Marspeaker, and the
captain went forward, with Gordon at his heels. The hoodlums tossed the
man aside easily, and let out a yell. From the buildings around, an
assortment of toughs came at the double, swinging knives, picks, and
bludgeons.

There was no chance to save the citizen, who was dying from lack of air.
Gordon felt the solid pleasure of the finely turned club in his hands.
It was light enough for speed, but heavy enough to break bones where it
hit. A skilled man could knock a knife, or even a heavy club, out of
another's hand with a single flick of the wrist. And he'd had practice.

He saw Murdoch's club dart in and take out two of the gang, one on the
forward swing, one on the recover. Gordon's eyes popped at that. The man
was totally unlike a Martian captain, and a knot of homesickness for
Earth ran through his stomach.

He swallowed the sentiment; his own club was moving now. Standing beside
Murdoch, they were moving forward. The other four cops had come in
reluctantly.

"Knock them out and kick them down!" Murdoch yelled. "And don't let them
get away!"

Gordon was after a thug who was attempting to run away. He brought him
to the ground with a single blow across the kidneys.

It was soon over. They rounded up the men of the gang, and one of the
cops started off. Murdoch called, "Where are you going?"

"To find a phone and call the wagon."

"We're not using wagons," Murdoch told him. "Line them up."

When the hoods came to, they found themselves helpless, and facing
police with clubs. If they tried to run, they were hit from behind; if
they stood still, they were clubbed carefully. If they fought back, the
pugnaciousness was knocked out of them at once.

Murdoch indicated one who stood with his shoulders shaking and tears
running down his cheeks. The captain's face was as sick as Gordon felt.
"Take him aside. Names."

Gordon found a section away from the others. "I want the name of every
man in the gang you can remember," he told the man.

Horror shot over the other's bruised features. "Colonel, they'd kill me!
I don't know."

His screams were almost worse than the beating but names began to come.
Gordon took them down, and then returned with the man to the others.

Murdoch took his nod as evidence enough, and turned to the wretched
toughs. "He squealed," he announced. "If he should turn up dead, I'll
know you boys are responsible, and I'll find you. Now get out of this
district, or get honest jobs! Because every time one of my men sees one
of you, this will happen again. And you can pass the word along that the
Stonewall gang is dead!"

He turned and moved off down the street, the others at his side. Gordon
nodded. "I've heard the theory, but never saw it in practice. Suppose
the whole gang jumps us at once?"

Murdoch shrugged. "Then we're taken. The old book I got the idea from
didn't mention that."

       *       *       *       *       *

Trouble began brewing shortly after, though. Men stood outside, studying
the cops on their beat. Murdoch sent one of the men to pick up a second
squad of six, and then a third. After that, the watchers began to melt
away.

"We'd better shift to another territory," Murdoch decided. Gordon
realized that the gang had figured that concentrating the police here
meant other territories would be safe.

Two more groups were given the treatment. In the third one, Bruce Gordon
spotted one of the men who'd been beaten before. He was a sick-looking
spectacle.

Murdoch nodded. "Object lesson!"

The one good thing about the captain, Gordon decided, was that he
believed in doing his own dirtiest work. When he was finished, he turned
to two of the other captives.

"Get a stretcher, and take him wherever he belongs," he ordered. "I'm
leaving you two able to walk for that. But if _you_ get caught again,
you'll get still worse."

The squad went in, tired and sore; all had taken a severe beating in the
brawls. But there was little grumbling. Gordon saw grudging admiration
in their eyes for Murdoch, who had taken more punishment than they had.

Gordon rode back in the official car with Murdoch and both were silent
most of the way. But the captain stirred finally, sighing. "Poor
devils!"

Gordon jerked up in surprise. "The gang?"

"No, the cops they're giving me. We're covered, Gordon. But the
Stonewall gang is backing Wayne. He's let me come in because he figures
it will get him more votes. But afterwards, he'll have me out; and then
the boys with me will be marks for the gang when it comes back. Besides,
it'll show on the books that they didn't kick into his fund. I can
always go back to Earth, and I'll try to take you along. But it's going
to be tough on them."

Bruce Gordon grimaced. "I've got a yellow ticket, from Security."

Murdoch blinked. He dropped his eyes slowly. "So you're _that_ Gordon?
But you're still a good cop."

They rode on further in silence, until Gordon broke the ice to ease the
tension. He found himself liking the other.

"What makes you think Wayne will be re-elected? Nobody wants him, except
a gang of crooks and those in power."

Murdoch grinned bitterly. "Ever see a Martian election? No, you're a
firster. He can't lose! And then hell is going to pop, and this whole
planet may be blown wide open!"

It fitted with the dire predictions of Security, and with the spying
Gordon was going to do--according to them.

He discussed it with Mother Corey, who agreed that Wayne would be
re-elected.

"Can't lose," the old man said. He was getting even fatter, now that he
was eating better food from the fair restaurant around the corner.

"He'll win," Mother Corey repeated. "And you'll turn honest all over,
now you're in uniform. Take me, cobber. I figured on laying low for a
while, then opening up a few rooms for a good pusher or two, maybe a
high-class duchess. Cost 'em more, but they'd be respectable. Only now
I'm respectable myself, they don't look so good. But this honesty stuff,
it's like dope. You start out on a little, and you have to go all the
way."

"It didn't affect Honest Izzy," Gordon pointed out.

"Nope. Because Izzy is always honest, according to how he sees it. But
you got Earth ideas of the stuff, like I had once. Too bad." He sighed
ponderously.

       *       *       *       *       *

The week moved on. The groups grew more experienced, and Murdoch was
training a new squad every night. Gordon's own squad was equipped with
shields now, and they were doing better. The number of muggings and
holdups in the section was going down. They seldom saw a man after he'd
been treated.

One of the squads was jumped by a gang of about forty, and two of the
men were killed before the nearest other squad could pull a rear attack.
That day the whole force worked overtime hunting for the men who had
escaped; and by evening the Stonewall boys had received proof that it
didn't pay to go against the police in large numbers.

After that, they began to go hunting for the members of the gang. They
had the names of nearly all of them, and some pretty good ideas of their
hide-outs.

It wasn't exactly legal; but nothing was, here. If a doctor's job was to
prevent illness, instead of merely curing it, then why shouldn't it be a
policeman's job to prevent crime? Here, that was best done by wiping out
the Stonewall gang to the last member.

This could lead to abuses, as he'd seen on Earth. But there probably
wouldn't be time for it if Mayor Wayne was re-elected.

The gang had begun to break up, but the nucleus would be the last to go.
The police had orders to beat any member on sight, now. Citizens were
appearing on the streets at night for the first time in years. And there
were smiles--hungry, beaten smiles, but still genuine ones--for the
cops.




Chapter V

RECALL


It was night outside, and the phosphor bulbs at the corners glowed
dimly, giving him barely enough light by which to locate the way to the
extemporized precinct house. Bruce Gordon reached the outskirts of the
miserable business section, noticing that a couple of the shops were
still open. It had probably been years since any had dared risk it after
the sun went down. And the slow, doubtful respect on the faces of the
citizens as they nodded to him was even more proof that Haley's system
was working. Gordon nodded to a couple, and they grinned faintly at him.
Damn it, Mars could be cleaned up....

He grinned at himself, then something needled at his mind, until he
swung back. The man who had just passed was carrying a lunch basket, and
was wearing the coveralls of one of the crop-prospector crews; but the
expression on his face had been wrong.

Red hair, too heavily built, a lighter section where a mustache had been
shaved and the skin not quite perfectly powdered.... Gordon moved
forward quickly, until he could make out the thin scar showing through
the make-up over the man's eyes. He'd been right--this was O'Neill, head
of the Stonewall gang.

Gordon hit the signal switch, and the Marspeaker let out a shrill
whistle. O'Neill had turned to run, and then seemed to think better of
it. His hand darted down to his belt, just as Gordon reached him.

The heavy locust stick met the man's wrist before the weapon was half
drawn--another gun! Guns suddenly seemed to be flourishing everywhere.
The gun dropped from O'Neill's hand as the wrist snapped, and the
Stonewall chief let out a high-pitched cry of pain. Then another cop
came around a corner at a run.

"You can't do it to me! I'm reformed; I'm going straight! You damned
cops can't...." O'Neill was blubbering. The small crowd that was
collecting was all to the good, Gordon knew, and he let O'Neill go on.
Nothing could help break up the gangs more than having a leader break
down in public.

The other cop had yanked out O'Neill's wallet, and now tossed it to
Gordon. One look was enough--the work papers had the telltale
over-thickening of the signature that had showed up on other papers,
obviously forgeries. The cops had been passing them on the hope of
finding one of the leaders.

Some turned away as Gordon and the other cop went to work, but most of
them weren't squeamish. When it was over, the two picked up their
whimpering captive. Gordon pocketed the revolver with his free hand.
"Walk, O'Neill!" he ordered. "Your legs are still whole. Use them!"

The man staggered between them, whimpering at each step. If any members
of the gang were around, they made no attempt to rescue him.

Jenkins, the other cop, had been holding the wallet. Now he held it out
toward Gordon. "The gee was heeled, Corporal. Must of been making a big
contact in something. Fifty-fifty?"

"Turn it in to Murdoch," Gordon said, and then cursed himself. There
must have been over two thousand credits in the wallet.

       *       *       *       *       *

The captain's face had been buried in a pile of papers, but now Murdoch
came around to stare at the gang leader. He inspected the forged work
papers, and jerked his thumb toward one of the hastily built cells where
a doctor would look O'Neill over--eventually. When Gordon and Jenkins
came back, Murdoch tossed the money to them. "Split it. You guys earned
it by keeping your hands off it. Anyhow, you're as entitled to it as he
was--or the grafters back at Police Headquarters. I never saw it.
Gordon, you've got a visitor!"

His voice was bitter, but he made no opening for them to question him as
he picked up the papers and began going through them again. Gordon went
down the passage to the end of the hall, in the direction Murdoch had
indicated. Waiting for him was the lean, cynical little figure of Honest
Izzy, complete with uniform and sergeant's stripes.

"Hi, gov'nor," the little man greeted him. "Long time no see. With you
out here and me busy nights doing a bit of convoy work on the side, we
might as well not both live at Mother's."

Bruce Gordon nodded, grinning in spite of himself. "Convoy duty, Izzy?
Or dope running?"

"Whatever comes to hand, gov'nor. The Force pays for my time during the
day, and I figure my time's my own at night. Of course, if I ever catch
myself doing anything shady during the day, I'll have to turn myself in.
But it ain't likely." He grinned in satisfaction. "Now that I've dug up
the scratch to buy these stripes and get made sergeant--and that takes
the real crackle--I'm figuring on taking it easy."

"Like this social call?" Gordon asked him.

The little man shook his head, his ancient eighteen-year-old face
turning sober. "Nope. I've been meaning to see you, so I volunteered to
run out some red tape for your captain. You owe me some bills, gov'nor.
Eleven hundred fifty credits. You didn't pay up your pledge to the
campaign fund, so I hadda fill in. A thousand, interest at ten per cent
a week, standard. Right?"

Gordon had heard of the friendly interest charged on the side here, but
he shook his head. "Wrong, Izzy. If they want to collect that dratted
pledge of theirs, let them put me where I can make it. There's no graft
out here."

"Huh?" Izzy turned it over, and shook his head. Finally he shrugged.
"Don't matter, gov'nor. Nothing about that in the pledge, and when you
sign something, you gotta pay it. You _gotta_."

"All right," Gordon admitted. He was suddenly in no mood to quibble with
Izzy's personal code. "So you paid it. Now show me where I signed any
agreement saying I'd pay _you_ back!"

For a second, Izzy's face went blank; then he chuckled. "Jet me! You're
right, gov'nor. I sure asked for that one. Okay; I'm bloody well
suckered, so forget it."

Gordon shrugged and gave up. He pulled out the bills and handed them
over. "Thanks, Izzy."

"Thanks, yourself." The kid pocketed the money cheerfully, nodding. "Buy
you a beer. Anyhow, you won't miss it. I came out to tell you I got the
sweetest beat in Marsport--over a dozen gambling joints on it--and I
need a right gee to work it with me. So you're it!"

For a moment, Gordon wondered what Izzy had done to earn that beat, but
he could guess. The little guy knew Mars as few others did, apparently,
from all sides. And if any of the other cops had private rackets of
their own, Izzy was undoubtedly the man to find it out, and use the
information. With a beat such as that, even going halves, and with all
the graft to the upper brackets, he'd still be able to make his pile in
a matter of months.

But he shook his head. "I'm assigned here, Izzy, at least for another
week, until after elections...."

"Better take him up, Gordon," Murdoch told him bitterly. The captain
looked completely beaten as he came into the room and dropped onto the
bench. "Go on, accept, damn it. You're not assigned here any more. None
of us are. Mayor Wayne found an old clause in the charter and got a
rigged decision, pulling me back under his full authority. I thought I
had full responsibility to Earth, but he's got me. Wearing their uniform
makes me a temporary citizen! So we're being smothered back into the
Force, and they'll have their patsies out here, setting things up for
the Stonewall boys to come back by election time. So grab while the
grabbing's good, because by tomorrow morning I'll have this all closed
down!"

He shook off Gordon's hand and stood up roughly, to head back up the
hallway. Then he stopped and looked back. "One thing, though, I've still
got enough authority to make you a sergeant. It's been a pleasure
working with you, Sergeant Gordon!"

He swung out of view abruptly, leaving Gordon with a heavy weight in his
stomach. Izzy whistled, and began picking up his helmet, preparing to go
outside. "So that's the dope I brought out, eh? Takes it kind of hard,
doesn't he?"

"Yeah," Gordon answered. There was no use trying to explain it to Izzy.
"Yeah, we do. Come on."

Outside, Gordon saw other cops moving from house to house, and he
realized that Murdoch must be sending out warnings to the citizens that
things would soon be rough again.

Izzy held out a hand to Gordon. "Let's get a beer, gov'nor--on me!"

It was as good an idea as any he had, Gordon decided. He might as well
enjoy what life he still had while he could. The Stonewall gang--what
was left of it--and all its friends would be gunning for him now. The
Force wouldn't have been fooled when Izzy paid his pledge, and they'd
mark him down as disloyal--if they didn't automatically mark down all
who'd served under Murdoch. And he didn't have the ghost of an idea as
to what Security wanted of him, or where they were hiding themselves.

"Make it two beers, Izzy," he said. "Needled!"




Chapter VI

SEALED LETTER


In the few days at the short-lived Nineteenth Precinct, Bruce Gordon had
begun to feel like a cop again, but the feeling disappeared as he
reported in at Captain Isaiah Trench's Seventh Precinct. Trench had once
been a colonel in the Marines, before a court-martial and sundry
unpleasantnesses had driven him off Earth. His dark, scowling face and
lean body still bore a military air.

He looked Bruce Gordon over sourly. "I've been reading your record. It
stinks. Making trouble for Jurgens--could have been charged as false
arrest. No co-operation with your captain until he forced it; out in the
sticks beating up helpless men. Now you come crawling back to your only
friend, Isaacs. Well, I'll give it a try. But step out of line and I'll
have you cleaning streets with your bare hands. All right, _Corporal_
Gordon. Dismissed. Get to your beat."

Gordon grinned wryly at the emphasis on his title. No need to ask what
had happened to Murdoch's recommendation. He joined Izzy in the locker
room, summing up the situation.

"Yeah." Izzy looked worried, his thin face pinched in. "Maybe I didn't
do you a favor, gov'nor, pulling you here. I dunno. I got some pics of
Trench from a guy I know. That's how I got my beat so fast in the
Seventh. But Trench ain't married, and I guess I've used up the touch.
Maybe I could try it, though."

"Forget it," Gordon told him. "I'll work it out somehow."

The beat was a gold mine. It lay through the section where Gordon had
first tried his luck on Mars. There were a dozen or so gambling joints,
half a dozen cheap saloons, and a fair number of places listed as
rooming houses, though they made no bones about the fact that all their
permanent inhabitants were female. Then the beat swung off, past a row
of small businesses and genuine rooming houses, before turning back to
the main section.

They began in the poorer section. It wasn't the day to collect the
"tips" for good service, which had been an honest attempt to promote
good police service before it became a racket. But they were met
everywhere by sullen faces. Izzy explained it. The city had passed a new
poll tax--to pay for election booths, supposedly--and had made the
police collect it. Murdoch must have disregarded the order, but the rest
of the force had been busy helping the administration.

But once they hit the main stem, things were mere routine. The gambling
joints took it for granted that beat cops had to be paid, and considered
it part of their operating expense. The only problem was that Fats'
Place was the first one on the list. Gordon didn't expect to be too
welcome there.

There was no sign of the thug, but Fats came out of his back office just
as Gordon reached the little bar. He came over, nodded, picked up a cup
and dice and began shaking them.

"High man for sixty," he said automatically, and expertly rolled
bull's-eyes for a two. "Izzy said you'd be around. Sorry my man drew
that _knife_ on you the last time, Corporal."

Gordon rolled an eight, pocketed the bills, and shrugged. "Accidents
will happen, Fats."

"Yeah." The other picked up the dice and began rolling sevens absently.
"How come you're walking beat, anyhow? With what you pulled here, you
should have bought a captaincy."

Gordon told him briefly. The man chuckled grimly. "Well, that's Mars,"
he said, and turned back to his private quarters.

Mostly, it was routine work. They came on a drunk later, collapsed in an
alley. But the muggers had apparently given up before Izzy and Gordon
arrived, since the man had his wallet clutched in his hand. Gordon
reached for it, twisting his lips.

Izzy stopped him. "It ain't honest, gov'nor. If the gees in the wagon
clean him, or the desk man gets it, that's their business. But I'm going
to run a straight beat, or else!"

That was followed by a call to remove a berserk spaceman from one of the
so-called rooming houses. Gordon noticed that workmen were busy setting
up a heavy wooden gate in front of the entrance to the place. There were
a lot of such preparations going on for the forthcoming elections.

Then the shift was over. But Gordon wasn't too surprised when his relief
showed up two hours late; he'd half-expected some such nastiness from
Trench. But he was surprised at the look on his tardy relief's face.

The man seemed to avoid facing him, muttered, "Captain says report in
person at once," and swung out of the scooter and onto his beat without
further words.

Gordon was met there by blank faces and averted looks, but someone
nodded toward Trench's office, and he went inside. Trench sat chewing on
a cigar. "Gordon, what does Security want with you?"

"Security? Not a damned thing, if I can help it. They kicked me off
Earth on a yellow ticket, if that's what you mean."

"Yeah." Trench shoved a letter forward; it bore the "official business"
seal of Solar Security, and was addressed to Corporal Bruce Gordon,
Nineteenth Police Precinct, Marsport. Trench kept his eyes on it, his
face filled with suspicion and the vague fear most men had for Security.

"Yeah," he said again. "Okay, probably routine. Only next time, Gordon,
put the _facts_ on your record with the Force. If you're a deportee, it
should show up. That's all!"

Bruce Gordon went out, holding the envelope. The warning in Trench's
voice wasn't for any omission on his record, he knew. He shoved the
envelope into his belt pocket and waited until he was in his own room
before opening it.

It was terse, and unsigned.

     _Report expected, overdue. Failure to observe duty will result in
     permanent resettlement to Mercury._

He swore, coldly and methodically, while his stomach dug knots in
itself. The damned, stupid, blundering fools! That was all Trench and
the police gang had to see; it was obvious that the letter had been
opened. Sure, report at once. Drop a letter in the mailbox, and the next
morning it would be turned over to Commissioner Arliss' office. Report
or be kicked off to a planet that Security felt enough worse than Mars
to use as punishment! Report _and_ find Mars a worse place than Mercury
could ever be.

He felt sick as he stood up to find paper and pen and write a terse,
factual account of his own personal doings--minus any hint of anything
wrong with the system here. Security might think it was enough for the
moment, and the local men might possibly decide it a mere required
formality. At least it would stall things off for a while....

But Gordon knew now that he could never hope to get back to Earth
legally. That vague promise by Security was so much hogwash; yet it was
surprising how much he had counted on it.

He tore the envelope from Security into tiny shreds, too small for
Mother Corey to make sense of, and went out to mail the letter, feeling
the few bills in his pocket. As usual, less than a hundred credits.

He passed a sound truck blatting out a campaign speech by candidate
Nolan, filled with too-obvious facts about the present administration,
together with hints that Wayne had paid to have Nolan assassinated.
Gordon saw a crowd around it and was surprised, until he recognized them
as Rafters--men from the biggest of the gangs supporting Wayne. The few
citizens on the street who drifted toward the truck took a good look at
them and moved on hastily.

It seemed incredible that Wayne could be re-elected, though, even with
the power of the gangs. Nolan was probably a grafter, too; but he'd at
least be a change, and certainly the citizens were aching for that.

The next day his relief was later. Gordon waited, trying to swallow
their petty punishments, but it went against the grain. Finally, he
began making the rounds, acting as his own night man. The owners of the
joints didn't care whether they paid the second daily dole to the same
man or another, but they wouldn't pay it again that same night. He'd
managed to tap most of the places before his relief showed. He made no
comment, but dutifully filled out the proper portion of both takes for
the Voluntary Donation box. It wouldn't do his record any good with
Trench, but it should put an end to the overtime.

Trench, however, had other ideas. The overtime continued, but it was
dull after that--which made it even more tiring. But the time he took a
special release out to the spaceport was the worst. Seeing the big ship
readying for take-off back to Earth....

Then it was the day before election. The street was already bristling
with barricades around the entrances, and everything ran with a last
desperate restlessness, as if there would be no tomorrow. The operators
all swore that Wayne would be elected, but seemed to fear a miracle. On
the poorer section of the beat, there was a spiritless hope that Nolan
might come in with his reform program. Men who would normally have been
punctilious about their payments were avoiding Bruce Gordon, if in hope
that, by putting it off a day or so, they could run into a period where
no such payment would ever be asked--or a smaller one, at least. And he
was too tired to chase them down. His collections had been falling off
already, and he knew that he'd be on the carpet for that, if he didn't
do better. It was a rich territory, and required careful mining; even as
the week had gone, he still had more money in his wallet than he had
expected.

But there had to be still more before night.

He was lucky; he came on a pusher working one of the better houses--long
after his collections should have been over. He knew by the man's face
that no protection had been paid higher up. The pusher was well-heeled;
Gordon confiscated the money.

This time, Izzy made no protest. Lifting the roll of anyone outside the
enforced part of Mars' laws was apparently honest, in his eyes. He
nodded, and pointed to the man's belt. "Pick up the snow, too."

The pusher's face paled. He must have had his total capital with him,
because stark ruin shone in his eyes. "Good God, Sergeant," he pleaded,
"leave me something! I'll make it right. I'll cut you in. I gotta have
some of that for myself!"

Gordon grimaced. He couldn't work up any great sympathy for anyone who
made a living out of drugs.

They cleaned the pusher, and left him sitting on the steps, a picture of
slumped misery. Izzy nodded approval. "Let him feel it a while. No sense
jailing him yet. Bloody fool had no business starting without lining the
groove. Anyhow, we'll get a bunch of credits for the stuff when we turn
it in."

"Credits?" Gordon asked.

"Sure." Izzy patted the little package. "We get a quarter value. Captain
probably gets fifty per cent from one of the pushers who's lined with
him. Everybody's happy."

"Why not push it ourselves?" Gordon asked in disgust.

"Wouldn't be honest, gov'nor. Cops are supposed to turn it in."

Trench was almost jovial when he weighed the package and examined it to
find how much it had been cut. He issued them slips, which they added as
part of the contributions. "Good work--you, too, Gordon. Best week in
the territory for a couple of months. I guess the citizens like you, the
way they treat you." He laughed at his stale joke, and Gordon was
willing to laugh with him. The credit on the dope had paid for most of
the contributions. For once, he had money to show for the week.

Then Trench motioned Bruce Gordon forward, and dismissed Izzy with a nod
of his head. "Something to discuss, Gordon. Isaacs, we're holding a
little meeting, so wait around. You're a sergeant already. But, Gordon,
I'm offering you a chance. There aren't enough openings for all the good
men, but.... Oh, bother the soft soap. We're still short on election
funds, so there's a raffle. The two men holding winning tickets get
bucked up to sergeants. A hundred credits a ticket. How many?"

He frowned suddenly as Gordon counted out three bills. "You have a
better chance with more tickets. A _much_ better chance!"

The hint was hardly veiled. Gordon stuck the tickets into his wallet.
Mars was a fine planet for picking up easy money--but holding it was
another matter.

Trench counted the money and put it away. "Thanks, Gordon. That fills
_my_ quota. Look, you've been on overtime all week. Why not skip the
meeting? Isaacs can brief you, later. Go out and get drunk, or
something."

The comparative friendliness of the peace offering was probably the
ultimate in graciousness from Trench. Idly, Gordon wondered what kind of
pressures the captains were under; it must be pretty stiff, judging by
the relief the man was showing at making quota.

"Thanks," he said, but his voice was bitter in his ears. "I'll go home
and rest. Drinking costs too much for what I make. It's a good thing you
don't have income tax here."

"We do," Trench said flatly; "forty per cent. Better make out a form
next week, and start paying it regularly. But you can deduct your
contributions here."

Gordon got out before he learned more good news.




Chapter VII

ELECTIONEERING


As Bruce Gordon came out from the precinct house, he noticed the sounds
first. Under the huge dome that enclosed the main part of the city, the
heavier air pressure permitted normal travel of sound; and he'd become
sensitive to the voice of the city after the relative quiet of the
Nineteenth Precinct. But now the normal noise was different. There was
an undertone of hushed waiting, with the sharp bursts of hammering and
last-minute work standing out sharply through it. Voting booths were
being finished here and there, and at one a small truck was delivering
ballots. Voting by machine had never been established here. Wherever the
booths were being thrown up, the nearby establishments were rushing
gates and barricades in front of the buildings.

Most of the shops were already closed--even some of the saloons. To make
up for it, stands were being placed along the streets, carrying banners
that proclaimed free beer for all loyal administration friends. The few
bars that were still open had been blessed with the sign of some mob,
and obviously were well staffed with hoodlums ready to protect the
proprietor. Private houses were boarded up. The scattering of
last-minute shoppers along the streets showed that most of the citizens
were laying in supplies to last until after election.

Gordon passed the First Marsport Bank and saw that it was surrounded by
barbed wires, with other strands still being strung, and with a sign
proclaiming that there was high voltage in the wires. Watching the
operation was Jurgens; it was obvious that his hoodlums had been hired
for the job.

Toward the edge of the dome, where Mother Corey's place was, the
narrower streets were filling with the gangs, already half-drunk and
marching about with their banners and printed signs. Curiously enough,
all the gangs weren't working for Wayne's re-election. The big Star
Point gang had apparently grown tired of the increasing cost of
protection from the government, and was actively campaigning for Nolan.
Their home territory reached nearly to Mother Corey's, before it ran
into the no man's land separating it from the gang of Nick the Croop.
The Croopsters were loyal to Wayne.

Gordon turned into his usual short-cut, past a rambling plastics plant
and through the yard where their trucks were parked. He had half
expected to find it barricaded, but apparently the rumors that Nick the
Croop owned it were true; it would be protected in other ways, with the
trucks used for street fighting, if needed. He threaded his way between
two of the trucks.

Then a yell reached his ears, and something swished at him. An egg-sized
rock hit the truck behind him and bounced back, just as he spotted a
hoodlum drawing back a sling for a second shot.

Gordon was on his knees between heartbeats, darting under one of the
trucks. He rolled to his feet, letting out a yell of his own, and
plunged forward. His fist hit the thug in the elbow, just as the man's
hand reached for his knife. His other hand chopped around, and the edge
of his palm connected with the other's nose. Cartilage crunched, and a
shrill cry of agony lanced out.

But the hoodlum wasn't alone. Another came out from the rear of one of
the trucks. Gordon ducked as a knife sailed for his head; they were
stupid enough not to aim for his stomach, at least. He bent down to
locate some of the rubble on the ground, cursing his folly in carrying
his knife under his uniform. The new beat had given him a false sense of
security.

He found a couple of rocks and a bottle and let them fly, then bent for
more.

Something landed on his back, and fingernails were gouging into his
face, searching for his eyes!

Instinct carried him forward, jerking down sharply and twisting. The
figure on his back sailed over his head, to land with a harsh thump on
the ground. Brassy yellow hair spilled over a girl's face, and her
breath slammed out of her throat as she hit. But the fall hadn't been
enough to do serious damage.

Bruce Gordon jumped forward, bringing his foot up in a savage swing, but
she'd rolled, and the blow only glanced against her ribs. She jerked her
hand down for a knife, and came to her knees, her lips drawn back
against her teeth. "Get him!" she yelled. Then he recognized her--Sheila
Corey.

The two thugs had held back, but now they began edging in. Gordon
slipped back behind another truck, listening for the sound of their
feet. He'd half-expected another encounter with the Mother's
granddaughter.

They tried to outmaneuver him; he stepped back to his former spot,
catching his breath and digging frantically for his knife. It came out,
just as they realized he'd tricked them.

Sheila was still on her knees, fumbling with something, and apparently
paying no attention to him. But now she jerked to her feet, her hand
going back and forward.

It was a six-inch section of pipe, with a thin wisp of smoke, and the
throw was toward Gordon's feet. The hoodlums yelled, and ducked, while
Sheila broke into a run away from him. The little homemade bomb landed,
bounced, and lay still, with its fuse almost burned down.

Gordon's heart froze in his throat, but he was already in action. He
spat savagely into his hand, and jumped for the bomb. If the fuse was
powder-soaked, he had no chance. He brought his palm down against it,
and heard a faint hissing. Then he held his breath, waiting.

No explosion came. It had been a crude job, with only a wick for a fuse.

Sheila Corey had stopped at a safe distance; now she grabbed at her
helpers, and swung them with her. The three came back, Sheila in the
lead with her knife flashing.

Gordon side-stepped her rush, and met the other two head-on, his knife
swinging back. His foot hit some of the rubble on the ground at the last
second, and he skidded. The leading mobster saw the chance and jumped
for him. Gordon bent his head sharply, and dropped, falling onto his
shoulders and somersaulting over. He twisted at the last second, jerking
his arms down to come up facing the other.

Then a new voice cut into the fracas, and there was the sound of
something landing against a skull with a hollow thud. Gordon got his
head up just in time to see a man in police uniform kick aside the first
hoodlum and lunge for the other. There was a confused flurry; then the
second went up into the air and came down in the newcomer's hands, to
land with a sickening jar and lie still. Behind, Sheila Corey lay
crumpled in a heap, clutching one wrist in the other hand and crying
silently.

Bruce Gordon came to his feet and started for her. She saw him coming,
cast a single glance at the knife that had been knocked from her hands,
then sprang aside and darted back through the parked trucks. In the
street, she could lose herself in the swarm of Nick's Croopsters; Gordon
turned back.

The iron-gray hair caught his eyes first. Then, as the solidly built
figure turned, he grunted. It was Captain Murdoch--now dressed in the
uniform of a regular beat cop, without even a corporal's stripes. And
the face was filled with lines of strain that hadn't been there before.

Murdoch threw the second gangster up into a truck after the first one
and slammed the door shut, locking it with the metal bar which had
apparently been his weapon. Then he grinned wryly, and came back toward
Gordon.

"You seem to have friends here," he commented. "A good thing I was
trying to catch up with you. Just missed you at the Precinct House, came
after you, and saw you turn in here. Then I heard the rumpus. A good
thing for me, too, maybe."

Gordon blinked, accepting the other's hand. "How so? And what happened?"
He indicated the bare sleeve.

"One's the result of the other," Murdoch told him. "They've got me sewed
up, and they're throwing the book at me. The old laws make me a citizen
while I wear the uniform--and a citizen can't quit the Force. That puts
me out of Earth's jurisdiction. I can't even cable for funds, and I
guess I'm too old to start squeezing money out of citizens. I was coming
to ask whether you had room in your diggings for a guest--and I'm hoping
now that my part here cinches it."

Murdoch had tried to treat it lightly, but Gordon saw the red creeping
up into the man's face. "Forget that part. There's room enough for two
in my place--and I guess Mother Corey won't mind. I'm damned glad you
were following me."

"So'm I, Gordon. What'll we do with the prisoners?"

"Leave 'em; we couldn't get a Croopster locked up tonight for anything."

He started ahead, leading the way through the remaining trucks and back
to the street that led to Mother Corey's. Murdoch fell in step with him.
"This is the first time I've had to look you up," he said. "I've been
going out nights to help the citizens organize against the Stonewall
gang. But that's over now--they gave me hell for inciting vigilante
action, and confined me inside the dome. The way they hate a decent cop
here, you'd think honesty was contagious."

"Yeah." Gordon preferred to let it drop. Murdoch was being given the
business for going too far on the Stonewall gang, not for refusing to
take normal graft.

They came to the gray three-story building that Mother Corey now owned.
Gordon stopped, realizing for the first time that there was no trace of
efforts to protect it against the coming night and day. The entrance was
unprotected. Then his eyes caught the bright chalk marks around
it--notices to the gangs to keep hands off. Mother Corey evidently had
pull enough to get every mob in the neighborhood to affix its seal.

As he drew near, though, two men edged across the street from a clump
watching the beginning excitement. Then, as they identified Gordon, they
moved back again. Some of the Mother's old lodgers from the ruin outside
the dome were inside now--obviously posted where it would do the most
good.

Corey stuck his head out of the door at the back of the hall as Gordon
entered, and started to retire again--until he spotted Murdoch. Gordon
explained the situation hastily.

"It's your room, cobber," the old man wheezed. He waddled back, to come
out with a towel and key, which he handed to Murdoch. "Number
forty-two."

His heavy hand rested on Gordon's arm, holding the younger man back.
Murdoch gave Gordon a brief, tired smile, and started for the stairs.
"Thanks, Gordon. I'm turning in right now."

Mother Corey shook his head, shaking the few hairs on his head and face,
and the wrinkles in his doughy skin deepened. "Hasn't changed, that one.
Must be thirty years, but I'd know Asa Murdoch anywhere. Took me to the
spaceport, handed me my yellow ticket, and sent me off for Mars. A nice,
clean kid--just like my own boy was. But Murdoch wasn't like the rest of
the neighborhood. He still called me 'sir,' when my boy was walking
across the street, so the lad wouldn't know they were sending me away.
Oh well, that was a long time ago, cobber. A long time."

He rubbed a pasty hand over his chin, shaking his head and wheezing
heavily. Gordon chuckled. "Well, how--?"

Something banged heavily against the entrance seal, and there was the
sound of a hot argument, followed by a commotion of some sort. Corey
seemed to prick up his ears, and began to waddle rapidly toward the
entrance.

It broke open before he could reach it, the seal snapping back to show a
giant of a man outside holding the two guards from across the street,
while a scar-faced, dark man shoved through briskly. Corey snapped out a
quick word, and the two guards ceased struggling and started back across
the street. The giant pushed in after the smaller thug.

"I'm from the Ajax Householders Protection Group," the dark man
announced officially. "We're selling election protection. And brother,
do you need it, if you're counting on those mugs. We're assessing you--"

"Not long on Mars, are you?" Mother Corey asked. The whine was entirely
missing from his voice now, though his face seemed as expressionless as
ever. "What does your boss Jurgens figure on doing, punk? Taking over
_all_ the rackets for the whole city?"

The dark face snarled, while the giant moved a step forward. Then he
shrugged. "Okay, Fatty. So Jurgens is behind it. So now you know. And
I'm doubling your assessment, right now. To you, it's--"

A heavy hand fell on the man's shoulder, and Mother Corey leaned forward
slightly. Even in Mars' gravity, his bulk made the other buckle at the
knees. The hand that had been reaching for the knife yanked the weapon
out and brought it up sharply.

Gordon started to step in, then, but there was no time. Mother Corey's
free hand came around in an open-palmed slap that lifted the collector
up from the floor and sent him reeling back against a wall. The knife
fell from the crook's hand, and the dark face turned pale. He sagged
down the wall, limply.

The giant opened his mouth, and took half a step forward; but the only
sound he made was a choking gobble. Mother Corey moved without seeming
haste, but before the other could make up his mind. There was a series
of motions that seemed to have no pattern. The giant was spun around,
somehow; one arm was jerked back behind him, then the other was forced
up to it. Mother Corey held the wrists in one hand, put his other under
the giant's crotch, and lifted. Carrying the big figure off the floor,
the old man moved toward the seal. His foot found the button, snapping
the entrance open. He pitched the giant out overhanded; holding the
entrance, he reached for the dark man with one hand and tossed him on
top of the giant.

"To me, it's nothing," he called out. "Take these two back to young
Jurgens, boys, and tell him to keep his punks out of my house."

The entrance snapped shut then, and Corey turned back to Gordon, wiping
the wisps of hair from his face. He was still wheezing asthmatically,
but there seemed to be no change in the rhythm of his breathing. "As I
was going to say, cobber," he said, "we've got a little social game
going upstairs--the room with the window. Fine view of the parades. We
need a fourth."

Gordon started to protest that he was tired and needed his sleep; then
he shrugged. Corey's house was one of the few that had kept some
relation to Earth styles by installing a couple of windows in the second
story, and it would give a perfect view of the street. He followed the
old man up the stairs.

       *       *       *       *       *

Two other men were already in the surprisingly well-furnished room, at
the little table set up near the window. Bruce Gordon recognized one as
Randolph, the publisher of the little opposition paper. The man's pale
blondness, weak eyes, and generally rabbity expression totally belied
the courage that had permitted him to keep going at his hopeless task of
trying to clean up Marsport. The _Crusader_ was strictly a one-man
weekly, against Mayor Wayne's _Chronicle_, with its Earth-comics and
daily circulation of over a hundred thousand. Wayne apparently let the
paper stay in business to give himself a talking point about fair play;
but Randolph walked with a limp from the last working over he had
received.

"Hi, Gordon," he said. His thin, high voice was cool and reserved, in
keeping with the opinion he had expressed publicly of the police as a
body. But he did not protest Corey's selection of a partner. "This is Ed
Praeger. He's an engineer on our railroad."

Gordon acknowledged the introduction automatically. He'd almost
forgotten that Marsport was the center of a thinly populated area,
stretching for a thousand miles in all directions beyond the city,
connected by the winding link of the electric monorail. "So there really
is a surrounding countryside," he said.

Praeger nodded. He was a big, open-faced man, just turning bald. His
handshake was firm and friendly. "There are even cities out there,
Gordon. Nothing like Marsport, but that's no loss. That's where the real
population of Mars is--decent people, men who are going to turn this
into a real planet some day."

"There are plenty like that here, too," Randolph said. He picked up the
cards. "First ace deals. Damn it, Mother, sit down-wind from me, won't
you? Or else take a bath."

Mother Corey chuckled, and wheezed his way up out of the chair,
exchanging places with Gordon. "I got a surprise for you, cobber," he
said, and there was only amusement in his voice. "I got me in fifty
gallons of water today, and tomorrow I do just that. Made up my mind
there was going to be a cleanup in Marsport, even if Wayne does win. And
stop examining the cards, Bruce. I don't cheat my friends. The readers
are put away for old-times' sake."

Randolph shrugged, and went on as if he hadn't interrupted himself.
"Ninety per cent of Marsport is decent. They have to be. It takes at
least nine honest men to support a crook. They come up here to start
over--maybe spent half their life saving up for the trip. They hear a
man can make fifty credits a day in the factories, or strike it rich
crop prospecting. What they don't realize is that things cost ten times
as much here, too. They plan, maybe, on getting rich and going back to
Earth...."

"Nobody goes back," Mother Corey wheezed. "_I_ know." His eyes rested on
Gordon.

"A lot don't want to," Praeger said. "I never meant to go back. I've got
me a farm up north. Another ten years, and I retire to it. My kids are
up there now--grandkids, that is. They're Martians; maybe you won't
believe me, but they can breathe the air here without a helmet."

The others nodded. Gordon had learned that a fair number of
third-generation people got that way. Their chests were only a trifle
larger, and their heartbeat only a few points higher; it was an internal
adaptation, like the one that had occurred in test animals reared at a
simulated forty-thousand-feet altitude on Earth, before Mars was ever
settled.

"They'll take the planet away from Earth yet," Randolph agreed.
"Marsport is strictly artificial. It's kept going only because it's the
only place where Earth will set down her ships. If Security doesn't do
anything, time will."

"Security!" Gordon muttered bitterly. Security was good at getting
people in trouble, but he had seen no other sign of it.

Randolph frowned over his cards. "Yeah, I know. The government set them
up, gave them a mixture of powers, and has been trying to keep them from
working ever since. But somehow they did clean up Venus; and every crook
here is scared to death of the name. How come a muckraking newspaperman
like you never turned up anything on them, Gordon?"

Gordon shrugged. It was the first reference he'd heard to his
background, and he preferred to let it drop.

But Mother Corey cut in, his voice older and hoarser, and the skin on
his jowls even grayer than usual. "Don't sell them short, cobber. I
did--once.... You forget them, here, after a while. But they're
around...."

Bruce Gordon felt something run down his armpit, and a chill creep up
his back....

Out on the street, a sudden whooping began, and he glanced down. The
parade was on, the Croopsters in full swing, already mostly drunk. The
main body went down the street, waving fluorescent signs, while
side-guards preceded them, armed with axes, knocking aside the flimsier
barricades as they went. He watched a group break into a small grocery
store to come out with bundles. They dragged out the storekeeper, his
wife, and young daughter, and pressed them into the middle of the
parade.

"If Security's so damned powerful, why doesn't it stop that?" he asked
bitterly.

Randolph grinned at him. "They might do it, Gordon. They just might. But
are you sure you want it stopped?"

"All right," Mother Corey said suddenly. "This is a social game,
cobbers."

Outside, the parade picked up enthusiasm as smaller gangs joined behind
the main one. There were a fair number of plain citizens who had been
impressed into it, too, judging by the appearance of little frightened
groups in the middle of the mobsters.

Gordon couldn't understand why the police hadn't at least been kept on
duty, until Honest Izzy came into the room. The little man found a chair
and bought chips silently; he looked tired.

"Vacation?" Mother Corey asked.

Izzy nodded. "Trench took forever giving it to us, Mother. But it's the
same old deal; all the police gees get tomorrow off--you, too, gov'nor.
No cops to influence the vote, that's the word. We even gotta wear
civvies when we go out to vote for Wayne."

Gordon looked down at the rioters, who were now only keeping up a
pretense of a parade. It would be worse tomorrow, he supposed; and there
would be no cops. The image of the old woman and her husband in the
little liquor store where he'd had his first experience came back to
him. He wondered how well barricaded they were.

He felt the curious eyes of Mother Corey dancing from him to Izzy and
back, and heard the old man's chuckle. "Put a uniform on some men and
they begin to believe they're cops, eh, cobber?"

He shoved up from the table abruptly and headed for his room, swearing
to himself.




Chapter VIII

VOTE EARLY AND OFTEN


Izzy was up first the next morning, urging them to hurry before things
began to hum. From somewhere, he dug up a suit of clothes that Murdoch
could wear. He found the gun that Gordon had confiscated from O'Neill
and filled it from a box of ammunition he'd apparently purchased.

"I picked up some special permits," he said. "I knew you had this
cannon, gov'nor, and I figured it'd come in handy. Wouldn't be caught
dead with one myself. Knives, that's my specialty. Come on, Cap'n, we
gotta get out the vote."

Murdoch shook his head. "In the first place, I'm not registered."

Izzy grinned. "Every cop's registered in his own precinct; Wayne got the
honor system fixed for us. Show your papers and go into any booth in
your territory. That's all. And you'd better be seen voting often, too,
Cap'n. What's your precinct?"

"Eleventh, but I'm not voting. I'd like to come along with you to
observe, but I wouldn't make any choice between Wayne and Nolan."

Downstairs, the rear room was locked, with one of Mother Corey's guards
at the door. From inside came the rare sound of water splashing, mixed
with a wheezing, off-key caterwauling. Mother Corey was apparently
making good on his promise to take a bath. As they reached the hall, one
of Trench's lieutenants came through the entrance, waving his badge at
the protesting man outside.

He spotted the three, and jerked his thumb. "Come on, you. We're late.
And I ain't staying on the streets when it gets going."

A small police car was waiting outside, and they headed for it. Bruce
Gordon looked at the debacle left behind the drunken, looting mob. Most
of the barricades were down. Here and there, a few citizens were rushing
about trying to restore them, keeping wary eyes on the mobsters who had
passed out on the streets.

Suddenly a siren blasted out in sharp bursts, and the lieutenant jumped.
"Come on, you gees. I gotta be back in half an hour."

They piled inside, and the little electric car took off at its top
speed. But now the quietness had been broken. There were trucks coming
out of the plastics plant, and mobsters were gathering up their drunks,
and chasing the citizens back into their houses. Some of them were
wearing the forbidden guns, but it wouldn't matter on a day when no
police were on duty.

In the Ninth Precinct, the Planters were the biggest gang, and all the
others were temporarily enrolled under them. Here, there were less signs
of trouble. The joints had been better barricaded, and the looting had
been kept to a minimum.

The three got off. A scooter pulled up alongside them almost at once,
with a gun-carrying mobster riding it. "You mugs get the hell out
of--Oh, cops! Okay, better pin these on."

He handed out gaudy arm bands, and the three fastened them in place.
Nearly everyone else already had them showing. The Planters were moving
efficiently. They were grouped around the booths, and they had begun to
line up their men, putting them in position to begin voting at once.

Then the siren hooted again, a long, steady blast. The bunting in front
of the booths was pulled off, and the lines began to move. Izzy led the
way to the one at the rich end of their beat, and moved toward the head
of the line. "Cops," he said to the six mobsters who surrounded the
booth. "We got territory to cover."

A thumb indicated that they could go in. Murdoch remained outside, and
one of the thugs reached for him. Izzy cut him off. "Just a friend on
the way to his own route. Eleventh Precinct."

There were scowls, but they let it go. Then Gordon was in the little
booth. It seemed to be in order. There were the books of registration,
with a checker for Wayne, one for Nolan, and a third, supposedly
neutral, behind the plank that served as a desk. The Nolan man was
protesting.

"He's been dead for ten years. I know him. He's my uncle."

"There's a Mike Thaler registered, and this guy says he's Thaler," the
Wayne man said decisively. "He votes."

One of the Planters passed his gun to the inspector for the Wayne side.
The Nolan man gulped, and nodded. "Heh-heh, yes, just a mix-up. He's
registered, so he votes."

The next man Gordon recognized as being from one of the small shops on
his beat. The fellow's eyes were desperate, but he was forcing himself
to go through with it. "Murtagh," he said, and his voice broke on the
second syllable. "Owen Murtagh."

"Murtang.... No registration!" The Wayne checker shrugged. "Next!"

"It's Murtagh. M-U-R-T-A-G-H. Owen Murtagh, of 738 Morrisy--"

"Protest!" The Wayne man cut off the frantic wriggling of the Nolan
checker's finger toward the line in the book. "When a man can't get the
name straight the first time, it's suspicious."

The supposedly neutral checker nodded. "Better check the name off,
unless the real Murtagh shows up. Any objections, Yeoman?"

The Nolan man had no objections--outwardly. He was sweating, and the
surprise in his eyes indicated that this was all new to him.

Bruce Gordon came next, showing his badge. He was passed with a nod, and
headed for the little closed-off polling place. But the Wayne man
touched his arm and indicated a ballot. There were two piles, and this
pile was already filled out for Wayne. "Saves trouble, unless you want
to do it yourself," he suggested.

Gordon shrugged, and shoved it into the slot. He went outside and waited
for Izzy to follow. It was raw beyond anything he'd expected--but at
least it saved any doubt about the votes.

The procedure was the same at the next booth, though they had more
trouble. The Nolan man there was a fool--neither green nor agreeable. He
protested vigorously, in spite of a suspicious bruise along his temple,
and finally made some of the protests stick.

Gordon began to wonder how it could be anything but a clear unanimous
vote, at that rate. Izzy shook his head. "Wayne'll win, but not that
easy. The sticks don't have strong mobs, and they'll pile up a heavy
Nolan vote. And you'll see things hum soon!"

Gordon had voted three times under the "honor system," before he saw.
They were just nearing a polling place when a heavy truck came careening
around a corner. Men began piling out of the back before it stopped--men
armed with clubs and stones. They were in the middle of the Planters at
once, striking without science, but with ferocity. The line waiting to
vote broke up, but the citizens had apparently organized with care. A
good number of the men in the line were with the attackers.

There was the sound of a shot, and a horrified cry. For a second, the
citizens broke; then a wave of fury seemed to wash over them at the
needless risk to the safety of all. The horror of rupturing the dome was
strongly ingrained in every citizen of Marsport. They drew back, then
made a concerted rush. There was a trample of bodies, but no more shots.

In a minute, the citizens' group was inside, ripping the fixed ballots
to shreds, filling out and dropping their own. They ignored the
registration clerks.

A whistle had been shrilling for minutes. Now another group came onto
the scene, and the Planters' men began getting out rapidly. Some of the
citizens looked up and yelled, but it was too late. From the approaching
cars, pipes projected forward. Streams of liquid jetted out, and their
agonized cries followed.

Even where he stood, Gordon could smell the fumes of ammonia. Izzy's
face tensed, and he swore. "Inside the dome! They're poisoning the air."

But the trick worked. In no time, men in crude masks were clearing out
the booth, driving the last struggling citizens away, and getting ready
for business as usual.

Murdoch turned on his heel. "I've had enough. I've made up my mind," he
said. "The cable offices must be open for the doctored reports on the
election to Earth. Where's the nearest?"

Izzy frowned, but supplied the information. Bruce Gordon pulled Murdoch
aside. "Come off the head-cop role; it won't work. They must have had
reports on elections before this."

"Damn the trouble. It's never been this raw before. Look at Izzy's face,
Gordon. Even he's shocked. Something has to be done about this, before
worse happens. I've still got connections back there--"

"Okay," Gordon said bitterly. He'd liked Asa Murdoch, had begun to
respect him. It hurt to see that what he'd considered hardheadedness was
just another case of a fool fighting dragons with a paper sword.

"Okay, it's your death certificate," he said, and turned back toward
Izzy. "Go send your sob stories, Murdoch."

They taught a bunch of pretty maxims in school--even slum kids learned
that honesty was the best policy, while their honest parents rotted in
unheated holes, and the racketeers rode around in fancy cars. It had got
him once. He'd refused to take a dive as a boxer; he'd tried to play
honest cards; he'd tried honesty on his beat back on Earth. He'd tried
to help the suckers in his column, and here he was.

And Gordon had been proud to serve under Murdoch.

"Come on, Izzy," he said. "Let's vote!"

Izzy shook his head. "It ain't right, gov'nor."

"Let him do what he damn pleases," Gordon told him.

Izzy's small face puckered up in lines of worry. "No, I don't mean him.
I mean this business of using ammonia. I know some of the gees trying to
vote. They been paying me off--and that's a retainer, you might say. Now
this gang tries to poison them. I'm still running an honest beat, and I
bloody well can't vote for that! Uniform or no uniform, I'm walking beat
today. And the first gee that gives trouble to the men who pay me gets a
knife where he eats. When I get paid for a job, I do the job."

Gordon watched him head down the block, and started after the little
man. Then he grimaced. Rule books! Even Izzy had one.

He went down the row, voting regularly. The Planters had things in
order. The mess had already been cleaned up when he arrived at the
cheaper end of the beat. It was the last place where he'd be expected to
do his duty by Wayne's administration; he waited in line.

Then a voice hit at his ears, and he looked up to see Sheila Corey only
two places in front of him. "Mrs. Mary Edelstein," she was saying. The
Wayne man nodded, and there was no protest. She picked up a Wayne
ballot, and dropped it in the box.

Then her eyes fell on Gordon. She hesitated for a second, bit her lips,
and finally moved out into the crowd.

He could see no sign of her as he stepped out a minute later, but the
back of his neck prickled.

He started out of the crowd, trying to act normal, but glancing down to
make sure the gun was in its proper position. Satisfied, he wheeled
suddenly and spotted her behind him, before she could slip out of sight.

Then a shout went up, yanking his eyes around with the rest of those
standing near. The eyes had centered on the alleys along the street, and
men were beginning to run wildly, while others were jerking out their
weapons. He saw a big gray car coming up the street; on its side was
painted the colors of the Planters. Now it swerved, hitting a siren
button.

But it was too late. Trucks shot out of the little alleys, jamming
forward through the people; there must have been fifty of them. One hit
the big gray car, tossing it aside. It was Trench himself who leaped
out, together with the driver. The trucks paid no attention, but bore
down on the crowd. From one of them, a machine gun opened fire.

Gordon dropped and began crawling in the only direction that was open,
straight toward the alleys from which the trucks had come. A few others
had tried that, but most were darting back as they saw the colors of
Nolan's Star Point gang on the trucks.

Other guns began firing; men were leaping from the trucks and pouring
into the mob of Planters, forcing their way toward the booth in the
center of the mess.

It was a beautifully timed surprise attack, and a well-armed one, even
though guns were supposed to be so rare here. Gordon stumbled into
someone ahead of him, and saw it was Trench. He looked up, and straight
into the swinging muzzle of the machine gun that had started the
commotion.

Trench was reaching for his revolver, but he was going to be too late.
Gordon brought his up the extra half inch, aiming by the feel, and
pulled the trigger. The man behind the machine gun dropped.

Trench had his gun out now, and was firing, after a single surprised
glance at Gordon. He waved back toward the crowd.

But Gordon had spotted the open trunk of the gray car. He shook his head
and tried to indicate it. Trench jerked his thumb and leaped to his
feet, rushing back.

Gordon saw another truck go by, and felt a bullet miss him by inches.
Then his legs were under him, and he was sliding into the big luggage
compartment, where the metal would shield him.

Something soft under his feet threw him down. He felt a body under him,
and coldness washed over him before he could get his eyes down. The cold
went away, to be replaced by shock. Between his spread knees lay
Murdoch, bound and gagged, his face a bloody mess.

Gordon reached for the gag, but the other held up his hands and pointed
to the gun. It made sense. The knots were tight, but Gordon managed to
get his knife under the rope around Murdoch's wrists and slice through
it. The older man's hands went out for the gun; his eyes swung toward
the street, while Gordon attacked the rope around his ankles.

The Star Point men were winning, though it was tough going. They had
fought their way almost to the booth, but there a V of Planters' cars
had been gotten into position somehow, and gunfire was coming from
behind them. As he watched, a huge man reached over one of the cars,
picked up a Star Point man, and lifted him behind the barricade.

The gag had just come out when the Star Point man jumped into view
again, waving a rag over his head and yelling. Captain Trench followed
him out, and began pointing toward the gray car.

"They want me," Murdoch gasped thickly. "Get out, Gordon, before they
gang up on us!"

Gordon jerked his eyes back toward the alley on the other side. It went
at an angle and would offer some protection.

He looked back, just as bullets began to land against the metal of the
car. Murdoch held up one finger and put himself into a position to make
a run for it. Then he brought the finger down sharply, and the two
leaped out.

Trench's ex-Marine bellow carried over the fighting. "Get the old man!"

Bruce Gordon had no time to look back. He hit the alley in five
heart-ripping leaps and was around the bend. Then he swung, just as
Murdoch made it. Bullets spatted against the walls, and he saw blood
pumping from under Murdoch's right shoulder.

"Keep going!" Murdoch ordered.

A fresh cry from the street cut into his order, however. Gordon risked a
quick look, then stepped farther out to make sure.

The surprise raid by the Star Pointers hadn't been quite as much of a
surprise as expected. Coming down the street, with no regard for men
trying to get out of their way, the trucks of the Croopsters were
battering aside the few who could not reach safety. There were no
machine guns this time.

They smacked into the tangle of Star Point trucks, and came to a
grinding halt, men piling out ready for battle. Gordon nodded. In a few
minutes, Wayne's supporters would have the booth again; there'd be a
delay before any organized search could be made for the fugitives. He
looked down at Murdoch's shoulder.

"Come on," he said finally. "Or should I carry you?"

Murdoch shook his head. "I'll walk. Get me to a place where we can
talk--and be damned to this. Gordon, I've got to talk--but I don't have
to live. I mean that!"

Gordon started off, disregarding the words; a place of safety had to
come first. He picked his way down alleys and small streets. The older
man kept trying to stop to speak, but Gordon gave him no opportunity.
There was one chance....

It was farther than he'd thought, and Gordon began to suspect he'd
missed the way, until he saw the drugstore. Now it all fell into
place--the first beat he'd had with Izzy.

He ducked down back alleys until he reached the right section. He
scanned the street, jumped to the door of the little liquor store and
began banging on it. There was no answer, though he was sure the old
couple lived just over the store.

He began banging again. Finally, a feeble voice sounded from inside.
"Who is it?"

"A man in distress!" he yelled back. There was no way to identify
himself; he could only hope she would look.

The entrance seal opened briefly; then it flashed open all the way. He
motioned to Murdoch, and jumped to help the failing man to the entrance.
The old lady looked, then moved quickly to the other side.

"_Ach, Gott_," she breathed. Her hands trembled as she relocked the
seal. Then she brushed the thin hair off her face, and pointed. Gordon
followed her up the stairs, carrying Murdoch on his back. She opened a
door, passed through a tiny kitchen, and threw open another door to a
bedroom.

The old man lay on the bed, and this time there was no question of
concussion. The woman nodded. "Yes. Pappa is dead, God forbid it. He
_would_ try to vote. I told him and told him--and then ... With my own
hands, I carried him here."

Gordon felt sick. He started to turn, but she shook her head quickly.
"No. Pappa is dead. He needs no beds now, and your friend is suffering;
put him here."

She lifted the frail body of the old man and lowered him onto the floor
with a strength that seemed impossible. Then her hands were gentle as
she helped lower Murdoch where the corpse had been. "I'll get alcohol
from below--and bandages and hot water."

Asa Murdoch opened his eyes, breathing stertoriously. His face was
blanched, his clothes a mess. But he protested as Gordon tried to strip
them. "Let them go, kid. There's no way to save me now. And listen!"

"I'm listening!"

"With your _mind_, Gordon, not your ears. You've heard a lot about
Security. Well, I'm Security. Top level--policy for Mars. We never got a
top man here without his being discovered and killed--That's why we've
had to work under all the cover--and against our own government. Nobody
knew I was here--Trench was our man--Sold us out! We've got junior
men--down to your level, clerks, such things. We've got a dozen plans.
But we're not ready for an emergency, and it's here--now!

"Gordon, you're a self-made louse, but you're a man underneath it
somewhere. That's why we rate you higher than you think you are. That's
why I'm going to trust you--because I have to."

He swallowed, and the thin hand of the woman lifted brandy to his lips.
"Pappa," she said slowly. "He was a clerk once for Security. But nobody
came, nobody called...."

She went back to trying to bandage the bleeding bluish hole in his
chest. Murdoch nodded faintly.

"Probably what happened to a lot--men like Trench, supposed to build an
organization, just leaving the loose ends hanging." He groaned; sweat
popped out on his forehead, but his eyes never left Gordon's. "Hell's
going to pop. The government's just waiting to step in; Earth _wants_ to
take over."

"It should," Gordon said.

"No! We've studied these things. Mars won't give up--and Earth wants a
plum, not responsibility. You'll have civil war and the whole planetary
development ruined. Security's the only hope, Gordon--the only chance
Mars had, has, or will have! Believe me, I know. Security has to be
notified. There's a code message I had ready--a message to a
friend--even you can send it. And they'll be watching. I've got the
basic plans in the book here."

He slumped back. Gordon frowned, then found the book and pulled it out
as gently as he could. It was a small black memo book, covered with
pages of shorthand. The back was an address book, filled with
names--many crossed out. A sheet of paper in normal writing fell out.

"The message ..." Murdoch took another swallow of brandy. "Take it.
You're head of Security on Mars now. It's all authorized in the plans
there. You'll need the brains and knowledge of the others--but they
can't act. You can--we know about you."

The old woman sighed. She put down the hot water and picked up the
bottle of brandy, starting down the stairs.

"Gordon!" Murdoch said faintly.

He turned to put his head down. From the stairs, a sudden cry and thump
sounded, and something hit the floor. Gordon jumped toward the sound, to
find the old lady bending over the inert figure of Sheila Corey.

"I heard someone," the woman said. She stared at the brandy bottle
sickly. "_Gott in Himmel_, look at me. Am I a killer, too, that I should
strike a young and beautiful girl. She comes into my house, and I sneak
behind her ... It is an evil time, young man. Here, you carry her
inside. I'll get some twine to tie her up. The idea, spying on you!"

Gordon picked the girl up roughly. That capped it, he thought. There was
no way of knowing how much she'd heard, or whether she'd tipped others
off. He dropped her near the bed, and went over to Murdoch. The man was
dying now.

"So Security wants me to contact the others in the book and organize
things?"

"Yes." Murdoch swallowed. "Not a good chance, then--but a chance. Still
time--I think. Gordon?"

"What else can I do?" Bruce Gordon asked.

He knew it was no answer, but Asa Murdoch apparently accepted it as a
promise. The gray-speckled head relaxed and rolled sideways on the
bloody pillow.

"Dead," Gordon said to the woman, as she came up with the twine. "Dead,
fighting wind-mills. And maybe winning. I don't know."

He turned toward Sheila--a split second too late. The girl came up from
the floor with a single push of her arm. She pivoted on her heel, hit
the door, and her heels were clattering on the stairs. Before Gordon
could reach the entrance, she was whipping around into an alley.

He watched her go, sick inside, and the last he saw was the hand she
held up, waving the little black book at him!

He turned back into the liquor shop; the woman seemed to read his face.
"I should have watched her. It is a bad day for me, young man. I failed
Pappa; I failed the poor man who died--and now I have failed you. It is
better..."

He caught her as she fell toward him. She relaxed after a second.
"Upstairs, please," she whispered, "beside Pappa. There was nothing
else. And these Martian poisons--they are so sure, they don't hurt. Five
minutes more, I think. Stay with me, I'll tell you how Pappa and I got
married. I want somebody should know how it was with us once, together."

He stayed, then picked the two bodies up and moved them from the floor
onto the bed where he had first seen the old man. He moved Murdoch's
body aside, and covered the two gently. Finally, he went down the
stairs, carrying Murdoch with him. The man's weight was a stiff load,
even on Mars; but, somehow, he couldn't leave his body with the old
couple.

He stopped finally ten blocks of narrow alleys away, and put Murdoch
down.

Now he had no witnesses, except Sheila Corey. He had no book, no clues
as to whom to see and what to do.

He heard the sound of a mobile amplifier, and strained his ears toward
it. He got enough to know that Wayne had won a thumping victory, better
than three to two.

Isaiah Trench was still captain of the Seventh Precinct.




Chapter IX

CONTRABAND


Elections were over, but the few dim lights along the street showed only
boarded-up and darkened buildings. There were sounds of stirring, but no
one was trusting that the election-day brawls were completely ended yet.

Gordon hesitated, then swung glumly toward a corner where he could find
a police call box. He heard a tiny patrol car turn the corner and ducked
back into another alley to wait for it to go by. But they weren't
looking for him. Their spotlight caught a running boy, clutching a few
thin copies of the _Crusader_ under a scrawny arm.

After the cops had dumped the unconscious kid into the back of the small
squad car, and gone looking for more game, Gordon went over to look at
the tattered scraps left of the opposition paper.

Randolph wasn't preaching this time, but was content to report the facts
he'd seen. There had been at least ninety known killings; mobs had
fought citizens outside the main market for three hours.

Yet in spite of all the ballot-stuffing and intimidations, Wayne had
barely squeaked through, by a four per cent majority. It was obvious
that the current administration could never win another election.

Bruce Gordon lifted the cradled phone from the box. "Gordon reporting,"
he announced.

A startled grunt came from the instrument, followed by the clicks of
hasty switching. In less than fifteen seconds, Trench's voice barked out
of the phone. "Gordon? Where the hell you been?"

"Up an alley between McCutcheon and Miles," Gordon told him. "With a
corpse. Murdoch's corpse. Better send out the wagon."

Trench hesitated only a fraction of a second. "Okay, _I'll_ be out in
ten minutes."

Gordon clumped back to the alley and bent for a final inspection of
Murdoch's body, to make sure nothing would prove the flaws in his weakly
built story.

Isaiah Trench was better than his word. He swung his gray car up to the
alley in seven minutes.

The door slammed behind him, a beam snapped out from his flashlight into
the alley, and then he was beside Murdoch's body. He threw the light to
Gordon and stooped to run expert hands over the corpse and through the
pockets.

Finally, he stood up, frowning. "He's dead, all right. I don't get it.
If you hadn't reported in ... Gordon, did he try to make you think he
was--"

"Security?" Gordon filled in. "Yeah. Claimed he was head of it here, and
wanted me to send a message to Earth for him."

Trench nodded, a touch of relief on his face. "Crazy!"

Gordon grimaced faintly.

"Crazy," Trench repeated. "He must have been to spin that story ... By
the way, thanks for killing that sniper. You're a good shot. I'd be dead
if you weren't, I guess."

Gordon made no comment, and Trench said, "I could start a nasty
investigation, I guess. But I heard him raving, too. Give me a hand, and
I'll take care of all this ... Want me to drop you off?"

They wangled the body into the trunk of the car. Then it was good to
relax while Trench drove along the rubble-piled and nearly deserted
streets. Gordon heard a sigh from beside him; Trench must have been
under tension, too.

They didn't speak until Trench stopped in front of Mother Corey's place.
Then the captain turned and stuck out his hand. "Congratulations, by the
way. I forgot to tell you, but you won the lottery. You're a sergeant
from now on."

       *       *       *       *       *

Inside, a thick effluvium hit his nose, and Gordon turned to see Mother
Corey's huge bulk waddling down the hall. The old man nodded. "We
thought you'd gone on the lam, cobber. But I guess, since Trench brought
you back, you've cooled. Good, good. As a respectable man now, I
couldn't have stashed you from the cops--though I might have been
tempted--mighty tempted." His face was melancholy. "Tell me, lad, did
they get Murdoch?"

Bruce Gordon nodded, and the old man sighed. Something suspiciously like
a tear glistened in his eyes.

"I thought you were taking a bath," Gordon commented.

The old man chuckled. "Fate's against me, cobber. With all the shooting,
some punk put a bullet clean through the wall and the plastic of the
tub. Fifty gallons of water, all wasted!"

He turned back toward the end of the hall, sighing again. Gordon went up
the stairs, noticing that Izzy's door was open. The little man was
stretched out on the bunk in his clothes, filthy; one side of his face
swollen.

"Hi, gov'nor," he called out, his voice still cheerful. "I had odds
you'd beat the ticket, though the Mother and me were worried there for a
while. How'd you grease the fix?"

Gordon sketched it in, without mentioning Security. "What happened to
you, Izzy?"

"Price of being honest. But the gees who paid me protection didn't get
hurt, gov'nor." He winced, then grinned. "So they pay double tomorrow.
Honesty pays, gov'nor, if you squeeze it once in a while ... Funny, you
making sergeant; I thought two other gees won the lottery."

So the promotion _had_ come from Trench! It bothered him. When a turkey
sees corn on the menu, it's time to wonder about Thanksgiving.

       *       *       *       *       *

Collections were good all week--probably as a result of Izzy's actions.
Even after he arranged to pay his income tax, and turned over his
"donation" to the fund, Gordon was well ahead for the first time since
he'd landed here.

He had become almost superstitious about the way he was always left with
no more than a hundred credits in his pockets. This time, he stripped
himself to that sum at once, depositing the rest in the First Marsport
Bank. Maybe it would break the jinx.

They were one of the few teams in the Seventh Precinct to make full
quota. Trench was lavish in his praise. He was playing more than fair
with Bruce Gordon now, but there was a basic suspicion in his eyes.

The next day, he drafted Izzy and Gordon for a trip outside the dome.
"It's easy enough, and you'll get plenty of credit in the fund for it. I
need two men who can keep their mouths shut."

They idled around the station through the morning. In the late
afternoon, they left in a big truck capable of hauling what would have
been fifty tons on Earth. Trench drove. Outside the dome, the electric
motor carried them along at a steady twenty miles an hour, almost
silently.

It was Gordon's first look at the real Mars. He saw small villages where
crop prospectors and hydroponic farmers lived, with a few small
industrial sections scattered over the desert. As they moved out, he saw
the slow change from the beaten appearance of Marsport to something that
seemed no worse than would be found among the share-croppers back on
Earth. It was obvious that Marsport was the poison center here.

Some of the younger children were running around without helmets,
confirming Praeger's claim that third-generation Martians somehow
learned to adapt to the atmosphere.

Darkness fell sharply, as it always did in Mars' thin air, but they went
on, heading out into the dunes of the desert. When they finally stopped,
they were beside a small, battered space ship. Boxes were piled all
around it, and others were being tossed out. Trent leaped from the
truck, motioning them to follow, and they began loading the crates
hastily. It took about an hour of hard work to load the last of them,
and Trench was working harder than they were. Finished, he went up to
one of the men from the ship, handed over an envelope, and came back to
start the truck back toward Marsport. As the dunes dwindled behind them,
Gordon could see the brief flare of the little rocket taking off.

They drove back through the night as rapidly as the truck could manage.
Finally, they rolled into City Hall, down a ramp, and onto an elevator
that took them three levels down. Trench climbed out and nodded in
satisfaction. "That's it. Take tomorrow off, if you want, and I'll fix
credit for you. But just remember you haven't seen anything. You don't
know any more than our old friend Murdoch!"

He led them to another elevator, then swung back to the truck.

"Guns," Gordon said slowly. "Guns and contraband ammunition for the
administration from Earth. And they must have paid half the graft
they've taken for that. What the hell do they want it for?"

Izzy jerked a shoulder upwards and a twist ran across his pock-marked
face. "War, what else? Gov'nor, Earth must be boiling about the
election. Maybe Security's getting set to spring."

The idea of Marsport rebelling against Earth seemed ridiculous. Even
with guns, they wouldn't have a chance if Earth sent a force of any
strength to back Security. But it was the only explanation.

Gordon took the next day off to look for Sheila Corey, but nobody would
admit having seen her.

He had seen crowds beginning to assemble all afternoon, but had paid no
attention to them. Now he found the way back to Corey's blocked by a
mob. Then he saw that the object of it all was the First Marsport Bank.
It was only toward that that the shaking fists were raised. Gordon
managed to get onto a pile of rubble where he could see over the crowd.
The doors of the bank were locked shut, but men were attacking it with
an improvised battering ram. As he watched, a pompous little man came to
the upper window over the door and began motioning for attention. The
crowd quieted almost at once, except for a single yell. "When do we get
our money?"

"Please. Please." The voice reached back thinly as the bank president
got his silence. "Please. It won't do you any good. Not a bit. We're
broke. Not a cent left! And don't go blaming me. _I_ didn't start the
rush. Your friends did that. They took all the money, and now we're
cleaned out. You can't--"

A rope rose from the crowd and settled around him. In a second, he was
pulled down, and the crowd surged forward.

Gordon dropped from the rubble, staring at the bank. He'd played it safe
this time--he'd put his money away, to make sure he'd have it!

A heavy hand fell on his shoulder, and he turned to see Mother Corey.
"That's the way a panic is, cobber," the man said. "There's a run, then
everything is ruined. I tried to get you when I first heard the rumor,
but you were gone. And when this starts, a man has to get there first."
He patted his side, where a bulge showed. "And I just made it, too."

The mob was beginning to break up now, but it was still in an ugly mood.
"But what started it?"

"Rumors that Mayor Wayne got a big loan from the bank--and why not,
seeing it was his bank! Nobody had to guess that he'd never pay it back,
so--"

Gordon found Izzy organizing the bouncers from the joints and some of
the citizens into a squad. Every joint was closed down tightly already.
Gordon began organizing his own squad.

Izzy slipped over as he began to get them organized. "If we hold past
midnight, we'll be set, gov'nor," he said. "They go crazy for a while,
but give 'em a few hours and they stop most of it. I figure you know
where all the scratch went?"

"Sure--guns from Earth! The damned fools!"

"Yeah. But not fools. Just bloody well-informed, gov'nor. Earth's
sending a fleet--got official word of it. No way of telling how big, but
it's coming."

It gave Gordon something to think about while they patrolled the beat.
But he had enough for a time without that. The mobs left the section
alone, apparently scared off by the organized group ready and waiting
for them. But every street and alley had to be kept under constant
surveillance to drive out the angry, desperate men who were trying to
get something to hang onto before everything collapsed. He saw stores
being broken into, beyond his beat; and brawls as one drunken, crazed
crowd met another. But he kept to his own territory, knowing that there
was nothing he could do beyond it.

By midnight, as Izzy had promised, the people had begun to quiet down,
however. The anger and hysteria were giving way to a sullen, beaten
hopelessness.

Honest Izzy finally seemed satisfied to turn things over to the regular
night men. Gordon waited around a while longer, but finally headed back
to Mother Corey's place.

Mother Corey put a cup of steaming coffee into his hands. "You look
worse than I do, cobber. Worse than even that granddaughter of mine. She
was looking for you!"

"Sheila?" Gordon jerked the word out.

"Yeah. She left a note for you. I put it up in your room." Mother Corey
chuckled. "Why don't you two get married and make your fighting legal?"

"Thanks for the coffee," Gordon threw back at him. He was already
mounting the stairs.

He tossed his door open and found the letter on his bed.

"I'd rather go to Wayne," it said, "but I need money. If you want the
rest of this, you've got until three tonight to make an offer. If you
can find me, maybe I'll listen."

The torn-off front cover of the notebook accompanied the letter. But it
was a quarter after three already, he was practically broke--and he had
no idea where she could be found.




Chapter X

MARRIAGE OF CONVENIENCE


Bruce Gordon jerked the door open to yell for Izzy while he tucked the
bit of notebook cover into his pocket. Then he stopped as something
nibbled at his mind; the odor Gordon had smelled before registered. He
yanked out the bit of notebook and sniffed. It hadn't been close enough
for any length of time to be contaminated by Mother Corey, so the smell
could only come from one place.

He checked the batteries on his suit and put it on quickly. There was no
point in wearing the helmet inside the dome, but it was better than
trying to rent one at the lockers. He buckled it to a strap. The knife
slid into its sheath, and the gun holster snapped onto the suit. As a
final thought, he picked up the stout locust stick he'd used under
Murdoch.

There were no cabs outside tonight, of course. The streets were almost
deserted, except for some prowler or desperation-driven drug addict. He
proceeded cautiously, however, realizing that it would be just like
Sheila to ambush him. But he reached the exit from the dome with no
trouble.

"Special pass to leave at this hour," the guard there reminded him. "Of
course, if it's urgent, pal..."

Gordon was in no mood to try bribes. He let his hand drop to the gun.
"Police Sergeant Gordon, on official business," he said curtly. "Get the
hell out of my way."

The guard thought it over, and reached for the release. Gordon swung
back as he passed through. "And you'd better be ready to open when I
come back."

He was in comparative darkness almost at once, and tonight there was no
sign of the lights of patrolling cops. Then three specks of glaring blue
light suddenly appeared in the sky, jerking his eyes up. They were
dropping rapidly.

Rockets that flamed bright blue--military rockets! Earth was finally
taking a hand!

He crouched in a hollow that had once been some kind of a basement until
the ships had landed and cut off their jets. Then he stood up, blinking
his eyes until they could again make out the pattern of the dim bulbs.
He'd seen enough by the rocket glare to know that he was headed right.
And finally the ugly half-cylinder of patched brick and metal that was
the old Mother Corey's Chicken Coop showed up against the faint light.

He moved in cautiously, as silently as he could, and located the
semi-secret entrance to the building without meeting anyone. Once in the
tunnel that led to the building, he felt a little safer.

He removed his helmet, and strapped it to the back of his suit, out of
the way. The old hall was in worse shape than before. Mother Corey had
run a somewhat orderly place, with constant vigilance; Bruce Gordon
could never have come into the hallway without being seen in the old
days.

Then a pounding sound came from the second floor, and Gordon drew back
into the denser shadows, staring upwards. A heavy voice picked up the
exchange of shouts.

"You, Sheila, you come outa there! You come right out or I'm gonna blast
that there door down. You open up."

Gordon was already moving up the stairs when a second voice reached him,
and this one was familiar. "Jurgens don't want _you_; all he wants is
this place--we got use for it. It don't belong to you, anyhow! Come out
now, and we'll let you go peaceful. Or stay in there and we'll blast you
out--in pieces."

It was the voice of Jurgens' henchman who had called on Mother Corey
before elections. The thick voice must belong to the big ape who'd been
with him.

"Come on out," the little man cried again. "You don't have a chance.
We've already chased all your boarders out!"

Gordon tried to remember which steps had creaked the worst, but he
wasn't too worried, if there were only two of them. Then his head
projected above the top step, and he hesitated. Only the rat and the ape
were standing near a heavy, closed door. But four others were lounging
in the background. He lifted his foot to put it back down to a lower
step, just as Sheila's muffled voice shrilled out a fog of profanity. He
grinned, and then saw that he'd lifted his foot to a higher step.

There was a sharp yell from one of the men in the background and a knife
sailed for him, but the aim was poor. Gordon's gun came out. Two of the
men were dropping before the others could reach for their own weapons,
and while the rat-faced man was just turning. The third dropped without
firing, and the fourth's shot went wild. Gordon was firing rapidly, but
not with such a stupid attempt at speed that he couldn't aim each shot.
And at that distance, it was hard to miss.

Rat-face jerked back behind the big hulk of his partner, trying to pull
a gun that seemed to be stuck; a scared man's ability to get his gun
stuck in a simple holster was always amazing. The big guy simply lunged,
with his hands out.

Gordon side-stepped and caught one of the arms, swinging the huge body
over one hip. It sailed over the broken railing, to land on the floor
below and crash through the rotten planking. He heard the man hit the
basement, even while he was swinging the club in his hand toward the
rat-faced man.

There was a thin, high-pitched scream as a collarbone broke. He slumped
onto the floor, and began to try hitching his way down the steps. Gordon
picked up the gun that had fallen out of the holster as the man fell and
put it into his pouch. He considered the two, and decided they would be
no menace.

"Okay, Sheila," he called out, trying to muffle his voice. "We got them
all."

"Pie-Face?" Her voice was doubtful.

He considered what a man out here who went under that name might be
like. "Sure, baby. Open up!"

"Wait a minute. I've got this nailed shut." There was the sound of an
effort of some kind going on as she talked. "Though I ought to let you
stay out there and rot. Damn it ... uh!"

The door heaved open then, and she appeared in it; then she saw him, and
her jaw dropped open slackly. "You!"

"Me," he agreed. "And lucky for you, Cuddles."

Her hand streaked to a gun in her belt. "Kill him!"

This time, he didn't wait to be attacked. He went for the door, knocking
her aside. His knee caught the outside of her hip as she spun; she fell
over, dropping the gun.

The two men in the room were both holding knives, but in the ridiculous
overhand position that seems to be an ingrained stupidity of the human
race, until it's taught better. A single flip of his locust club against
their wrists accounted for both of the knives. He grabbed them by the
hair of their heads, then, and brought the two skulls together savagely.

Sheila lay stretched out on the floor, where her head had apparently
struck against the leg of a bed. Gordon shoved the bodies of the two men
aside and looked down at the wreck of a man who lay on the dirty
blanket. "Hello, O'Neill," he said.

The former leader of the Stonewall gang stared up at the club swinging
from Gordon's wrist. "You ain't gonna beat me this time? I'm a sick man.
Sick. Can't hurt nobody. Don't beat me again."

Gordon's stomach knotted sickly. Doing something under the pressure of
necessity was one thing; but to see the sorry results of it later was
another. "All right," he said. "Just stay there until I get away from
this rat's nest and I won't hit you. I won't even touch you."

He was sure enough that it was no act on O'Neill's part; he wasn't so
sure about Sheila. He checked the two men on the floor, who were still
out cold. Then he stepped through the door carefully, to make sure that
the big bruiser hadn't come back.

His ears barely detected the sound Sheila made as she reached for the
knife of one of the men. Then it came--the faintest catch of breath.
Gordon threw himself flat to the floor. She let out a scream as he saw
her momentum carry her over him; she was at the edge of the rail, and
starting to fall.

He caught her feet in his hands and yanked her back. There was nothing
phony this time as she hit the floor.

"Just a matter of co-ordination, Cuddles," he told her. "Little girls
shouldn't play with knives; they'll grow up to be old maids that way."

Fury blackened her face, but she still couldn't function. He picked her
up and tossed her back into the room. From the broken mattress on the
bed, he dug out a coil of wire and bound her hands and feet with it.

"Can't say I think much of your choice of companions these days," he
commented, looking toward the bed where O'Neill was cowering. "It looks
as if your grandfather picks them better for you."

"You filthy-minded hog! D'you think I'd--I'd--One room in the place with
a decent door, and you can't see why I'd choose that room to keep
Jurgens' devils back. You--You--"

He'd been searching the room, but there was no sign of the notebook
there. He checked again to see that the wire was tight, and then picked
up the two henchmen who were showing some signs of reviving.

"I'll watch them," a voice said from the door. Gordon snapped his head
up to see Izzy standing there. He realized he'd been a lot less cautious
than he'd thought.

Izzy grinned at his confusion. "I got enough out of the Mother to case
the pitch," he said. "I knew I was right when I spotted the apeman
carrying a guy with a bad shoulder away from here. Jurgens' punks, eh?"

"Thanks for coming. What's it going to cost me?"

"Wouldn't be honest to charge unless you asked me to convoy you,
gov'nor. And if you're looking for the vixen's room, it's where you
bunked before. I got around after I spotted you here."

Sheila Corey forced herself to a sitting position and spat at Izzy.
"Traitor! Crooked little traitor!"

"Shut up, Sheila," Izzy said. "Your retainer ran out."

Surprisingly, she did shut up. Gordon went to the little space--and saw
that Izzy was right; there was a nearly used-up lipstick, a comb, and a
cracked mirror. There was also a small cloth bag containing a few scraps
of clothes.

He turned the room upside down, but there was no sign of the notebook or
papers from it.

He located her helmet and carried it down with him. "You're going
bye-bye, Cuddles," he told her. "I'm going to put this on you and then
unfasten your arms and legs. But if you start to so much as wiggle your
big toe, you won't sit down for a month."

She pursed her lips hotly, but made no reply. He screwed the helmet on,
and unfastened her arms. For a second, she tensed, while he waited,
grinning down at her. Then she slumped back and lay quiet as he
unfastened her legs.

He tossed her over his shoulder, and started down the rickety stairs.

There was a little light in the sky. Five minutes later, it was full
daylight, which should have been a signal for the workers to start for
their jobs. But today they were drifting out unhappily, as if already
sure there would be no jobs by nightfall.

A few stared at Gordon and his burden, but most of them didn't even look
up. The two men trudged along silently.

"Prisoner," he announced crisply to the guard, but there was no protest
this time. They went through, and he was lucky enough to locate a
broken-down tricycle cab.

Mother Corey let them in, without flickering an eyelash as he saw his
granddaughter. Bruce Gordon dropped her onto her legs. "Behave
yourself," he warned her as he took off his helmet, and then unfastened
hers.

Mother Corey chuckled. "Very touching, cobber. You have a way with
women, it seems. Too bad she had to wear a helmet, or you might have
dragged her here by her hair. Ah, well, let's not talk about it here. My
room is more comfortable--and private."

Inside, Sheila sat woodenly on the little sofa, pretending to see none
of them. Mother Corey looked from one to the other, and then back to
Gordon. "Well? You must have had some reason for bringing her here,
cobber."

"I want her out of my hair, Mother," Gordon tried to explain. "I can
lock her up--carrying a gun without a permit is reason enough. But I'd
rather you kept her here, if you'll take the responsibility. After all,
she's your granddaughter."

"So she is. That's why I wash my hands of her. I couldn't control myself
at her age, couldn't control my son, and I don't intend to handle a
female of my line. It looks as if you'll have to arrest her."

"Okay. Suppose I rent a room and put a good lock on it. You've got the
one that connects with mine vacant."

"I run a respectable house now, Gordon," Mother Corey stated flatly.
"What you do outside my place is your own business. But no women, except
married ones. Can't trust 'em."

Gordon stared at the old man, but he apparently meant just what he said.
"All right, Mother," he said finally. "How in hell do I marry her
without any rigmarole?"

Izzy's face seemed to drop toward the floor. Sheila came up off the
couch with a choking cry and leaped for the door. Mother Corey's immense
arm moved out casually, sweeping her back onto the couch.

"Very convenient," the old man said. "The two of you simply fill out a
form--I've got a few left from the last time--and get Izzy and me to
witness it. Drop it in the mail, and you're married."

"If you think I'd marry you, you filthy--" Sheila began.

Mother Corey listened attentively. "Rich, but not very imaginative," he
said thoughtfully. "But she'll learn. Izzy, I have a feeling we should
let them settle their differences."

As the door shut behind them, Gordon yanked Sheila back to the couch.
"Shut up!" he told her. "This isn't a game. Hell's popping here--you
know that better than most people. And I'm up to my neck in it. If I've
got to marry you to keep you out of my hair, I will."

Her face was pasty-white, but she bent her head, and fluttered her
eyelashes up at him. "So romantic," she sighed. "You sweep me off my
feet. You--Why, you--"

"Me or Trench! I can take you to him and tell him you're mixed up in
Security, and that you either have papers on you or out at the Chicken
Coop to prove it. He won't believe _you_ if I take you in. Well?"

She looked at him a long time in silence, and there was surprise in her
eyes. "You'd do it! You really would.... All right; I'll sign your
damned papers!"

Ten minutes later, he stood in what was now a connecting double room,
watching Mother Corey nail up the hall door to the room that was to be
hers. There were no windows here, and his own room had an excellent lock
on it already--one he'd put on himself. Izzy came back as Mother Corey
finished the door and began knocking a small panel out of the connecting
door. The old man was surprisingly adept with his hands as he fitted
hinges and a catch to the panel, and re-installed it so that Sheila
could swing it open.

"They're married," Izzy said. "It's in the mail to the register, along
with the twenty credits. Gov'nor, we're about due to report in."

Gordon nodded. "Be with you in a minute," he said as he paid Mother
Corey for the materials and work. He jerked his head and the two men
went out, leaving him alone with Sheila.

"I'll bring you some food tonight. And you may not have a private bath,
but it beats the Chicken Coop. Here." He handed her the key to the
connecting door. "It's the only key there is."




Chapter XI

THE SKY'S THE LIMIT


All that day, the three rocket ships sat out on the field. Nobody went
up to them, and nobody came from them; surprisingly, Wayne had found the
courage to ignore them. But rumors were circulating wildly. Bruce Gordon
felt his nerves creeping out of his skin and beginning to stand on end
to test each breeze for danger.

With the credit they'd accumulated in the fund, nearly all their
collection was theirs. Gordon went out to do some shopping. He stopped
when his money was down to a hundred credits, hardly realizing what he
was doing. When he went out, the street was going crazy.

Izzy had been waiting, and filled him in. At exactly sundown, the rocket
ships had thrown down ramps, and a stream of jeeps had ridden down them
and toward the south entrance to the dome. They had presented some sort
of paper and forced the guard to let them through. There were about two
hundred men, some of them armed. They had driven straight to the huge,
barnlike Employment Bureau, had chased out the few people remaining
there, and had simply taken over. Now there was a sign in front which
simply said MARSPORT LEGAL POLICE FORCE HEADQUARTERS. Then the
jeeps had driven back to the rockets, gone on board, and the ships had
taken off.

Gordon glanced at his watch, finding it hard to believe it could have
been done so quickly. But it was two hours after sundown.

Now a car with a loudspeaker on top rolled into view--a completely
armored car. It stopped, and the speaker began operating.

"Citizens of Marsport! In order to protect your interests from the
proven rapacity of the administration here, Earth has revoked the
independent charter of Marsport. The past elections are hereby declared
null and void. Your home world has appointed Marcus Gannett as mayor,
with Philip Crane as chief of police. Other members of the council will
be by appointment until legal elections can be held safely. The
Municipal Police Force is disbanded, and the Legal Police Force is now
being organized.

"All police and officers who remain loyal to the legal government will
be accepted at their present grade or higher. To those who now leave the
illegal Municipal Force and accept their duty with the Legal Force,
there will be no question of past conduct. Nor will they suffer
financially from the change!

"Banks will be reopened as rapidly as the Legal Government can extend
its control, and all deposits previously made will be honored in full."

That brought a cheer from the crowd, as the sound truck moved on. Gordon
saw two of the police officers nearby fingering their badges
thoughtfully.

Then another truck rolled into view, and the Mayor's canned voice came
over it, panting as if he'd had to rush to make the recording. He began
directly:

"Martians! Earth has declared war on us. She has denied us our right to
rule ourselves--a right guaranteed in our charter. We admit there have
been abuses; all young civilizations make mistakes. But we've developed
and grown.

"This is an old pattern, fellow Martians! England tried it on her
colonies three hundred years ago. And the people rose up and demanded
their right to rule themselves. They had troubles with their
governments, too--and they had panics. But they won their freedom, and
it made them great--so great that now that _one_ nation--not all Earth,
but that single nation!--is trying to do to us what she wouldn't permit
to herself.

"Well, we don't have an army. But neither do they. They know the people
of this world wouldn't stand for the landing of foreign--that's right,
_foreign_--troops. So they're trying to steal our police force from us
and use it for their war.

"Fellow Martians, they aren't going to bribe us into that! Mars has had
enough. I declare us to be in a state of revolution. And since they have
chosen the weapons, I declare our loyal and functioning Municipal Police
Force to be _our_ army. Any man who deserts will be considered a
traitor. But any man who sticks will be rewarded more than he ever
expected. We're going to protect our freedom.

"Let them open their banks--our banks--again. And when they have
established your accounts, go in and collect the money! If they give it
to you, Mars is that much richer. If they don't, you'll know they're
lying.

"Let them bribe us if they like. We're going to win this war."

Gordon felt the crowd's reaction twist again, and he had to admit that
Wayne had played his cards well.

But it didn't make the question of where he belonged, or what he should
do, any easier. He waited until the crowd had thinned out a little and
began heading toward Corey's, with Izzy moving along silently beside
him, carrying half the packages.

He remembered the promise of forgiveness for all sins on joining the new
Legal Force; but he'd read enough history to know that it was fine--as
long as the struggle continued. Afterwards, promises grew dim....

He had no use for the present administration, but Earth had no right to
take over without a formal investigation, and a chance for the people to
state their choice.

Then he grimaced at himself. He was in no position to move according to
right and wrong. The only question that counted was how he had the best
chance to ride out the storm, and to get back to Earth and a normal
life.

He was still in a brown study as he took the bundles from Izzy and
dropped them on his bed. Izzy went out, and Gordon stood staring at the
wall. Trench? Or the new Commissioner Crane? If Earth should win--and
they had most of the power, after all--and Bruce Gordon had fought
against Security, the mines of Mercury were waiting.

He picked up the stuff from his bed and started to sweep it aside before
he lay down. Then he remembered at last; he knocked on the panel, until
it finally opened a crack.

"Here," he told her. "Food, and some other stuff. There are some refuse
bags, too. Yell when you want them removed."

She took the bundles woodenly until she came to a plastic can. Then she
gasped. "Water! Two gallons!"

"There are heat tablets, and a skin tub." The salesgirl had explained
how one gallon was enough in the plastic bag that served as a tub; he
had his doubts. "Detergent. The whole works."

She hauled the stuff in and started to close the panel. Then she
hesitated. "I suppose I should thank you, but I don't like to be told I
stink so much you can't stand me in the next room!"

"Hell, I've gotten so I can stand your grandfather," he answered. "It
wasn't that." The panel slammed shut.

       *       *       *       *       *

He still hadn't solved his problem in the morning; out of habit, he put
on his uniform and went across to Izzy's room. But Izzy was already
gone.

Gordon fished into the pocket of his uniform for paper and a pencil to
leave a note in case Izzy came back. His fingers found the half notebook
cover instead. He drew it out, scowling at it, and started to crumple
it. Then he stopped, staring at the piece of imitation leather and paper
that wouldn't bend.

His fingers were still stiff as he began tearing off the thin covering
with his knife; the paper backing peeled away easily.

Under it lay a thin metal plate that glowed faintly even in the dim
light of Izzy's room! Gordon nearly dropped it. He'd seen such an
identification plate once before.

The printing on it leaped at him: "This will identify the bearer, BRUCE
IRVING GORDON, as a PRIME agent of the Office of Solar Security,
empowered to make and execute any and all directives under the powers of
this office." The printing in capitals was obviously done by hand, but
with the same catalytic "ink" as the rest of the badge. Murdoch must
have prepared it, hidden it in the notebook, then died before the secret
could be revealed.

A knock sounded from across the hall. Gordon thrust the damning badge as
deep into his pouch as he could cram it and looked out. It was Mother
Corey.

"You've got a visitor--outside," he announced. "Trench. And I don't like
the stench of that kind of cop in my place. Get him away, cobber, get
him away!"

Gordon found Trench pacing up and down in front of the house, scowling
up at it. But the ex-Marine smiled as he saw Bruce Gordon in uniform.
"Good. At least some men are loyal. Had breakfast, Gordon?"

Gordon shook his head, and realized suddenly that the decision seemed to
have been taken out of his hands. They crossed the street and went down
half a block. "All right," he said, when the coffee began waking him.
"What's the angle?"

Trench dropped the eyes that had been boring into him. "I'll have to
trust you, Gordon. I've never been sure. But either you're loyal now or
I can't depend on anyone being loyal."

During the night, it seemed, the Legal Force had been recruiting. Wayne,
Arliss, and the rest of the administration had counted on self-interest
holding most of the cops loyal to them. They'd been wrong. Legal forces
already controlled about half the city.

"So?" Gordon asked. He could have told Trench that the fund was
good-enough reason for most police deserting.

Trench put his coffee down and yelled for more. It was obvious he'd
spent the night without sleep. "So we're going to need men with guts.
Gordon, you had training under Murdoch--who knew his business. And you
aren't a coward, as most of these fat fools are. I've got a proposition,
straight from Wayne."

"I'm listening."

"Here." Trench threw across a platinum badge. "Take that--captain at
large--and conscript any of the Municipal Force you want, up to a
hundred. Pick out any place you want, train them to handle those damned
Legals the way Murdoch handled the Stonewall boys. In return, the sky's
the limit. Name your own salary, once you've done the job. And no
kickbacks, either!"

Gordon picked up the badge slowly and buckled it on, while a grim,
satisfied smile spread over Trench's features. The problem seemed to
have been solved. Gordon should have been satisfied, but he felt like
Judas picking up the thirty pieces of silver. He tried to swallow them
with the dregs of his coffee, and they stuck in his throat.

Comes the revolution and we'll all eat strawberries and scream!

A hubbub sounded outside, and Trench grimaced as a police whistle
sounded, and a Municipal cop ran by. "We're in enemy territory," he
said. "The Legals got this precinct last night. Captain Hendrix and some
of his men wanted to come back with full battle equipment and chase them
out. I had a hell of a time getting them to take it easy. I suppose that
was some damned fool who tried to go back to his beat."

"Then you'd better look again," Gordon told him. He'd gone to the door
and was peering out. Up the narrow little street was rolling a group of
about seventy Municipal police and half a dozen small trucks. The men
were wearing guns. And up the street a man in bright green uniform was
pounding his fist up and down in emphasis as he called in over the
precinct box.

"The idiot!" Trench grabbed Gordon and spun out, running toward the
advancing men. "We've got to stop this. Get my car--up the street--call
Arliss on the phone--under the dash. Or Wayne. I'll bring Hendrix."

Trench's system made some sense, and this business of marching as to war
made none at all. Gordon grabbed the phone from under the dash. A sleepy
voice answered to say that Commissioner Arliss and Mayor Wayne were
sleeping. They'd had a hard night, and...

"Damn it, there's a rebellion going on!" Gordon told the man. Rebellion,
rebellion! He'd meant to say revolution, but...

Trench was arguing frantically with the pompous figure of Captain
Hendrix. From the other end of the street, a group of small cars
appeared; and men began piling out, all in shiny green.

"Who's this?" the phone asked. When Gordon identified himself, there was
a snort of disgust. "Yes, yes, congratulations. Trench was quite right;
you're fully authorized. Did you call me out of bed just to check on
that, young man?"

"No, I--" Then he hung up. Hendrix had dropped to his knees and fired
before Trench could knock the gun from his hands.

There was no answering fire. The Legals simply came boiling down the
street, equipped with long pikes with lead-weighted ends. And Hendrix
came charging up, his men straggling behind him. Gordon was squarely in
the middle. He considered staying in Trench's car and letting it roll
past him. But he'd taken the damned badge.

"Hell," he said in disgust. He climbed out, just as the two groups met.
It all had a curious feeling of unreality.

Then a man jumped for him, swinging a pike, and the feeling was suddenly
gone. His hand snapped down sharply for a rock on the street. The pike
whistled over his head, barely missing, and he was up, squashing the big
stone into the face of the other. He jerked the pike away, kicked the
man in the neck as he fell, and unsheathed his knife with the other
hand.

Trench was a few feet away. The man might be a louse, but he was also a
fighting machine of first order, still. He'd already captured one of the
pikes. Now he grinned tightly at Gordon and began moving toward him.
Gordon nodded--in a brawl such as this, two working together had a
distinct advantage.

Then a yell sounded as more Legals poured down the street. One of them
was obviously Izzy, wearing the same green as the others!

Gordon felt something hit his back, and instinctively fell, soaking up
the blow. He managed to bend his neck and roll, coming to his feet. His
knife slashed upwards, and the Legal fell--almost on top of the Security
badge that had dropped from Gordon's pouch.

He jerked himself down and scooped it up, his eyes darting for Trench.
He stuffed it back, ducking a blow. Then his glance fell on the entrance
to Mother Corey's house--with Sheila Corey coming out of the seal!

Gordon threw himself back; he had to get to her.

He hadn't been watching as closely as he should. He saw the pike coming
down and tried to duck...

He was vaguely conscious later of looking up, to see Sheila dragging him
into some entrance, while Trench ran toward them. Sheila and Trench
together--and the Security badge was still in his pouch!




Chapter XII

WIFE OR PRISONER?


Something cold and damp against his forehead brought Gordon part way out
of his unconsciousness finally. There was the softness of a bed under
him and the bitter aftertaste of Migrainol on his tongue. He tried to
move, but nothing happened. The drug killed pain, but only at the
expense of a temporary paralysis of all voluntary motion.

There was a sudden withdrawal of the cooling touch on his forehead, and
then hasty steps that went away from him, and the sound of a door
closing.

Steps sounded from outside; his door opened, and there was the sound of
two men crossing the room, one with the heavy shuffle of Mother Corey.

"No wonder the boys couldn't find where you'd stashed him, Mother. Must
be a bloody big false section you've got in that trick mattress of
yours!"

"Big enough for him and for Trench, Izzy," Mother Corey's wheezing voice
agreed. "Had to be big to fit me."

"You mean you hid Trench out, too?" Izzy asked.

There was a thick chuckle and the sound of hands being rubbed together.
"A respectable landlord has to protect himself, Izzy. For hiding and a
convoy back, our Captain Trench gave me a paper with immunity from the
Municipal Force. Used that, with a bit of my old reputation, to get your
Mayor Gannett to give me the same from the Legals. Gannett didn't want
Mother Corey to think the Municipals were kinder than the Legals, so
you're in the only neutral territory in Marsport. Not that you deserve
it."

"Lay off, Mother," Izzy said sharply. "I told you I had to do it. I take
care of the side that pays my cut, and the bloody administration pulled
the plug on my beat twice. Only honest thing to do was to join the
Legals."

"And get your rating upped to a lieutenant," Mother Corey observed.
"Without telling cobber Gordon!"

"Like I say, honesty pays, Mother--when you know how to collect. Hell, I
figured Bruce would do the same. He's a right gee."

Mother Corey chuckled. "Yeah, when he forgets he's a machine. How about
a game of shanks?"

The steps moved away; the door closed again. Bruce Gordon got both eyes
open and managed to sit up. The effects of the drug were almost gone,
but it took a straining of every nerve to reach his uniform pouch. His
fingers, clumsy and uncertain, groped back and forth for a badge that
wasn't there!

He heard the door open softly, but made no effort to look up. The
reaction from his effort had drained him.

Fingers touched his head carefully, brushing the hair back delicately
from the side of his skull. Then there was the biting sting of
antiseptic, sharp enough to bring a groan from his lips. Sheila's hair
fell over her face as she bent to replace his bandages.

Her eyes wandered toward his, and the scissors and bandages on her lap
hit the floor as she jumped to her feet. She turned toward her room,
then hesitated as he grinned crookedly at her. "Hi, Cuddles," he said
flatly.

She bit her lips and turned back, while a slow flush ran over her face.
Her voice was uncertain. "Hello, Bruce. You okay?"

"How long have I been like this?"

"Fifteen hours, I guess. It's almost midnight." She bent over to pick up
the bandages and to finish with his head. "Are you hungry? There's some
canned soup--I took the money from your pocket. Or coffee..."

"Coffee." He forced himself up again; Sheila propped the flimsy pillow
behind him, then went into her room to come back with a plastic cup
filled with brown liquid that passed for coffee here. It was loaded with
caffeine, at least.

"Why'd you come back?" he asked suddenly. "You were anxious enough to
pick the lock and get out."

"I didn't pick it--you forgot to lock it."

He couldn't remember what he'd done after he found the badge. "Okay, my
mistake. But why the change of heart?"

"Because I needed a meal ticket!" she said harshly. "When I saw that
Legal cop ready to take you, I had to go running out to save you.
Because I don't have the iron guts to starve like a Martian!"

It rocked him back on his mental heels. He'd thought that she had been
attacking him on the street; but it made more sense this way, at that.

"You're a fool!" he told her bitterly. "You bought a punched meal
ticket. Right now, I probably have six death warrants out on me, and
about as much chance of making a living as--"

"I'll stick to my chances. I don't have any others now." She grimaced.
"You get things done. Now that you've got a wife to support, you'll
support her. Just remember, it was your idea."

He'd had a lot of ideas, it seemed. "I've got a wife who's holding onto
a notebook that belongs to me, then. Where is it?"

She shook her head. "I'm keeping the notebook for insurance. Blackmail,
Bruce. You should understand that! And you won't find it, so don't
bother looking..." She went into the other room and shut the door.
There was the sound of the lock being worked, and then silence.

He stared at the door foolishly, swearing at all women; then grimaced
and turned back to the chair where his uniform still lay. He could stay
here fighting with her, or he could face his troubles on the outside.
The whole thing hinged on Trench; unless Trench had shown the badge to
others, his problem boiled down to a single man.

Gordon found one tablet of painkiller left in the bottle and swallowed
it with the dregs of the coffee. He made sure his knife was in its
sheath and that the gun at his side was loaded. He found his police
club, checked the loop at its end, and slipped it onto his wrist.

At the door to the hall, he hesitated, staring at Sheila's room. Wife or
prisoner? He turned it over in his mind, knowing that her words couldn't
change the facts. But in the end, he dropped the key and half his money
beside her door, along with a spare knife and one of his guns.

He went by Izzy's room without stopping; technically, the boy was an
enemy to all Municipals. This might be neutral territory, but there was
no use pressing it. Gordon went down the stairs and out through the seal
onto the street entrance, still in the shadows.

His eyes covered the street in two quick scans. Far up, a Legal cop was
passing beyond the range of the single dim light. At the other end, a
pair of figures skulked along, trying the door of each house they
passed. With the cops busy fighting each other, this was better pickings
than outside the dome.

He saw the Legal cop move out of sight and stepped onto the street,
trying to look like another petty crook on the prowl. He headed for the
nearest alley, which led through the truckyard of Nick the Croop.

The entrance was in nearly complete darkness. Gordon loosened his knife
and tightened his grip on the locust stick.

Suddenly a whisper of sound caught his ears. He stopped, not too
quickly, and listened, but everything was still. A hundred feet farther
on, and within twenty yards of the trucks, a swishing rustle reached his
ears and light slashed hotly into his eyes. Hands grabbed at his arms,
and a club swung down toward his knife. But the warning had been enough.
Gordon's arms jerked upwards to avoid the reaching hands. His boot
lifted, and the flashlight spun aside, broken and dark. With a
continuous motion, he switched the knife to his left hand in a thumb-up
position and brought it back. There was a grunt of pain; he stepped
backwards and twisted. His hands caught the man behind, lifted across a
hip, and heaved, just before the front man reached him.

The two ambushers were down in a tangled mess. There was just enough
light to make out faint outlines, and Gordon brought his locust club
down twice, with the hollow thud of wood on skulls.

His head was swimming in a hot maelstrom of pain, but it was quieting as
his breathing returned to normal. As long as his opponents were slower
or less ruthless, he could take care of himself.

The trouble, though, was that Isaiah Trench was neither slow nor
squeamish.

Gordon gathered the two hoodlums under his arms and dragged them with
him. He came out in the truckyard and began searching. Nick the Croop
had ridden his reputation long enough to be careless, and the third
truck had its key still in the lock. He threw the two into the back and
struck a cautious light.

One of them was Jurgens' apelike follower, his stupid face relaxed and
vacant. The other was probably also one of Jurgens' growing mob of
protection racketeers. Gordon yanked out the man's wallet, but there was
no identification; it held only a small sheaf of bills.

He stripped out the money--and finally put half of it back into the
wallet and dropped it beside the hoodlum. Even in jail, a man had to
have smokes.

He stuck to the alleys, not using the headlights, after he had locked
the two in and started the electric motor. He had no clear idea of how
the battles were going, but it looked as if the Seventh Precinct was
still in Municipal hands.

There was no one at the side entrance to Seventh Precinct Headquarters
and only two corporals on duty inside; the rest were probably out
fighting the Legals, or worrying about it. One of the corporals started
to stand up and halt him, but wavered at the sight of the captain's star
that was still pinned to his uniform.

"Special prisoners," Gordon told him sharply. "I've got to get
information to Trench--and in private!"

The corporal stuttered. Gordon knocked him out of the way with his
elbow, reached for the door to Trench's private office, and yanked it
open. He stepped through, drawing it shut behind him, while his eyes
checked the position of his gun at his hip. Then he looked up.

There was no sign of Trench. In his place, and in the uniform of a
Municipal captain, sat the heavy figure of Jurgens. "Outside!" he
snapped. Then his eyes narrowed, and a stiff smile came onto his lips as
he laid the pen down. "Oh, it's you, Gordon?"

"Where's Captain Trench?"

The heavy features didn't change as Jurgens chuckled. "Commissioner
Trench, Gordon. It seems Arliss decided to get rid of Mayor Wayne, but
didn't count on Wayne's spies being better than his. So Trench got
promoted--and I got his job for loyal service in helping the Force
recruit. My boys always wanted to be cops, you know."

Gordon tried to grin in return as he moved closer, slipping the heavy
locust club off his wrist.

"I sent Ape and Mullins out to get in touch with you," Jurgens said.
"But I guess they didn't reach you before you left."

Gordon shook his head slightly, while the nerves bunched and tingled in
his neck. "They hadn't arrived when I left the house," he said
truthfully enough.

Jurgens reached out for tobacco and filled a pipe. He fumbled in his
pockets, as if looking for a light. "Too bad. I knew you weren't in top
shape, so I figured a convoy might be handy. Well, no matter. Trench
left some instructions about you, and--"

His voice was perfectly normal, but Gordon saw the hand move suddenly
toward the drawer that was half-open. And the cigarette lighter was
attached to the other side of the desk.

The locust stick left Gordon's hand with a snap. It cut through the air
a scant eight feet, jerked to a stop against Jurgens' forehead and
clattered onto the top of the desk, while Jurgens folded over, his mouth
still open, his hand slumping out of the drawer. The club rolled toward
Gordon, who caught it before it could reach the floor.

But Jurgens was only momentarily out. As Gordon slipped the loop over
his wrist again, one of the new captain's hands groped, seeking a button
on the edge of the desk.

The two corporals were at the door when Gordon threw it open, but they
drew back at the sight of his drawn gun. Feet were pounding below as he
found the entrance that led to the truck. He hit the seat and rammed
down the throttle with his foot before he could get his hands on the
wheel.

It was a full minute before sirens sounded behind him, and Nick the
Croop had fast trucks. He spotted the squad car far behind, ducked
through a maze of alleys, and lost it for another few precious minutes.
Then a barricade lay ahead.

The truck faltered as it hit the nearly finished obstacle, and Gordon
felt his stomach squashing down onto the wheel. He kept his foot to the
floor, strewing bits of the barricade behind him, until he was beyond
the range of the Legal guns that were firing suddenly. Then he stopped
and got out carefully, with his hands up.

"Captain Bruce Gordon, with two prisoners--bodyguards of Captain
Jurgens," he reported to the three men in bright new Legal uniform who
were approaching warily. "How do I sign up with you?"




Chapter XIII

ARREST MAYOR WAYNE!


The Legal forces were shorthanded and eager for recruits. They had
struck quickly, according to plans made by experts on Earth, and now
controlled about half of Marsport. But it was a sprawling crescent
around the central section, harder to handle than the Municipal
territory. Bruce Gordon was sworn in at once.

Then he cooled his heels while the florid, paunchy ex-politician
Commissioner Crane worried about his rating and repeated how corrupt
Mars was and how the collection system was over--absolutely over. In the
end, he was given a captain's pay and the rank of sergeant. As a favor,
he was allowed to share a beat with Honest Izzy under Captain Hendrix,
who had simply switched sides after losing the morning's battle.

Gordon's credits were changed to Legal scrip, and he was issued a
trim-fitting green uniform. Then a surprisingly competent doctor
examined his wound, rebandaged it, and sent him home for the day. The
change was finished--and he felt like a grown man playing with dolls.

He walked back, watching the dull-looking people closing off their
homes, as they had done at elections. Here and there, houses had been
broken into during the night. There were occasional buzzes of angry
conversation that cut off as he approached.

Marsport had learned to hate all cops, and a change of uniform hadn't
altered that; instead, the people seemed to resent the loss of the
familiar symbol of hatred.

He found Izzy and Randolph at the restaurant across from Mother Corey's.
Izzy grinned suddenly at the sight of the uniform. "I knew it,
gov'nor--knew it the minute I heard Jurgens was a cop. Did you make 'em
give you my beat?"

He seemed genuinely pleased as Gordon nodded, and then dropped it, to
point to Randolph. "Guess what, gov'nor. The Legals bought Randy's
_Crusader_. Traded him an old job press and a bag of scratch for his
reputation."

"You'll be late, Izzy," Randolph said quietly. Gordon suddenly realized
that Randolph, like everyone else, seemed to be Izzy's friend. He
watched the little man leave, and reached out for the menu. Randolph
picked it out of his hand. "You've got a wife home, muckraker. You don't
have to eat this filth."

Gordon got up, grimacing at the obvious dismissal. But the publisher
motioned him back again.

"Yeah, the Legals want the _Crusader_ for their propaganda," he said
wearily. "New slogans and new uniforms, and none of them mean anything.
Here!" He drew a small golden band from his little finger. "My mother's
wedding ring. Give it to her--and if you tell her it came from me, I'll
rip out your guts!"

He got up suddenly and hobbled out, his pinched face working. Gordon
turned the ring over, puzzled. Finally he got up and headed for his
room, a little surprised to find the door unlocked. Sheila opened her
eyes at his uniform, but made no comment. "Food ready in ten minutes,"
she told him.

She'd already been shopping, and had installed the tiny cooking
equipment used in half Marsport. There was also a small iron lying
beside a pile of his laundered clothes. He dropped onto the bed wearily,
then jerked upright as she came over to remove his boots. But there was
no mockery on her face--and oddly, it felt good to him. Maybe her idea
of married life was different from his.

She was sanding the dishes and putting them away when he finally
remembered the ring. He studied it again, then got up and dropped it
beside her. He was surprised as she fumbled it on to see that it
fitted--and more surprised at the sudden realization that she was
entitled to it.

She studied it under the glare of the single bulb, and then turned to
her room. She was back a few seconds later with a small purse. "I got a
duplicate key. Yours is in there," she said thickly. "And--something
else. I guess I was going to give it to you anyway. I was afraid someone
else might find it--"

He cut her off brusquely, his eyes riveted on the Security badge he'd
been sure Trench had taken. "Yeah, I know. Your meal ticket was in
danger. Okay, you've done your nightly duty. Now get the hell out of my
room, will you?"

       *       *       *       *       *

The week went on mechanically, while he gradually adjusted to the new
angles of being a Legal. The banks were open, and deposits honored, as
promised. But it was in the printing-press scrip of Legal currency,
useful only through Mayor Gannett's trick Exchanges. Water went up from
fourteen credits to eighty credits for a gallon of pure distilled. Other
things were worse. Resentment flared, but the scrip was the only money
available, and it still bound the people to the new regime.

Supplies were scarce, salt and sugar almost unavailable. Earth had cut
off all shipping until the affair was settled, and nobody in the
outlands would deal in scrip.

He came home the third evening to find that Sheila had managed to find
space for her bunk in his room, cut off by a heavy screen, and had
closed the other room to save the rent. It led to some relaxation
between them, and they began talking impersonally.

Gordon watched for a sign that Trench had passed on his evidence of the
murder of Murdoch, but there was none. The pressure of the beat took his
mind from it. Looting had stepped up.

Izzy had co-operated--reluctantly, until Gordon was able to convince him
that it was the people who paid his salary. Then he nodded. "It's a
helluva roundabout way of doing things, gov'nor, but if the gees pay for
protection any old way, then they're gonna get it!"

They got it. Hoodlums began moving elsewhere, toward easier pickings.

Gordon turned his entire pay over to Sheila; at current prices, it would
barely keep them in food for a week. "I told you you had a punched meal
ticket," he said bitterly.

"We'll live," she answered him. "I got a job today--barmaid, on your
beat, where being your wife helps."

He could think of nothing to say to it; but after supper, he went to
Izzy's room to arrange for a raid on Municipal territory. Such small
raids were nominally on the excuse of extending the boundaries, but
actually they were out-and-out looting.

He came back to find her cleaning up, and shoved her away. "Go to bed.
You look beat. I'll sand these."

She started to protest, then let him take over.

They never made the looting raid. The next morning, they arrived at the
Precinct house to find men milling around the bulletin board, buzzing
over an announcement there. Apparently, Chief Justice Arliss had broken
with the Wayne administration, and the mimeographed form was a legal
ruling that Wayne was no longer Mayor, since the charter had been
voided. He was charged with inciting a riot, and a warrant had been
issued for his arrest.

Hendrix appeared finally. "All right, men," he shouted. "You all see it.
We're going to arrest Wayne. By jingo, they can't say we ain't legal
now! Every odd-numbered shield goes from every precinct. Gordon,
Isaacs--you two been talking big about law and order. Here's the
warrant. Take it and arrest Wayne!"

It took nearly an hour to get the plans settled, but finally they headed
for the trucks that had been arriving. Most of them belonged to Nick the
Croop, who had apparently decided the Legals would win.

Gordon and Izzy found the lead truck and led the way. They neared the
bar where Sheila was working, and Bruce Gordon swore. She was running
toward the center of the street, frantically trying to flag him down,
and he barely managed to swerve around her. "Damned fool!" he muttered.

Izzy's pock-marked face soured for a second as he stared at Gordon. "The
princess? She sure is."

The crew at the barricade had been alerted, and now began clearing it
aside hastily, while others kept up a covering fire against the few
Municipals. The trucks wheeled through, and Gordon dropped back to let
scout trucks go ahead and pick off any rash enough to head for the call
boxes. They couldn't prevent advance warning, but they could delay and
minimize it.

They were near the big Municipal building when they came to the first
real opposition, and it was obviously hastily assembled. The scouts took
care of most of the trouble, though a few shots pinged against the truck
Gordon was driving.

"Rifles!" Izzy commented in disgust. "They'll ruin the dome yet. Why
can't they stick to knives?"

He was studying a map of the big building, picking their best entrance.
Ahead, trucks formed a sort of V formation as they reached the grounds
around it and began bulling their way through the groups that were
trying to organize a defense. Gordon found his way cleared and shot
through, emerging behind the defense and driving at full speed toward
the entrance Izzy pointed out.

"Cut speed! Left sharp!" Izzy shouted. "Now, in there!"

They sliced into a small tunnel, scraping their sides where it was
barely big enough for the truck. Then they reached a dead end, with just
room for them to squeeze through the door of the truck and into an
entrance marked with a big notice of privacy.

There was a guard beside an elevator, but Izzy's knife took care of him.
They ducked around the elevator, unsure of whether it could be remotely
controlled, and up a narrow flight of stairs, down a hallway, and up
another flight. A Municipal corporal at the top grabbed for a warning
whistle, but Gordon clipped him with a hasty rabbit punch and shoved him
down the stairs. Then they were in front of an ornate door, with their
weapons ready.

Izzy yanked the door open and dropped flat behind it. Bullets from a
submachine gun clipped out, peppering the entrance and the door, and
ricocheting down the hall. The yammering stopped, finally, and Izzy
stuck his head and one arm out with a snap of his knife. Gordon leaped
in, to see a Municipal dropping the machine gun.

There were about thirty cops inside, gathered around Mayor Wayne, with
Trench standing at one side. The fools had obviously expected the
machine gun to do all the work.

Izzy leaped for the machine gun and yanked it from dead hands, while the
cops slowly began raising their arms. Wayne sat petrified, staring
unbelievingly, and Gordon drew out the warrant. "Wayne, you're under
arrest!"

Trench moved forward, his hands in the air, but with no mark of surprise
or fear on his face. "So the bad pennies turn up. You damned fools, you
should have stuck. I had big plans for you, Gordon. I've still got them,
if you don't insist..."

His hands whipped down savagely toward his hips and came up sharply!
Gordon spun, and the gun leaped in his hands, while the submachine gun
jerked forward and clicked on an empty chamber. Trench was tumbling
forward to avoid the shot, but he twitched as a bullet creased his
shoulder. Then he was upright, waving empty hands at them, with the thin
smile on his face deepening. He'd had no guns.

Gordon jerked around, but Wayne was already disappearing through a heavy
door. And the cops were reaching for their guns. Gordon estimated the
chances of escape and then leaped forward into their group, with Izzy at
his side, seeking close quarters where guns wouldn't work.

Gun butts, elbows, fists, and clubs were pounding at him, while his own
club lashed out savagely. In ten seconds, things began to haze over, but
his arms went on mechanically, seeking the most damage they could work.

Then a heavy bellow sounded, and a seeming mountain of flesh thundered
across the huge room. There was no shuffle to Mother Corey now. The huge
legs pumped steadily, and the great arms were reaching out to flail
aside clubs and knives. Men began spewing out of the brawl like straw
from a thresher as the old man grabbed arms, legs, or whatever was
handy. He had one cop in his left arm, using him as a flail against the
others.

The Municipals broke. And at the first sign, Mother Corey leaped
forward, dropping his flail and gathering Izzy and Gordon under his
arms. He hit the heavy door with his shoulder and crashed through
without breaking stride. Stairs lay there, and he took them three at a
time.

He dropped them finally as they came to a side entrance. There was a
sporadic firing going on there, and a knot of Municipals were clustered
around a few Legals, busy with knives and clubs. Corey broke into a run
again, driving straight into them and through, with Gordon and Izzy on
his heels. The surprise element was enough to give them a few seconds.

Then they were around a small side building, out of danger. Sheila was
holding the door of a large three-wheeler open. They ducked into it,
while she grabbed the wheel.

They edged forward until they could make out the shape of the fight
going on. The Legals had never quite reached the front of the building,
obviously, and were now cut into sections. Corey tapped her shoulder,
pointing out the rout, and she gunned the car.

They were through too fast to draw fire from the busy groups of
battle-crazed men, leaping across the square and into the first side
street they could find. Then she slowed, and headed for the main street
back to Legal territory.

"Lucky we found a good car to steal," Mother Corey wheezed. He was
puffing now, mopping rivulets of perspiration from his face. "I'm
getting old, cobbers. Once I broke every strong-man record on
Earth--still stand, too. But not now. Senile!"

"You didn't have to come," Izzy said.

"When my own granddaughter comes crying for help? When she finally
admits she _needs_ her old grandfather?"

Gordon was staring back at the straggling of trucks he could see
beginning to break away. The raid was over, and the Legals had lost.
Trench had tricked him.

Izzy grunted suddenly. "Gov'nor, if you're right, and the plain gees pay
my salary, who's paying me to start fighting other cops? Or is it maybe
that somebody isn't being exactly honest with the scratch they lift from
the gees?"

"We still have to eat," Gordon said bitterly. "And to eat, we'll go on
doing what we're told."




Chapter XIV

FULL CIRCLE


Hendrix had been wounded lightly, and was out when Gordon and Izzy
reported. But the next day, they were switched to a new beat where
trouble had been thickest and given twelve-hour duty--without special
overtime.

Izzy considered it slowly and shook his head. "That does it, gov'nor. It
ain't honest, treating us this way. If the crackle comes from the
people, and these gees give everybody a skull cracking, then they're
crooks. It ain't honest, and I'm too sick to work. And if that bloody
doctor won't agree..."

He turned toward the dispensary. Gordon hesitated, and then swung off
woodenly to take up his new beat. Apparently, his reputation had gone
ahead of him, since most of the hoodlums had decided pickings would be
easier on some beat where the cops had their own secret rackets to
attend to, instead of head busting. But once they learned he was
alone...

But the second day, two of the citizens fell into step behind him almost
at once, armed with heavy clubs. Periodically during the shift,
replacements took their place, making sure that he was never by himself.
It surprised him even more when he saw that a couple of the men had come
over from his old beat. Something began to burn inside him, but he held
himself in, confining his talk to vague comments on the rumors going
around.

There were enough of them, mostly based on truth. Part of Jurgens' old
crowd had broken away from him and established a corner on most of the
drugs available; they had secretly traded a supply to Wayne, who had
become an addict, for a stock of weapons.

Gordon remembered the contraband shipment of guns, and compared it to
the increase he'd noticed in weapons, and to the impossible prices the
pushers were demanding. It made sense.

All kinds of supplies were low, and the outlands beyond Marsport had cut
off all shipments. Scrip was useless to them, and the Legals were
raiding all cargoes destined for Wayne's section. And the Municipals had
imposed new taxes again.

He came back from what should have been his day off to find Izzy in
uniform, waiting grimly. Behind the screen, there was a rustling of
clothes, and a dress came sailing from behind it. While he stared,
Sheila came out, finishing the zipping of her airsuit. She moved to a
small bag and began drawing out the gun she had used and a knife. He
caught her shoulders and shoved her back, pulling the weapons from her.

"Get out of my way, you damned Legal machine!" she spat.

"Easy, princess," Izzy said. "He hasn't seen it yet, I guess. Here,
gov'nor!"

He picked up a copy of Randolph's new little _Truth_ and pointed to the
headline: SECURITY DENOUNCES RAPE OF MARSPORT!

The story was somewhat cooler than that, but not much. Randolph simply
quoted what was supposed to be an official cable from Security on Earth,
denouncing both governments and demanding that both immediately
surrender. It listed the crimes of Wayne, then tore into the Legals as a
bunch of dupes, sent by North America to foment trouble while they
looted the city, and to give the Earth government an excuse for seizing
military control of Marsport officially. Citizens were instructed not to
co-operate; all members of either government were indicted for high
treason to Security!

He crushed the paper slowly, tearing it to bits with his clenched hands;
he'd swallowed the implication that the Legals _were_ Security...

Then it hit him slowly, and he looked up. "Where's Randolph?"

"At his plant. At least he left for it, according to Sheila."

Gordon picked up Sheila's gun and buckled it on beside his own. She
grabbed at it, but he shoved her back again. "You're staying here,
Cuddles. You're supposed to be a woman now, remember!"

She was swearing hotly as they left, but made no attempt to follow.
Gordon broke into a slow trot behind Izzy, until they could spot one of
the few remaining cabs. He stopped it with his whistle, and dumped the
passenger out unceremoniously, while Izzy gave the address.

"The damned fool opened up on the border--figured he'd circulate to both
sections," Izzy said. "We'd better get out a block up and walk. And I
hope we ain't _too_ bloody late!"

The building was a wreck, outside; inside it was worse. Men in the
Municipal uniform were working over the small job press and dumping the
hand-set type from the boxes. On the floor, a single Legal cop lay under
the wreckage, apparently having gotten there first and been taken care
of by the later Municipals. Randolph had been sitting in a chair between
two of the cops, but now he leaped up and tried to flee through the back
door.

Izzy started forward, but Gordon pulled him back, as the cops reached
for their weapons. The gun in his hand picked them out at quarters too
close for a miss, starting with the cop who had jumped to catch
Randolph. Izzy had ducked around the side, and now came back, leading
the little man.

Randolph paid no attention to the dead men, nor to the bruises on his
own body. He moved forward to the press, staring at it, and there were
tears in his eyes as he ran his hands over the broken metal. Then he
looked up at them. "Arrest or rescue?" he asked.

"Arrest!" a voice from the door said harshly, and Bruce Gordon swung to
see six Legals filing in, headed by Hendrix himself. The captain nodded
at Gordon. "Good work, Sergeant. By jinx, when I heard the Municipals
were coming, I was scared they'd get him for sure. Crane wants to watch
this guy shot in person!"

He grabbed Randolph by the arm.

"You're overlooking something, Hendrix," Gordon cut in. He had moved
back toward the wall, to face the group. "If you ever look at my record,
you'll find I'm an ex-newspaperman myself. This is a rescue. Tie them
up, Izzy."

Hendrix was faster than Gordon had thought. He had his gun almost up
before Gordon could fire. A bluish hole appeared on the man's forehead;
he dropped slowly. The others made no trouble as Izzy bound them with
baling wire.

"And I hope nobody finds them," he commented. "All right, Randy, I guess
we're a bunch of refugees heading for the outside, and bloody lucky at
that. Proves a man shouldn't have friends."

Randolph's face was still greenish-white, but he straightened and
managed a feeble smile. "Not to me, Izzy. Right now I can appreciate
friends. But you two better get going. I've got some unfinished business
to tend to." He moved to one corner and began dragging out an old
double-cylinder mimeograph. "Either of you know where I can buy stencils
and ink and find some kind of a truck to haul this paper along?"

Izzy stopped and stared at the rabbity, pale little man. Then he let out
a sudden yelp of laughter. "Okay, Randy, we'll find them. Gov'nor, you'd
better tell my mother I'll be using the old sheets. Go on. You've got
the princess to worry about. We'll be along later."

He grabbed Randolph's hand and ducked out the back before Gordon could
protest.

Izzy could only have meant that they were going to hole up in Mother
Corey's old Chicken Coop. Bruce Gordon had now managed to make a full
circle, back to his beginnings on Mars. He'd started at the Coop with a
deck of cards; now he was returning with a club.

He had counted on at least some regret from Mother Corey, however. But
the old man only nodded after hearing that Randolph was safe. "Fanatics,
crusaders and damned fools!" he said. He shook his head sadly and went
shuffling back to his room, where two of his part-time henchmen were
sitting.

Sheila had been sitting on the bunk, still in her airsuit. Now she
jerked upright, then sank back with a slow flush. Her hands were
trembling as she reached for a cup of coffee and handed it to him,
listening to his quick report of Randolph's safety and the fact that he
was going back outside the dome.

"I'm all packed," she said. "And I packed your things, too."

He shot his eyes around the room, realizing that it was practically
bare, except for a few of her dresses. She followed his gaze, and shook
her head. "I won't need them out there," she said. Her voice caught on
that. "They'll be safe here."

"So will you, now that you've made up with the Mother," he told her.
"Your meal ticket's ruined, Cuddles, and you made it clear a little
while ago just where you stand. Remind me to tell you sometime how much
fun it's been."

"Your mother was good with a soldering iron, wasn't she? You even look
human." She bent to pick up a shoulder pack and a bag, and her face was
normal when she stood up again. "You might guess that the cops would be
happy to get hold of your wife now, though. Come on, it's a long walk."

He left the car beyond the gate, and they pushed through the locker room
toward the smaller exit, stopping to fasten down their helmets. The
guard halted them, but without any suspicion.

"Going hunting for those damned kids, eh?" he said. He stared at Sheila.
"Lucky devil! All I got for a guide was an old bum. Okay, luck,
Sergeant!"

It made no sense to Gordon, but he wasn't going to argue. They went
through and out into the waste and slums beyond the domes, heading out
until there were only the few phosphor bulbs to guide their way.

Gordon was moving cautiously, using his helmet light only occasionally,
gun ready in his hand. But it was Sheila who caught the faint sound. He
heard her cry out, and turned to see her crash into the stomach of a man
with a half-raised stick. He went down with almost no resistance. Sheila
shot the beam of her light on the thin, drawn face. "Rusty!"

"Hi, princess." He got up slowly, trying to grin. "Didn't know who it
was. Sorry. Ever get that louse you were out for?"

She nodded. "Yeah, I got him. That's him--my husband! What's wrong with
you, Rusty? You've lost fifty pounds, and--"

"Things are a mite tough out here, princess. No deliveries. Closed my
bar, been living sort of hand to mouth, but not much mouth." His eyes
bulged greedily as she dug into a bag and began to drag out the
sandwiches she must have packed for the trip. But he shook his head. "I
ain't so bad off. I ate something yesterday. But if you can spare
something for the Kid--Hey, Kid!"

A thin boy of about sixteen crept out from behind some rubble, staring
uncertainly. Then, at the sight of the food, he made a lunge, grabbed
it, and hardly waited to get it through the slits of his suit before
gulping it down. Rusty sat down, his lined old face breaking into a
faint grin. He hesitated, but finally took some of the food.

"Shouldn't oughta. You'll need it. Umm." He swallowed slowly, as if
tasting the food all the way down. "Kid can't talk. Cop caught him
peddling one of Randolph's pamphlets, cut out part of his tongue. But
he's all right now. Come on, Kid, hurry it up. We gotta convoy these
people."

They were following a kind of road when headlights bore down on them.
Gordon's hand was on his gun as they leaped for shelter, but there was
no hostile move from the big truck. He studied it, trying to decide what
a truck would be doing here. Then a Marspeaker-amplified voice shouted
from it. "Any muckrakers there?"

"One," Gordon shouted back, and ran toward it, motioning the others to
follow. He'd always objected to the nickname, but it made a good code.
Randolph's frail hand came down to help them up, but a bigger paw did
the actual lifting.

"Why didn't you two wait?" Mother Corey asked, his voice booming out of
his Marspeaker. "I figured Izzy'd stop by first. Here, sit over there.
Not much room, with my stuff and Randolph's, but it beats walking."

"What in hell brings you back?" Gordon asked.

The huge man shrugged ponderously. "A man gets tired of being
respectable, cobber. And I'm getting old and sentimental about the
Chicken Coop." He chuckled, rubbing his hands together. "But not so old
that I can't handle a couple of guards that are stubborn about trucks,
eh, Izzy?"

"Messy, but nice," Izzy agreed from the pile above them. "Tell those
trained apes of yours to cut the lights, will you, Mother? Somebody must
be using the Coop."

They stopped the truck before reaching the old wreck. In the few dim
lights, the old building still gave off an air of mold and decay. Gordon
shuddered faintly, then followed Izzy and the Mother into the
semi-secret entrance.

Izzy went ahead, almost silent, with a thin strand of wire between his
hands, his elbows weaving back and forth slowly to guide him. He was
apparently as familiar with the garrote as the knife. But they found no
guard. Izzy pressed the seal release and slid in cautiously, while the
others followed.

In the beam of Gordon's torch, a single figure lay sprawled out on the
floor halfway to the rickety stairs to the main house. Mother Corey
grunted, and moved quickly to the coughing, battered old air machine.
His fingers closed a valve equipped with a combination lock.

"They're all dead, cobbers," he wheezed. "Dead because a crook had to
try his hand on a lock. Years ago, I had a flask of poison gas attached,
in case a gang should ever squeeze me out."

In the filthy rooms above, Gordon found the corpses--about fifteen of
them, and some former members of the Jurgens organization. He found the
apelike bodyguard stretched out on a bunk, a vacant smile on his face.

A yell from the basement called him back down to where Izzy was busily
going through piles of crates and boxes stacked along one wall. He was
pointing to a lead-foil-covered box. "Dope! And all that other stuff's
ammunition!"

He shivered, staring at the fortune in his hands. Then he grimaced and
shoved the open can back in its case. He threw it back and began
stacking ammunition cases in front of the dope. Gordon went out to get
the others and start moving in the supplies and transferring the corpses
to the truck for disposal. Randolph scurried off to start setting up his
makeshift plant in the basement.

Mother Corey was staring about when they returned. "Filthy," he wailed.
"A pigpen. They've ruined the Coop, cobber. Smell that air--even _I_ can
smell it!" He sniffed dolefully.

Mother Corey sighed again. "Well, it'll give the boys something to do,"
he decided. "When a man gets old, he likes a little comfort, cobber.
Nice things around him..."

Gordon found what had been his old room and dumped his few things into
it. Sheila watched him uncertainly, and then took possession of the next
room. She came back a few minutes later, staring at the ages-old filth.
"I'll be cleaning for a week," she said. "What are you going to do now,
Bruce?"

He shook his head, and started back down the stairs. He hurried down
into the basement where Randolph was arranging his mimeograph.

The printer listened only to the first sentence, and shook his head
impatiently. "I was afraid you'd think of that, Gordon. Look, you never
were a reporter--you ran a column. I've read the stuff you wrote. You
killed and maimed with words. But you never dug up news that would help
people, or tell them what they didn't suspect all along. And that's what
I've got to have."

"Thanks!" Gordon said curtly. "Too bad Security didn't think I was as
lousy a reporter as you do!"

"Okay. I'll give you a job, for one week. See what outer Marsport is
like. Find what can be done, if anything, and do it if you can. Then
come back and give me six columns on it. I'll pay Mother Corey for your
food--and for your wife's--and if I can find one column's worth of news
in it, maybe I'll give you a second week. I can't see a man's wife
starve because he doesn't know how to make an honest living!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Rusty and one of Mother Corey's men were on guard, and the others had
turned in. Gordon went up the stairs and threw himself onto the bed in
disgust.

"Bruce!" Sheila stood outlined in the doorway against the dim glow of a
phosphor bulb. Her robe was partly open, and hunger burned in him; then,
before he could lift himself, she bent over and began unfastening his
boots. "You all right, Bruce? I heard you tossing around."

"I'm fine," he told her mechanically. "Just making plans for tomorrow."

He watched her turn back slowly, then lay quietly, trying not to disturb
her again. Tomorrow, he thought. Tomorrow he'd find some kind of an
answer; and it wouldn't be Randolph's charity.




Chapter XV

MURDOCH'S MANTLE


There were three men, each with a white circle painted on chest and left
arm, talking to Mother Corey when Bruce Gordon came down the rickety
steps. He stopped for a second, but there was no sign of trouble. Then
the words of the thin man below reached him.

"So we figured when we found the stiffs maybe you'd come back, Mother.
Damn good thing we were right. We can sure use that ammunition you
found. Now, where's this Gordon fellow?"

"Here!" Gordon told the man. He'd recognized him finally as Schulberg,
the little grocer from the Nineteenth Precinct.

The man swung suspiciously, then grinned weakly. There was hunger and
strain on his face, but an odd authority and pride now. "I'll be
doggoned. Whyn't you say he was with Murdoch?"

"They want someone to locate Ed Praeger and see about getting some food
shipped in from outside, cobber," Mother Corey told him. "They got some
money scraped together, but the hicks are doing no business with
Marsport. You know Ed--just tell him I sent you. I'd go myself, but I'm
getting too old to go chasing men out there."

"What's in it?" Gordon asked, reaching for his helmet.

There was a surprised exchange of glances from the others, but Mother
Corey chuckled. "Heart like a steel trap, cobber," he said, almost
approvingly. "Well, you'll be earning your keep here--yours and that
granddaughter's, too. Here--you'll need directions for finding Praeger."

He handed the paper with his scrawled notes on it over to Gordon and
went shuffling back. Gordon stuck it into his pouch, and followed the
three. Outside, they had a truck waiting; Rusty and Corey's two henchmen
were busy loading it with ammunition from the cellar.

Schulberg motioned him into the cab of the truck, and the other two
climbed into the closed rear section. "All right," Gordon said, "what
goes on?"

The other began explaining as he picked a way through the ruin and
rubble. Murdoch had done better than Gordon had suspected; he'd laid out
a program for a citizens' vigilante committee, and had drilled enough in
the ruthless use of the club to keep the gangs down. Once the police
were all busy inside the dome with their private war, the committee had
been the only means of keeping order in the whole territory beyond. It
was now extended to cover about half the area, as a voluntary police
organization.

He pointed outside. It was changed; there were fewer people outside.
Gordon had never seen group starvation before....

They passed a crowd around a crude gallows, and Schulberg stopped. A man
was already dead and dangling. "Should turn 'em over to us cops,"
Schulberg said. "What's he hanged for?"

"Hoarding," a voice answered, and others supplied the few details. The
dead man had been caught with a half bag of flour and part of a case of
beans. Schulberg found a scrap of something and penciled the crime on
it, together with a circle signature, and pinned it to the body.

"All food should be turned in," he explained to Gordon as they climbed
back into the truck. "We figure community kitchens can stretch things a
bit more. And we give a half extra ration to the guys who can find
anything useful to do. We got enough so most people won't starve to
death for another week, I guess. But you'd better get Praeger to send
something, Gordon. Here, here's the scratch we scraped up."

He passed over a bag filled with a collection of small bills and coins.
"We can trust you, I guess," he said dully. "Remember you with Murdoch,
anyhow. And you can tell Praeger we got plenty of men looking for work,
in case he can use 'em."

He pulled up to shout a report through the big Marspeaker as they passed
the old building Murdoch had used as a precinct house. It now had a
crude sign proclaiming it voluntary police HQ and outland government
center. Then he went on until they came to a spur of the little electric
monorail system, with three abandoned service engines parked at the end.

"Extra air inside, and the best we could do for food. Was gonna try
myself, but I don't know Praeger," Schulberg said. He handed over a key,
and nodded toward the first service engine. "Good luck, Gordon--and damn
it, we're--we gotta eat, don't we? You tell him that! It ain't much--but
get what you can!"

He swung the truck, and was gone. Gordon climbed into the enclosed cab
and pulled back questioningly on the only lever he could see. The engine
backed briefly; he reversed the control. Then it moved forward, picking
up speed. Apparently there was still power flowing in from the automatic
atomic generators.

He got off to puzzle out a switch, using Mother Corey's scrawled
instructions.

He had vaguely expected to see more of Mars, but for eight hours there
was only the bare flatness and dunes of unending sandy surface and
scraggly, useless native plants, opened out to the sun. Marsport had
been located where the only vein of uranium had been found on Mars, and
the growing section was closer to the equator.

Then he came to villages. Again there was the sight of children running
around without helmets. He stopped once for directions, and a man stared
at him suspiciously and finally threw a switch reluctantly.

He was finally forced to stop again, sure that he was near, now. This
time, it was in what seemed to be a major shipping center in the heart
of the lines that ran helter-skelter from village to village. Another
suspicious-eyed man studied him. "You won't find Praeger on his
farm--couldn't reach it in that, anyhow," he said finally. Then he
turned up his Marspeaker. "Ed! Hey, Ed!"

Down the street, the seal of a building opened, and the big, bluff
figure of Praeger came out. His eyes narrowed as he spotted Gordon; then
he grinned and waved his visitor forward.

Inside, there was evidence of food, and a rather pretty girl brought out
another platter and set it before Gordon. He ate while they exchanged
uncertain, rambling information; finally, he got down to his errand.

Praeger seemed to read his mind. "I can get the stuff sent, Gordon. I'm
head of the shipping committee for this quadrant. But why in hell should
I? The last time, every car was looted in Outer Marsport. If they won't
let us get the oil and chemicals we need, why should we feed them?"

"Ever see starvation?" Gordon asked, wishing again someone else who'd
felt it could carry the message. He told about a man who'd committed
suicide for his kids, not stopping as Praeger's face sickened slowly.
"Hell, who wouldn't loot your trains if that's going on?"

"All right, if Mother Corey'll back up this volunteer police group. I've
got kids of my own.... Look, you want food, we want to ship. Get your
cops to give us an escort for every shipment through to the dome, and
we'll drop off one car out of four for the outlands."

Gordon sat back weakly. "Done!" he said. "Provided the first shipment
carries the most we can get for the credits I brought."

"It will--we've got some stuff that's about to spoil, and we can let you
have a whole train of it." He took the sack of credits and tossed it
toward a drawer, uncounted. "A damned good thing Security's sending a
ship. Credits won't be worth much until they get this mess straightened
out."

Gordon felt the hair at the base of his neck tingle. "What makes you
think Security can do anything? They haven't shown a hand yet."

"They will," Praeger said. "You guys in Marsport feed yourselves so many
lies you begin to believe them. But Security took Venus--and I'm not
worried here, in the long run. Don't ask me how."

His voice was a mixture of bitterness and an odd certainty. "They set
Security up as a nice little debating society, Gordon, to make it easy
for North America to grab the planets by doing it through that Agency.
Only they got better men on it than they wanted. So far, Security has
played one nation against another enough to keep any from daring to
swipe power on the planets. And this latest trick folded up, too. North
America figured on Marsport folding up once they got a police war
started, with a bunch of chiseling profiteers as their front; they
expected the citizens to yell uncle all the way back to Earth. But out
here, nobody thinks of Earth as a place to yell to for help, so they
missed. And now Security's got Pan-Asia and United Africa balanced
against North America, so the swipe won't work. We got the dope from our
southern receiver. North America's called it all a mistaken emergency
measure and turned it back to Security."

"Along with how many war rockets?" Gordon asked.

"None. They never gave any real power, never will. The only strength
Security's ever had comes from the fact that it always wins, somehow.
Forget the crooks and crooked cops, man! Ask the people who've been
getting kicked around about Security, and you'll find that even most of
Marsport doesn't hate it! It's the only hope we've got of not having all
the planets turned into colonial empires! You staying over, or want me
to give you an engineer and drag car so you can ride back in comfort?"

Gordon stared at the room, where almost everything was a product of the
planet, at Praeger, and at the girl. Here was the real Mars--the men who
liked it here, who were sure of their future. "I'll take the drag car."

       *       *       *       *       *

He found Randolph waiting in a scooter outside the precinct house after
he'd reported his results. He climbed in woodenly, leaving his helmet on
as he saw the broken window. "A good job," the little man said. "And
news for the paper, if I ever publish it again. I came over because I
wasn't much use at the Coop, and everyone else was busy."

"Doing what?" Gordon asked.

Randolph grinned crookedly. "Running Outer Marsport. The Mother's the
only man everybody knows, I guess--and his word has never been broken
that anyone can remember. So he's helping Schulberg make agreements with
the sections the volunteers don't handle. Place is lousy with people
now. Heard about Mayor Wayne?"

Gordon shook his head, not caring, but the man went on. "He must have
had his supply of drugs lifted somehow. He holed up one day, until it
really hit him that he couldn't get any more. Then he went gunning for
Trench, with some idea Trench had swiped the stuff--so Trench is now
running the Municipals. And I hear the gangs are just about in control
of both sections, lately."

       *       *       *       *       *

The Chicken Coop was filled, as Randolph had said, but he slipped in and
up the stairs, leaving the news to the publisher. The place had been
cleaned up more than he had expected, and there must have been new
plants installed beside the blower, since the air was somewhat fresher.

He found his own room, and turned in automatically...

"Bruce?" A dim light snapped on, and he stared down at Sheila. Then he
blinked. His bunk had been changed to a wider one, and she lay under the
thin covering on one side. Down the center, crude stitches of heavy cord
showed where she had sewed the blanket to the mattress to divide it into
two sections. And in one corner, a couple of blanket sections formed a
rough screen.

She caught his stare and reddened slowly. "I had to, Bruce. The Coop is
full, and they needed rooms--and I couldn't tell them that--that--"

"Forget it," he told her. He dropped to his own side, with barely enough
room to slide between the bed and the wall, and began dragging off his
boots and uniform. She started up to help him, then jerked back, and
turned her head away. "Forget all you're thinking, Cuddles. I'm still
not bothering unwilling women--and I'll even close my eyes when you
dress."

She sighed, and relaxed. There was a faint touch of humor in her voice
then. "They called it bundling once, I think. I--Bruce, I know you don't
like me, so I guess it isn't too hard for you. But--sometimes ... Oh,
damn it! Sometimes you're--nice!"

"Nice people don't get to Mars. They stay on Earth, being careful not to
find out what it's like up here," he told her bitterly. For a second he
hesitated, and then the account of the newsboy and his would-be killers
came rushing out.

She dropped a hand onto his, nodding. "I know. The Kid--Rusty's
friend--wrote down what they did to him."

Gordon grunted. He'd almost forgotten about the tongueless Kid. For a
second, his thoughts churned on. Then he got up and began putting on his
uniform again. Sheila frowned, staring at him, and began sliding from
her side, reaching for her robe. She followed him down the creaking
stairs, and to the room where Schulberg, Mother Corey, and a few others
were still arguing some detail.

They looked up, and he moved forward, dragging a badge from his pouch.
He slapped it down on the table in front of them. "I'm declaring myself
in!" he told them coldly. "You know enough about Security badges to know
they can't be forged. That one has my name on it, and rating as a Prime.
Do you want to shoot me, or will you follow orders?"

Randolph picked it up, and fumbled in his pocket, drawing out a tiny
badge and comparing them. He nodded. "I lost connection years ago,
Gordon. But this makes you my boss."

"Then give it all the publicity you can, and tell them Security has just
declared war on the whole damned dome section! Mother, I want all the
dope we found!" With that--about the only supply of any size left--he
could command unquestioning loyalty from every addict who hadn't already
died from lack of it. Mother Corey nodded, instant understanding running
over his puttylike face.

Schulberg shrugged. "After your deal with Praeger, we'd probably follow
you anyhow. I don't cotton to Security, Gordon--but those devils in
there are making our kids starve!"

Mother Corey heaved his bulk up slowly, wheezing, and indicated his
chair at the head of the table. But Gordon shook his head. He'd made his
decision. His head was emptied for the moment, and he wanted nothing
more than a chance to hit the bed and forget the whole business until
morning.

Sheila was staring at him as he shucked off his outer clothes
mechanically and crawled under the blanket. She let the robe fall to the
floor and slid into the bed without taking her eyes off him. "Is it true
about Security sending a ship?" she asked at last. He nodded, and her
breath caught. "What happens when they arrive, Bruce?"

She was shivering. He rolled over and patted her shoulder. "Who knows?
Who cares? I'll see that they know you weren't guilty, though. Stop
worrying about it."

She threw herself sideways, as far from him as she could get. Her voice
was thick, muffled in the blanket. "Damn you, Bruce Gordon. I _should_
have killed you!"




Chapter XVI

GET THE DOME!


To Gordon's surprise, the publicity Randolph wrote about his being a
Security Prime seemed to bring the other sections of Outer Marsport
under the volunteer police control even faster. But he was too busy to
worry about it. He left general co-ordination in the hands of Mother
Corey, while Izzy and Schulberg ran the expanding of the police force.

Praeger arrived with the first load of food, and came storming up to
him. "Why didn't you tell me you were a Security Prime! I'm grade three
myself."

"And I suppose that would have meant you'd have shipped in all the food
we needed free?" Gordon asked.

The other stopped to think it over. Then he laughed roughly. "Nope.
You're right. The growers would starve next year if they gave it all
away now. Well, we'll get in enough food this way to keep you going for
a while--couple of weeks, at least."

It sounded good, and might have worked if there had been the normal food
reserve, or if the other three quadrants had been willing to do as much.
But while the immediate pressure of starvation was lifted, Gordon's own
stomach told him that it wasn't an adequate diet. Signs of scurvy and
pellagra were increasing.

Bruce Gordon whipped himself into forgetting some of that. His army was
growing. Or rather, his mob. There was no sense in trying to get more
than the vaguest organization.

It was the eighth day when he led them out in the early dawn. He had
issued extra dope and managed a slight increase in the ration, so they
made a brave showing--until they reached the dome.

There were no rifles opposed to him, as he had expected, and the guard
at the gate was no heavier. But the warning had somehow been given, and
both forces were ready.

Stretching north from the gate were the Municipals with members of some
of the gangs; the other gangmen were with the Legals to the south. And
they stood within inches of the dome, holding axes and knives.

A big Marspeaker ran out from the gate, and the voice of Gannett came
over it. "Go back! If just one of you gets within ten feet of the dome
or entrance, we're going to rip the dome! We'll destroy Marsport before
we'll give in to a doped-up crowd of riffraff! You've got five minutes
to get out of sight, before we come out with rifles and knock you off!
Now beat it!"

Gordon got out of the car the Kid was driving and started toward the
entrance, just as the moaning wail of the crowd behind him built up.

"You fools!" he yelled. "They're bluffing. They wouldn't dare destroy
the dome! Come on!"

But already the men were evaporating. He stared at the rout, and
suddenly stopped fighting the hands holding him. Beside him, the Kid was
crying, making horrible sounds of it. He turned slowly back to the car,
and felt it get under way. His final sight was that of the Legals and
Municipals wildly scrambling for cover from each other.

Mother Corey met him, dragging him back to a small room where he dug up
an impossibly precious bottle of brandy. "Drink it all, cobber. So one
of your Security badges had the wrong man attached to it, and word got
back. Couldn't be helped. You just ran into the sacred law of
Marsport--the one they teach kids. Be bad, and the dome'll collapse. The
dome made Marsport, and it's taboo!"

Gordon nodded. Maybe the old man was right. "If the dome gives them a
perfect cover, why let me make a jackass of myself, Mother?" he asked
numbly.

Corey shook his head, setting the heavy folds of flesh to bouncing.
"Gave them something to live for here, cobber. And when you get over
this, you're gonna announce new plans to try again. Yes, you are! But
right now, you get yourself drunk!"

He left Gordon and the bottle. After a while, the bottle was gone. He
felt number, but no better, by the time Izzy came in.

"Trench is outside in a heavy-armored car, Bruce. Says he wants to see
you. Something to discuss--a proposition!"

Gordon stood up, wobbling a little, trying to think. Then he swore, and
headed for his room. "Tell him to go to hell!"

He saw Izzy and Sheila leave, wondering vaguely where she had been.
Through the opening in the seal, he spotted them moving toward the big
car outside. Then he shrugged. He finally made the stairs and reached
his bed before he passed out.

Sheila was standing over him when he finally woke. She dumped a headache
powder into her palm and held it out, handing him a small glass of
water. He swallowed the fast-acting drug, and sat up, trying to
remember. Then he wished he couldn't.

"What did Trench want?" he asked thickly.

"He wanted to show you a badge--a Security badge made out for him," she
answered. "At least he said he wanted to show you something, and it was
about that size. He wouldn't talk with us much. But I remember his name
in the book--"

Gordon shook his head and sat up. The book, he thought, trying to focus
his thoughts. The book with all the names...

"All right, Cuddles," he said finally. "You got your meal ticket, and
you've outgrown it in this mess. Now I want that damned book! I've been
operating in the dark. It's time I found out how to get in touch with
some of those people. Where is it?"

She shook her head. "It isn't. Bruce--I don't have it. That time I gave
you the note, you didn't come when I said, and I thought you wouldn't.
Then Jurgens' men broke in, and I thought they'd get it, so--so I burned
it. I lied to you about using it to make you keep me."

"You burned it!" He turned it over, staring at her. "Okay, Cuddles, you
burned it. You were trying to kill me then, so you burned it to keep
Jurgens from getting it and putting the finger on me! Where is it,
Sheila? On you?"

She backed away, biting her lips. "No, Bruce. I burned it. I don't know
why. I just did! No!"

She turned toward the door as he pushed up from the bed, but his arm
caught her wrist, dragging her back. She whimpered once, then shrieked
faintly as his hand caught the buttons on the dress, jerking them off.
Then suddenly she was a writhing, biting, scratching fury. He tightened
his hand and lifted her to the bed, dropping a knee onto her throat and
beginning to squeeze, while he jerked the dress and thin slip off.

She sat up as he released his knee, her hoarse voice squeezed from
between her writhing lips. "Are you satisfied now, you mechanical beast!
Do you still think I have it on me?"

He grinned, twisting the corners of his mouth. "You don't. Don't you
know a _wife_ shouldn't keep secrets from her _husband_? A warm-blooded,
affectionate husband, to boot." He bent down, knocking aside her
flailing arms, and pulled her closer to him. "Better tell your husband
where the book is, Cuddles!"

She cursed and he drew her closer. He bent down, forcing her head back
and setting his lips on hers.

From somewhere, wetness touched his cheek; he lifted his head and looked
down. The wetness came from tears that spilled out of her eyes and ran
off onto the mattress. She was making no sound, and there was no
resistance, but the tears ran out, one drop seeming to trip over
another.

"All right, Sheila," he said. His voice was cracked in his ears.
"Another week of being a failure on this planet of failures, and I
might. Go ahead and tell me I'm the same as your first husband. If I
can't even keep my word to you, I can at least get out and stay out." He
shook his head, waiting for her denunciation. "For your amusement, I'm
going to miss having you around!"

He stood up. Something touched his hand, and he looked down to see her
fingers.

"Bruce," she said faintly, "you meant it! You don't hate me any more."
She rubbed her wrist across her eyes, and the ghost of a smile touched
her lips. "I don't think you're a failure. And maybe--maybe I'm not.
Maybe I don't have to be a failure as a woman--a wife, Bruce. I don't
want you to go!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Two worlds. One huddled under its dome, forever afraid of losing that
protection and having to face the life the other led; and yet driven to
work together or to perish together. The sacred dome!

And suddenly he was shaking her. "The dome! It has to be the answer!
Cuddles, you broke the chain enough for me to think again! We've been
blind--the whole damned planet has been blind."

She blinked and then frowned. "Bruce--"

"I'm all right! I'm just half sane instead of all insane for a change."
He got up, pacing the floor as he talked.

"Look, most of the people here are Martians. They've left Earth behind,
and they're meeting this planet on its own terms. And they're adapting.
Third-generation children--not all, but a lot of them--are breathing the
air we'd die on, and they're doing fine at it. Probably
second-generation ones can keep going after we'd pass out. It's just as
true out here as it is on the frontier. But Marsport has that sacred
dome over it. It's still trying to be Earth. And it can't do it. It's
never had a chance to adjust here, and it's afraid to try."

"Maybe," she agreed doubtfully. "But what about this part of Marsport?"

"Obvious. Here, they grow up under the shadow of it. They live in a
half-world, and they have to live on the crumbs the dome tosses them.
Sheila, if something happened to that dome--"

"We'd be killed," she said. "How do we do it?"

He frowned, and then grinned slowly. "Maybe not!"

They spent the rest of the night discussing it. Sometime during the
discussion, she made coffee, and first Randolph, then the Kid came in
for briefing. Randolph was a natural addition, and the Kid had been
alternately following Gordon and Sheila around since he'd first heard
they were fighting against the men who'd robbed him of his right to
speak. In the end, as the night spread into day, there were more people
than they felt safe with, and less than they needed.

But later, as he stood beside the dome when night had fallen again,
Gordon wasn't so sure. It was huge. The fabric of it was thin, and even
the webbing straps that gave it added strength were frail things. But it
was strong enough to hold up the pressure of over ten pounds per square
inch, and the webbing was anchored in a metal sleeve that went too high
for cutting. They could rip it, but not ruin it completely; and it had
to be done so that no repair could ever be made.

Under it, and anchoring it, was a concrete wall all around the city.

Izzy came back from a careful exploration. "We can work enough powder
under those webbing supports, and lay the fuse wire beside the plastic
ring that keeps it airtight," he reported. "But God help us, gov'nor, if
any gee spots us."

They worked through the night, while Rusty went back to requisition more
explosives from the dwindling supply, and while the Kid and Izzy took
time off to break into a closed converter plant and find wire enough to
connect the charges. But dawn caught them with less done than they had
hoped. Gordon went to connect a wire and switch from the battery and
coil they had installed, but jerked backwards as he saw a suspicious
guard staring at him.

"Let him think we're just scouting," Randolph advised.

There were suspicious looks as the group came back to the Coop, but
Mother Corey waddled over to meet them. "Did you find them, cobber?" he
asked quickly, and one of his eyelids flickered.

Izzy answered before Gordon could rise to it. "Not yet, Mother. May have
to go back tonight."

Gordon left them discussing the mythical search for certain supplies
that Mother Corey had apparently used as an alibi for their absence from
the building. Sheila started to make coffee, but he shook his head and
headed for the bed. She yawned and nodded, fingering the stitches that
still ran down the blanket to divide it. Then she grimaced faintly and
dropped down beside him on top of the blanket. Her head hit his arm, and
she seemed to be asleep almost at once.

He awoke to find Izzy shaking his shoulder. He looked down for Sheila,
but she was gone. Izzy followed his eyes, and shook his head.

"The princess took off in a car three hours ago," he said. "She said it
was something that had to be done, gov'nor, so I figured you'd know
about it."

Gordon shrugged, and let it pass. He found the rest of the group ready,
with Mother Corey wishing them better luck tonight. The Mother obviously
knew something; but he kept his suspicions to himself, and gave them a
cover from the others.

There was no sign of Sheila near the dome. But inside, there were guards
pacing along it. Gordon spotted them first, and drew the others back. If
they'd found the carefully worked-in powder...

The Kid ducked down and out of the car, worming his way around the
building that concealed them. He waited for the guard to vanish, and
then went crawling forward. Gordon swore, but there was no sense in two
of them risking themselves, only to attract more attention. And at last
the Kid came back. He ducked into the truck, nodding.

"Wire and explosive still there?" Gordon asked.

The Kid made the sound he used for assent.

It made no sense; there was no reason for the sudden vigilance inside
the dome.

"We might be able to run the wire in," Izzy said doubtfully.

Gordon grunted. "And tip them off to where it is, probably. No, we'll
have to do it under some kind of covering, the way I had it planned in
the first place, only with one more damned complication. We'll pull
another false raid on the dome. As soon as we get chased off, I'll
manage to set it off while they're relaxing and laughing at us."

"It smells!" Izzy told him. "Who elected you chief martyr around here?
You'll be blown up, gov'nor--and if you ain't, they'll rip you to
ribbons for knocking off the dome."

Then he stopped suddenly, staring. Bruce Gordon leaned forward, with
Izzy's hands grabbing for him. But he'd seen it, too.

Standing next to the dome was Trench, talking to one of the guards. And
beside him stood Sheila, with one hand resting on the man's elbow!

He could feel the thickness of the silence and misery in the truck, but
he pushed it away, with all the other things. "Get us back, Izzy," he
ordered. "We've got to round up whatever group we can and get them back
here on the double. They must be counting on our original time, so
they're in no hurry to remove the powder and wiring. But we can't count
on any more time."

"You're going through with it?" Randolph asked doubtfully.

"In one hour. And you might pass the word along that we're doing it to
save the dome. Tell the men we just found out that Trench is losing and
intends to blow it up instead of letting the Legals win."

Rumor would travel fast enough, he hoped. And it should give him a few
extra seconds before his forces cracked.

He lifted the switch in his hands and stared at it. It wasn't necessary
now. All he had to do was to reach the battery and drop any metal across
the two terminals there--if they could get back before Trench--and
Sheila--could remove the battery.

It was a period of complete fog to him, but it wasn't until his motley
army reached the dome, straggling up in trucks and on foot, that he
snapped into focus again. There was no sign of Sheila this time, and he
didn't look for her. His whole mind was concentrated down to a single
point: Get the dome!

This time, there was no scattering of Municipals and Legals. The
Municipal forces were rushing up toward the dome, and surprised Legals
were frantically arriving in trucks. There was the beginning of a
pitched battle right at the spot where Gordon needed his own cover.

It made no sense to him, and he didn't care. He marched his men up, with
the thin wailing of a banshee in his ears.

"Dome warning!" Izzy shouted in his ear. "Hear that siren, gov'nor?
Means they're scared we may do it. Give me that damned switch!"

He grabbed for it, but Gordon held firmly to the copper strap. And now
the men inside caught sight of the approaching force. For a second,
consternation seemed to reign.

Then a huge truck with a speaker on top drove into the struggling group,
and the thin whisper of unintelligible words reached Gordon. The whole
development made no more sense than any part of it to him, but he saw
the Municipals and Legals suddenly begin to turn as a single man to face
the outside menace that had crept up on them while they were boiling
into a fight.

And suddenly the Marspeaker over the entrance blasted into life. "Get
back! The dome is mined! Any man comes near it, it'll blow! Get back!
The dome is mined!"

By Gordon's side, a sudden gargling sound came from the Kid. His hand
snaked out, caught the strap from Gordon's hand, and jerked it free.
Then he was running frantically forward.

Rifles lifted inside, and shots rang out, clipping bullets through the
dome. In one place it began to tear, and there was a sudden savage roar
from the men around Gordon. He had started forward after the Kid, but
Izzy was in front of him, holding him back.

The Kid stumbled and slid across the ground, while blood spurted out
from a gash across his head, and the helmet fell into pieces. Then, with
a jerk, he was up. His hand reached out, the strap hit the terminals...

And where the dome had been, a clap of thunder seemed to take visible
form. The webbing straps broke, and the dome jerked upwards, twisting
outwards, and then falling into ribbons. The shock wave hit Gordon,
knocking him from his feet into the crowd around him.

He struggled to his feet to see helmeted men pouring out of the houses
around, and other men pouring forward from his own group. The few of
either police force still standing and helmeted broke into a wild run,
but they had no chance! The mob had decided that they had mined and
exploded the dome.

He turned back toward the Coop, sick with the death of the Kid and the
violence. For once, he'd had more than his fill of it.

Then a small truck drew up, and an arm went out to draw him inside the
cab. He stared into the face of Isaiah Trench. And driving the truck was
Sheila.

"Your wife took a helluva chance, Gordon," Trench said heavily. "And I
took quite a chance, too, to set this up so nobody could ever believe
you were behind it. Getting that fight started in time, after you first
showed up--oh, sure, we spotted you--was the toughest job I ever did!
But I guess Sheila had the roughest end, not even knowing for sure where
I stood."

Gordon stared at them slowly, not quite believing it, even though it was
no crazier than anything else during the past few hours.

Trench shrugged. "I was railroaded here by Security, told to be good and
they'd let me go home. A lot of men got that treatment. So when Wayne
was still talking about building a perfect Marsport, I joined up. He
treated me right, and I took orders. But a man gets sick of working with
punks and cheap hoods; he gets sicker of killing off a planet he's
learned to like. I learned to take orders, though--and I took them until
Wayne tried to put a bullet through me. That ended that, and I came out
to join up with you. You were soused, I hear--but your wife guessed
enough to take the chance of coming to me, when she thought you were
going to get yourself killed. Well, I guess you get out here."

He indicated the Coop. Gordon got down, followed by Sheila as Trench
took the wheel. "What happens to you now?" Gordon asked. "They'll be
blaming you for the end of the dome."

"Let them. I planned on that. Too bad Trench got torn to bits by the
mob, isn't it? And it's a good thing I've always kept myself a place
under a safe incognito out in the sticks. Got a wife and two kids out
there that even Wayne didn't know about." He stuck out a hand. "You're
like Security, Gordon. You do all the wrong things, but you get the
right results. Goodbye!"

Sheila watched him go, shaking her head. "He likes you, Bruce. But he
can't say it. Men!"

"Women!" Gordon answered.

Then he stiffened. Coming down through the thin air of Mars was the
bright blue exhaust of a rocket. The real Security was arriving!




Chapter XVII

SECURITY PAYOFF


It was three days before Bruce Gordon made up his mind to hunt up
Security; another four days passed after they had sent him back to wait
until they received orders from Headquarters for him. There was a man
coming from Earth on a second ship who would see him. They gave him a
chauffeur back to the Chicken Coop, and politely indicated that it would
be better if he stayed within reach.

The dome had been down a full week when he watched the last of
Randolph's equipment packed onto a truck and hauled away. The little
publisher was back at the _Crusader_ again. Rusty was busy opening his
bar, and the others were all busy. Only Gordon and Sheila were left.

He heard her coming down the old stairs, and ducked out through the
private exit, snapping his helmet in place as he went through the seal.
She must have sensed his desire to be left alone, since she made no
attempt to follow. She'd asked no questions and hadn't even tried to
convince him that he'd be sent back to Earth now.

He muttered to himself as he headed over the rubble toward the
previously domed section.

Out at the spaceport, ships were dropping down from Deimos with the
supplies that had been held up so long, and a long line of trucks went
snaking by. Credit had been established again, and the businesses were
open.

For the time being, the hoods and punks were having a tough time of it,
with working papers demanded as constant identification. And while it
lasted, at least, Marsport was beginning to have its face lifted. Wrecks
were being broken up, with salvageable material used for newer homes.
Gordon came to a row of temporary bubbles, individual dwellings built
like the dome, but opaque for privacy.

As Gordon drew closer to the old foundation of the dome, the feeling
around began to clarify into something halfway between what he had seen
on the real frontier and what he had known as a kid in Earth's slums.

They had been lucky. The dome had exploded outwards, with only bits of
it falling back; and the buildings had come through the outward
explosion of the pressure with little damage. Gordon grinned wryly.
Schulberg's volunteers were official, now. Izzy was acting as chief of
police, Schulberg was head of the reconstruction corps, and Mother Corey
was temporary Mayor of all Marsport. The old charter for Marsport from
North America was dead, and the whole city was now under Security
charter, like the rest of the planet. But the dozen Security men had
left most of the control in the Mother's hands, and the old man was up
to his fat jowls in business.

Gordon moved automatically toward the Seventh Ward. Fats' Place was
still open, though the crooked tables had been removed. Gordon dropped
to a stool, slipping off his helmet. He reached automatically for the
glass of ether-needled beer. This time, it even tasted good to him.

"On the house, copper," Fats' voice said. The man dropped to another
stool, rolling dice casually between his thumbs. "And bring out a steak,
there! You look as if you could stand it--and Fats don't forget old
friends!"

"Friends and other things," Gordon said, remembering his first visit
here. "Maybe you should have got me that night, Fats."

The other shrugged. "That's Mars." He rolled the dice out, then picked
them up again. "Guess I'll have to stick to selling meals, mostly--for a
while, at least. Somebody told me you'd joined Security and got banged
up trying to keep Trench from blowing up the dome. Thought you'd be in
the chips!"

"That's Mars," Gordon echoed the other's comment. "Why don't you pull
off the planet, Fats? You could go back to Earth, I'd guess."

The other nodded. "Yeah. I went back, about ten years ago. Spent four
weeks down there. I dunno. Guess a man gets used to anything ... Hell,
maybe I can hire some bums to sit around and whoop it up when the ships
come in, and bill this as a real old Martian den of sin! Get a barker
out at the port, run special busses, charge the suckers a mint for a
cheap thrill."

Gordon grinned wryly; Fats would probably make more than ever.

He finished the meal, accepted a pack of the Earth cigarettes that sold
at a luxury price here, and went out into the thin air of Mars. It was
almost good to get out into the filth of the slums, and be heading back
to the still-standing monument of the old Chicken Coop. He headed for
the private entrance out of habit, and then shrugged as he realized it
was a needless precaution now. He moved up the front steps and through
the battered seal.

Then he stopped. Security had finally gotten around to him, it seemed.
Inside the hallway, the Security man who'd first sent him to Mars was
waiting.

There was a grin on the other's face. "Hello, Gordon. Finally got our
orders for you. It's Mercury!"

Bruce Gordon nodded slowly. "All right. I suppose you know I ruined the
dome, was supposed to have killed Murdoch, pretended I was a Security
agent..."

"You _were_ one," the man said. He grinned again. "We know about
Murdoch, and we know where Trench is--but he's a good citizen now, so he
can stay there. We're not throwing the book at you, Bruce. Damn it, we
sent you here to get results, and you got them. We sent twenty others
the same way--and they failed. You were a bit drastic--that I have to
admit--but we're one step closer to keeping nationalism off the planets,
and that's all we care about."

"I wonder if it's worth it," Gordon said slowly.

The other shook his head. "We can't know in our lifetime. All we can do
is to hope. We'll probably get this Mother Corey and Isaacs elected
properly; and for a while, things will improve. But there'll be pushers
as long as weak men turn to drugs, and graft as long as voters allow the
thing to get out of their hands. Let's say you've shifted some of the
misery around a bit, and given them a chance to do better. It's up to
them to take it or lose it."

"So I get sent to Mercury?"

"You can't stay here. They'll find out too much eventually." He paused,
estimating Gordon. "You _can_ go back to Earth, Bruce, but you won't
like it now. You're a fighter. And there's hell brewing on
Mercury--worse than here. We've got permission to send you there, if
you'll go. With a yellow ticket, again--but without any razzle-dazzle
this time. The only thing you'll get out of it is a chance to fight for
a better chance for others some day--and a promise that there'll be
more, until you get old enough to sit at a desk on Earth and fight
against every bickering nation there to keep the planets clean. There's
a rocket waiting to transship you to the Moon on the way to Mercury
right now."

Gordon sighed. "All right. But I wish you'd tell my wife sometime
that--well, that I didn't just run out on her. She's had bad luck with
men."

"She already knows," the Security man said. "I've been waiting for you
quite a while, you know. And I've paid her the pay we owe you from the
time you began using your badge. She's out shopping!"

The car pulled up to the waiting rocket, and the Security man helped him
up the steps with a perfunctory wish for good luck. Then Bruce Gordon
stopped as great arms surrounded him.

Mother Corey was immaculate, though not much prettier. But his old eyes
were glinting. "Did you think we'd let you go without seeing you off,
cobber?" he asked. "And after I took a _bath_ to celebrate? I--I--Oh,
drat it, I'm getting old. Izzy, you tell him."

He grabbed Gordon's hand and waddled down the landing plank. Izzy shook
his head.

"I can't say it, either, gov'nor--but some day, I'm going to have one of
those badges myself. Like I always said, honesty sure pays, even if it
kills you. Here!"

He followed Mother Corey, leaving behind his favorite knife and a
brand-new deck of reader cards, marked exactly as the ones Gordon had
first used.

Gordon dropped into his seat, while the sounds outside indicated
take-off time. He had less than a hundred credits, a knife, a deck of
phony cards, and a yellow ticket. Mars was leaving him what he'd
brought....

She dropped into the seat very quietly, but her blouse touched his arm.
In her hand was a punched ticket with the orange of Mars on top and the
black of Mercury on the bottom.

"Hello, Bruce," Sheila said softly. "I've been shopping and I spent the
money the man gave me. This is all I have left. Do you think it's worth
it? Or should I take it back?"

He turned it over in his hands slowly, and the smile came back to his
face gradually.

"You got a bargain, Cuddles," he said. "A lot better than the meal
ticket you bought. Let's keep it."





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Police Your Planet, by Lester del Rey

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK POLICE YOUR PLANET ***

***** This file should be named 20212-8.txt or 20212-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/0/2/1/20212/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
