The Project Gutenberg EBook of Ministry of Disturbance, by Henry Beam Piper

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Ministry of Disturbance

Author: Henry Beam Piper

Release Date: February 24, 2007 [EBook #20659]
Last updated: January 19, 2009

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MINISTRY OF DISTURBANCE ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, LN Yaddanapudi and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net





[Illustration]





MINISTRY ... OF DISTURBANCE


BY H. BEAM PIPER


Illustrated by van Dongen


+----------------------------------------------------------------+
|                                                                |
| Transcriber's Note                                             |
|                                                                |
| This etext was produced from Astounding Science Fiction        |
| December 1958. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence |
| that the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.       |
+----------------------------------------------------------------+


     _Sometimes getting a job is harder than the job after you get
     it--and sometimes getting out of a job is harder than either!_


[Illustration]

The symphony was ending, the final triumphant pæan soaring up and up,
beyond the limit of audibility. For a moment, after the last notes had
gone away, Paul sat motionless, as though some part of him had followed.
Then he roused himself and finished his coffee and cigarette, looking
out the wide window across the city below--treetops and towers, roofs
and domes and arching skyways, busy swarms of aircars glinting in the
early sunlight. Not many people cared for João Coelho's music, now, and
least of all for the Eighth Symphony. It was the music of another time,
a thousand years ago, when the Empire was blazing into being out of the
long night and hammering back the Neobarbarians from world after world.
Today people found it perturbing.

He smiled faintly at the vacant chair opposite him, and lit another
cigarette before putting the breakfast dishes on the serving-robot's
tray, and, after a while, realized that the robot was still beside his
chair, waiting for dismissal. He gave it an instruction to summon the
cleaning robots and sent it away. He could as easily have summoned them
himself, or let the guards who would be in checking the room do it for
him, but maybe it made a robot feel trusted and important to relay
orders to other robots.

Then he smiled again, this time in self-derision. A robot couldn't feel
important, or anything else. A robot was nothing but steel and plastic
and magnetized tape and photo-micro-positronic circuits, whereas a
man--His Imperial Majesty Paul XXII, for instance--was nothing but
tissues and cells and colloids and electro-neuronic circuits. There was
a difference; anybody knew that. The trouble was that he had never met
anybody--which included physicists, biologists, psychologists,
psionicists, philosophers and theologians--who could define the
difference in satisfactorily exact terms. He watched the robot pivot on
its treads and glide away, trailing steam from its coffee pot. It might
be silly to treat robots like people, but that wasn't as bad as treating
people like robots, an attitude which was becoming entirely too
prevalent. If only so many people didn't act like robots!

He crossed to the elevator and stood in front of it until a tiny
electroencephalograph inside recognized his distinctive brain-wave
pattern. Across the room, another door was popping open in response to
the robot's distinctive wave pattern. He stepped inside and flipped a
switch--there were still a few things around that had to be manually
operated--and the door closed behind him and the elevator gave him an
instant's weightlessness as it started to drop forty floors.

When it opened, Captain-General Dorflay of the Household Guard was
waiting for him, with a captain and ten privates. General Dorflay was
human. The captain and his ten soldiers weren't. They wore helmets,
emblazoned with the golden sun and superimposed black cogwheel of the
Empire, and red kilts and black ankle boots and weapons belts, and the
captain had a narrow gold-laced cape over his shoulders, but for the
rest, their bodies were covered with a stiff mat of black hair, and
their faces were slightly like terriers'. (For all his humanity,
Captain-General Dorflay's face was more like a bulldog's.) They were
hillmen from the southern hemisphere of Thor, and as a people they made
excellent mercenaries. They were crack shots, brave and crafty fighters,
totally uninterested in politics off their own planet, and, because they
had grown up in a patriarchial-clan society, they were fanatically loyal
to anybody whom they accepted as their chieftain. Paul stepped out and
gave them an inclusive nod.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Good morning, gentlemen."

"Good morning, Your Imperial Majesty," General Dorflay said, bowing the
couple of inches consistent with military dignity. The Thoran captain
saluted by touching his forehead, his heart, which was on the right
side, and the butt of his pistol. Paul complimented him on the smart
appearance of his detail, and the captain asked how it could be
otherwise, with the example and inspiration of his imperial majesty.
Compliment and response could have been a playback from every morning of
the ten years of his reign. So could Dorflay's question: "Your Majesty
will proceed to his study?"

He wanted to say, "No, to Niffelheim with it; let's get an aircar and
fly a million miles somewhere," and watch the look of shocked
incomprehension on the captain-general's face. He couldn't do that,
though; poor old Harv Dorflay might have a heart attack. He nodded
slowly.

"If you please, general."

Dorflay nodded to the Thoran captain, who nodded to his men. Four of
them took two paces forward; the rest, unslinging weapons, went
scurrying up the corridor, some posting themselves along the way and the
rest continuing to the main hallway. The captain and two of his men
started forward slowly; after they had gone twenty feet, Paul and
General Dorflay fell in behind them, and the other two brought up the
rear.

"Your Majesty," Dorflay said, in a low voice, "let me beg you to be most
cautious. I have just discovered that there exists a treasonous plot
against your life."

Paul nodded. Dorflay was more than due to discover another treasonous
plot; it had been ten days since the last one.

"I believe you mentioned it, general. Something about planting loose
strontium-90 in the upholstery of the Audience Throne, wasn't it?"

And before that, somebody had been trying to smuggle a fission bomb into
the Palace in a wine cask, and before that, it was a booby trap in the
elevator, and before that, somebody was planning to build a submachine
gun into the viewscreen in the study, and--

"Oh, no, Your Majesty; that was--Well, the persons involved in that plot
became alarmed and fled the planet before I could arrest them. This is
something different, Your Majesty. I have learned that unauthorized
alterations have been made on one of the cooking-robots in your private
kitchen, and I am positive that the object is to poison Your Majesty."

They were turning into the main hallway, between the rows of portraits
of past emperors, Paul and Rodrik, Paul and Rodrik, alternating over and
over on both walls. He felt a smile growing on his face, and banished
it.

"The robot for the meat sauces, wasn't it?" he asked.

"Why--! Yes, Your Majesty."

"I'm sorry, general. I should have warned you. Those alterations were
made by roboticists from the Ministry of Security; they were installing
an adaptation of a device used in the criminalistics-labs, to insure
more uniform measurements. They'd done that already for Prince Travann,
the Minister, and he'd recommended it to me."

That was a shame, spoiling poor Harv Dorflay's murder plot. It had been
such a nice little plot, too; he must have had a lot of fun inventing
it. But a line had to be drawn somewhere. Let him turn the Palace upside
down hunting for bombs; harass ladies-in-waiting whose lovers he
suspected of being hired assassins; hound musicians into whose
instruments he imagined firearms had been built; the emperor's private
kitchen would have to be off limits.

Dorflay, who should have been looking crestfallen but relieved, stopped
short--shocking breach of Court etiquette--and was staring in horror.

"Your Majesty! Prince Travann did that openly and with your consent?
But, Your Majesty, I am convinced that it is Prince Travann himself who
is the instigator of every one of these diabolical schemes. In the case
of the elevator, I became suspicious of a man named Samml Ganner, one of
Prince Travann's secret police agents. In the case of the gun in the
viewscreen, it was a technician whose sister is a member of the
household of Countess Yirzy, Prince Travann's mistress. In the case of
the fission bomb----"

The two Thorans and their captain had kept on for some distance before
they had discovered that they were no longer being followed, and were
returning. He put his hand on General Dorflay's shoulder and urged him
forward.

"Have you mentioned this to anybody?"

"Not a word, Your Majesty. This Court is so full of treachery that I can
trust no one, and we must never warn the villain that he is suspected--"

"Good. Say nothing to anybody." They had reached the door of the study,
now. "I think I'll be here until noon. If I leave earlier, I'll flash
you a signal."

       *       *       *       *       *

He entered the big oval room, lighted from overhead by the great
star-map in the ceiling, and crossed to his desk, with the viewscreens
and reading screens and communications screens around it, and as he sat
down, he cursed angrily, first at Harv Dorflay and then, after a
moment's reflection, at himself. He was the one to blame; he'd known
Dorflay's paranoid condition for years. Have to do something about it.
Any psycho-medic would certify him; be no problem at all to have him put
away. But be blasted if he'd do that. That was no way to repay loyalty,
even insane loyalty. Well, he'd find a way.

He lit a cigarette and leaned back, looking up at the glowing swirl of
billions of billions of tiny lights in the ceiling. At least, there were
supposed to be billions of billions of them; he'd never counted them,
and neither had any of the seventeen Rodriks and sixteen Pauls before
him who had sat under them. His hand moved to a control button on his
chair arm, and a red patch, roughly the shape of a pork chop, appeared
on the western side.

That was the Empire. Every one of the thousand three hundred and
sixty-five inhabited worlds, a trillion and a half intelligent beings,
fourteen races--fifteen if you counted the Zarathustran Fuzzies, who
were almost able to qualify under the talk-and-build-a-fire rule. And
that had been the Empire when Rodrik VI had seen the map completed, and
when Paul II had built the Palace, and when Stevan IV, the grandfather
of Paul I, had proclaimed Odin the Imperial planet and Asgard the
capital city. There had been some excuse for staying inside that patch
of stars then; a newly won Empire must be consolidated within before it
can safely be expanded. But that had been over eight centuries ago.

He looked at the Daily Schedule, beautifully embossed and neatly slipped
under his desk glass. Luncheon on the South Upper Terrace, with the
Prime Minister and the Bench of Imperial Counselors. Yes, it was time
for that again; that happened as inevitably and regularly as Harv
Dorflay's murder plots. And in the afternoon, a Plenary Session, Cabinet
and Counselors. Was he going to have to endure the Bench of Counselors
twice in the same day? Then the vexation was washed out of his face by a
spreading grin. Bench of Counselors; that was the answer! Elevate Harv
Dorflay to the Bench. That was what the Bench was for, a gold-plated
dustbin for the disposal of superannuated dignitaries. He'd do no harm
there, and a touch of outright lunacy might enliven and even improve the
Bench.

And in the evening, a banquet, and a reception and ball, in honor of His
Majesty Ranulf XIV, Planetary King of Durendal, and First Citizen Zhorzh
Yaggo, People's Manager-in-Chief of and for the Planetary Commonwealth
of Aditya. Bargain day; two planetary chiefs of state in one big
combination deal. He wondered what sort of prizes he had drawn this
time, and closed his eyes, trying to remember. Durendal, of course, was
one of the Sword-Worlds, settled by refugees from the losing side of the
System States War in the time of the old Terran Federation, who had
reappeared in Galactic history a few centuries later as the Space
Vikings. They all had monarchial and rather picturesque governments;
Durendal, he seemed to recall, was a sort of quasi-feudalism. About
Aditya he was less sure. Something unpleasant, he thought; the titles of
the government and its head were suggestive.

He lit another cigarette and snapped on the reading screen to see what
they had piled onto him this morning, and then swore when a graph chart,
with jiggling red and blue and green lines, appeared. Chart day, too.
Everything happens at once.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was the interstellar trade situation chart from Economics. Red line
for production, green line for exports, blue for imports, sectioned
vertically for the ten Viceroyalties and sub-sectioned for the
Prefectures, and with the magnification and focus controls he could even
get data for individual planets. He didn't bother with that, and
wondered why he bothered with the charts at all. The stuff was all at
least twenty days behind date, and not uniformly so, which accounted for
much of the jiggling. It had been transmitted from Planetary
Proconsulate to Prefecture, and from Prefecture to Viceroyalty, and from
there to Odin, all by ship. A ship on hyperdrive could log light-years
an hour, but radio waves still had to travel 186,000 mps. The
supplementary chart for the past five centuries told the real
story--three perfectly level and perfectly parallel lines.

It was the same on all the other charts. Population fluctuating slightly
at the moment, completely static for the past five centuries. A slight
decrease in agriculture, matched by an increase in synthetic food
production. A slight population movement toward the more urban planets
and the more densely populated centers. A trend downward in
employment--nonworking population increasing by about .0001 per cent
annually. Not that they were building better robots; they were just
building them faster than they wore out. They all told the same story--a
stable economy, a static population, a peaceful and undisturbed Empire;
eight centuries, five at least, of historyless tranquility. Well, that
was what everybody wanted, wasn't it?

He flipped through the rest of the charts, and began getting summarized
Ministry reports. Economics had denied a request from the Mining Cartel
to authorize operations on a couple of uninhabited planets; danger of
local market gluts and overstimulation of manufacturing. Permission
granted to Robotics Cartel to---- Request from planetary government of
Durendal for increase of cereal export quotas under consideration--they
wouldn't want to turn that down while King Ranulf was here. Impulsively,
he punched out a combination on the communication screen and got Count
Duklass, Minister of Economics.

Count Duklass had thinning red hair and a plump, agreeable, extrovert's
face. He smiled and waited to be addressed.

"Sorry to bother Your Lordship," Paul greeted him. "What's the story on
this export quota request from Durendal? We have their king here, now.
Think he's come to lobby for it?"

Count Duklass chuckled. "He's not doing anything about it, himself. Have
you met him yet, sir?"

"Not yet. He's to be presented this evening."

"Well, when you see him--I think the masculine pronoun is
permissible--you'll see what I mean, sir. It's this Lord Koreff, the
Marshal. He came here on business, and had to bring the king along, for
fear somebody else would grab him while he was gone. The whole object of
Durendalian politics, as I understand, is to get possession of the
person of the king. Koreff was on my screen for half an hour; I just got
rid of him. Planet's pretty heavily agricultural, they had a couple of
very good crop years in a row, and now they have grain running out their
ears, and they want to export it and cash in."

"Well?"

"Can't let them do it, Your Majesty. They're not suffering any hardship;
they're just not making as much money as they think they ought to. If
they start dumping their surplus into interstellar trade, they'll cause
all kinds of dislocations on other agricultural planets. At least,
that's what our computers all say."

And that, of course, was gospel. He nodded.

"Why don't they turn their surplus into whisky? Age it five or six years
and it'd be on the luxury goods schedule and they could sell it
anywhere."

Count Duklass' eyes widened. "I never thought of that, Your Majesty.
Just a microsec; I want to make a note of that. Pass it down to somebody
who could deal with it. That's a wonderful idea, Your Majesty!"

       *       *       *       *       *

He finally got the conversation to an end, and went back to the reports.
Security, as usual, had a few items above the dead level of bureaucratic
procedure. The planetary king of Excalibur had been assassinated by his
brother and two nephews, all three of whom were now fighting among
themselves. As nobody had anything to fight with except small arms and a
few light cannon, there would be no intervention. There had been
intervention on Behemoth, however, where a whole continent had tried to
secede from the planetary republic and the Imperial Navy had been
requested to send a task force. That was all right, in both cases. No
interference with anything that passed for a planetary government, but
only one sovereignty on any planet with nuclear weapons, and only one
supreme sovereignty in a galaxy with hyperdrive ships.

And there was rioting on Amaterasu, because of public indignation over a
fraudulent election. He looked at that in incredulous delight. Why, here
on Odin there hadn't been an election in the past six centuries that
hadn't been utterly fraudulent. Nobody voted except the nonworkers,
whose votes were bought and sold wholesale, by gangster bosses to
pressure groups, and no decent person would be caught within a hundred
yards of a polling place on an election day. He called the Minister of
Security.

Prince Travann was a man of his own age--they had been classmates at the
University--but he looked older. His thin face was lined, and his hair
was almost completely white. He was at his desk, with the Sun and
Cogwheel of the Empire on the wall behind him, but on the breast of his
black tunic he wore the badge of his family, a silver planet with three
silver moons. Unlike Count Duklass, he didn't wait to be spoken to.

"Good morning, Your Majesty."

"Good morning, Your Highness; sorry to bother you. I just caught an
interesting item in your report. This business on Amaterasu. What sort
of a planet is it, politically? I don't seem to recall."

"Why, they have a republican government, sir; a very complicated setup.
Really, it's a junk heap. When anything goes badly, they always build
something new into the government, but they never abolish anything. They
have a president, a premier, and an executive cabinet, and a tricameral
legislature, and two complete and distinct judiciaries. The premier is
always the presidential candidate getting the next highest number of
votes. In the present instance, the president, who controls the
planetary militia, is accusing the premier, who controls the police, of
fraud in the election of the middle house of the legislature. Each is
supported by the judiciary he controls. Practically every citizen
belongs either to the militia or the police auxiliaries. I am looking
forward to further reports from Amaterasu," he added dryly.

"I daresay they'll be interesting. Send them to me in full, and red-star
them, if you please, Prince Travann."

He went back to the reports. The Ministry of Science and Technology had
sent up a lengthy one. The only trouble with it was that everything
reported was duplication of work that had been done centuries before.
Well, no. A Dr. Dandrik, of the physics department of the Imperial
University here in Asgard announced that a definite limit of accuracy in
measuring the velocity of accelerated subnucleonic particles had been
established--16.067543333--times light-speed. That seemed to be typical;
the frontiers of science, now, were all decimal points. The Ministry of
Education had a little to offer; historical scholarship was still
active, at least. He was reading about a new trove of source-material
that had come to light on Uller, from the Sixth Century Atomic Era, when
the door screen buzzed and flashed.

       *       *       *       *       *

He lit it, and his son Rodrik appeared in it, with Snooks, the little
red hound, squirming excitedly in the Crown Prince's arms. The dog began
barking at once, and the boy called through the phone:

"Good morning, father; are you busy?"

"Oh, not at all." He pressed the release button. "Come on in."

Immediately, the little hound leaped out of the princely arms and came
dashing into the study and around the desk, jumping onto his lap. The
boy followed more slowly, sitting down in the deskside chair and drawing
his foot up under him. Paul greeted Snooks first--people can wait, but
for little dogs everything has to be right now--and rummaged in a drawer
until he found some wafers, holding one for Snooks to nibble. Then he
became aware that his son was wearing leather shorts and tall buskins.

"Going out somewhere?" he asked, a trifle enviously.

"Up in the mountains, for a picnic. Olva's going along."

And his tutor, and his esquire, and Olva's companion-lady, and a dozen
Thoran riflemen, of course, and they'd be in continuous screen-contact
with the Palace.

"That ought to be a lot of fun. Did you get all your lessons done?"

"Physics and math and galactiography," Rodrik told him. "And Professor
Guilsan's going to give me and Olva our history after lunch."

They talked about lessons, and about the picnic. Of course, Snooks was
going on the picnic, too. It was evident, though, that Rodrik had
something else on his mind. After a while, he came out with it.

"Father, you know I've been a little afraid, lately," he said.

"Well, tell me about it, son. It isn't anything about you and Olva, is
it?"

Rod was fourteen; the little Princess Olva thirteen. They would be
marriageable in six years. As far as anybody could tell, they were both
quite happy about the marriage which had been arranged for them years
ago.

"Oh, no; nothing like that. But Olva's sister and a couple others of
mother's ladies-in-waiting were to a psi-medium, and the medium told
them that there were going to be changes. Great and frightening changes
was what she said."

"She didn't specify?"

"No. Just that: great and frightening changes. But the only change of
that kind I can think of would be ... well, something happening to you."

Snooks, having eaten three wafers, was trying to lick his ear. He pushed
the little dog back into his lap and pummeled him gently with his left
hand.

"You mustn't let mediums' gabble worry you, son. These psi-mediums have
real powers, but they can't turn them off and on like a water tap. When
they don't get anything, they don't like to admit it, and they invent
things. Always generalities like that; never anything specific."

"I know all that." The boy seemed offended, as though somebody were
explaining that his mother hadn't really found him out in the rose
garden. "But they talked about it to some of their friends, and it seems
that other mediums are saying the same thing. Father, do you remember
when the Haval Valley reactor blew up? All over Odin, the mediums had
been talking about a terrible accident, for a month before that
happened."

"I remember that." Harv Dorflay believed that somebody had been falsely
informed that the emperor would visit the plant that day. "These great
and frightening changes will probably turn out to be a new fad in
abstract sculpture. Any change frightens most people."

They talked more about mediums, and then about aircars and aircar
racing, and about the Emperor's Cup race that was to be flown in a
month. The communications screen began flashing and buzzing, and after
he had silenced it with the busy-button for the third time, Rodrik said
that it was time for him to go, came around to gather up Snooks, and
went out, saying that he'd be home in time for the banquet. The screen
began to flash again as he went out.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was Prince Ganzay, the Prime Minister. He looked as though he had a
persistent low-level toothache, but that was his ordinary expression.

"Sorry to bother Your Majesty. It's about these chiefs-of-state. Count
Gadvan, the Chamberlain, appealed to me, and I feel I should ask your
advice. It's the matter of precedence."

"Well, we have a fixed rule on that. Which one arrived first?"

"Why, the Adityan, but it seems King Ranulf insists that he's entitled
to precedence, or, rather, his Lord Marshal does. This Lord Koreff
insists that his king is not going to yield precedence to a commoner."

[Illustration]

"Then he can go home to Durendal!" He felt himself growing angry--all
the little angers of the morning were focusing on one spot. He forced
the harshness out of his voice. "At a court function, somebody has to go
first, and our rule is order of arrival at the Palace. That rule was
established to avoid violating the principle of equality to all
civilized peoples and all planetary governments. We're not going to set
it aside for the King of Durendal, or anybody else."

Prince Ganzay nodded. Some of the toothache expression had gone out of
his face, now that he had been relieved of the decision.

"Of course, Your Majesty." He brightened a little. "Do you think we
might compromise? Alternate the precedence, I mean?"

"Only if this First Citizen Yaggo consents. If he does, it would be a
good idea."

"I'll talk to him, sir." The toothache expression came back. "Another
thing, Your Majesty. They've both been invited to attend the Plenary
Session, this afternoon."

"Well, no trouble there; they can enter by different doors and sit in
visitors' boxes at opposite ends of the hall."

"Well, sir, I wasn't thinking of precedence. But this is to be an
Elective Session--new Ministers to replace Prince Havaly, of Defense,
deceased, and Count Frask, of Science and Technology, elevated to the
Bench. There seems to be some difference of opinion among some of the
Ministers and Counselors. It's very possible that the Session may
degenerate into an outright controversy."

"Horrible," Paul said seriously. "I think, though, that our
distinguished guests will see that the Empire can survive difference of
opinion, and even outright controversy. But if you think it might have a
bad effect, why not postpone the election?"

"Well--It's been postponed three times, already, sir."

"Postpone it permanently. Advertise for bids on two robot Ministers,
Defense, and Science and Technology. If they're a success, we can set up
a project to design a robot emperor."

The Prime Minister's face actually twitched and blanched at the
blasphemy. "Your Majesty is joking," he said, as though he wanted to be
reassured on the point.

"Unfortunately, I am. If my job could be robotized, maybe I could take
my wife and my son and our little dog and go fishing for a while."

But, of course, he couldn't. There were only two alternatives: the
Empire or Galactic anarchy. The galaxy was too big to hold general
elections, and there had to be a supreme ruler, and a positive and
automatic--which meant hereditary--means of succession.

"Whose opinion seems to differ from whose, and about what?" he asked.

"Well, Count Duklass and Count Tammsan want to have the Ministry of
Science and Technology abolished, and its functions and personnel
distributed. Count Duklass means to take over the technological sections
under Economics, and Count Tammsan will take over the science part under
Education. The proposal is going to be introduced at this Session by
Count Guilfred, the Minister of Health and Sanity. He hopes to get some
of the bio-and psycho-science sections for his own Ministry."

"That's right. Duklass gets the hide, Tammsan gets the head and horns,
and everybody who hunts with them gets a cut of the meat. That's good
sound law of the chase. I'm not in favor of it, myself. Prince Ganzay,
at this session, I wish you'd get Captain-General Dorflay nominated for
the Bench. I feel that it is about time to honor him with elevation."

"General Dorflay? But why, Your Majesty?"

"Great galaxy, do you have to ask? Why, because the man's a raving
lunatic. He oughtn't even to be trusted with a sidearm, let alone five
companies of armed soldiers. Do you know what he told me this morning?"

"That somebody is training a Nidhog swamp-crawler to crawl up the
Octagon Tower and bite you at breakfast, I suppose. But hasn't that been
going on for quite a while, sir?"

"It was a gimmick in one of the cooking robots, but that's aside from
the question. He's finally named the master mind behind all these
nightmares of his, and who do you think it is? Yorn Travann!"

       *       *       *       *       *

The Prime Minister's face grew graver than usual. Well, it was something
to look grave about; some of these days----

"Your Majesty, I couldn't possibly agree more about the general's mental
condition, but I really should say that, crazy or not, he is not alone
in his suspicions of Prince Travann. If sharing them makes me a lunatic,
too, so be it, but share them I do."

Paul felt his eyebrows lift in surprise. "That's quite too much and too
little, Prince Ganzay," he said.

"With your permission, I'll elaborate. Don't think that I suspect Prince
Travann of any childish pranks with elevators or viewscreens or
cooking-robots," the Prime Minister hastened to disclaim, "but I
definitely do suspect him of treasonous ambitions. I suppose Your
Majesty knows that he is the first Minister of Security in centuries who
has assumed personal control of both the planetary and municipal police,
instead of delegating his _ex officio_ powers.

"Your Majesty may not know, however, of some of the peculiar uses he has
been making of those authorities. Does Your Majesty know that he has
recruited the Security Guard up to at least ten times the strength
needed to meet any conceivable peace-maintenance problem on this planet,
and that he has been piling up huge quantities of heavy combat
equipment--guns up to 200-millimeter, heavy contragravity, even
gun-cutters and bomb-and-rocket boats? And does Your Majesty know that
most of this armament is massed within fifteen minutes' flight-time of
this Palace? Or that Prince Travann has at his disposal from two and a
half to three times, in men and firepower, the combined strength of the
Planetary Militia and the Imperial Army on this planet?"

"I know. It has my approval. He's trying to salvage some of the young
nonworkers through exposing them to military discipline. A good many of
them, I believe, have gone off-planet on their discharge from the SG and
hired as mercenaries, which is a far better profession than vote
selling."

"Quite a plausible explanation: Prince Travann is nothing if not
plausible," the Prime Minister agreed. "And does Your Majesty know that,
because of repeated demands for support from the Ministry of Security,
the Imperial Navy has been scattered all over the Empire, and that there
is not a naval craft bigger than a scout-boat within fifteen hundred
light-years of Odin?"

That was absolutely true. Paul could only nod agreement. Prince Ganzay
continued:

"He has been doing some peculiar things as Police Chief of Asgard, too.
For instance, there are two powerful nonworkers' voting-bloc bosses, Big
Moogie Blisko and Zikko the Nose--I assure Your Majesty that I am not
inventing these names; that's what the persons are actually called--who
have been enjoying the favor and support of Prince Travann. On a number
of occasions, their smaller rivals, leaders of less important gangs,
have been arrested, often on trumped-up charges, and held incommunicado
until either Moogie or Zikko could move into their territories and annex
their nonworker followers. These two bloc-bosses are subsidized,
respectively, by the Steel and Shipbuilding Cartels and by the Reaction
Products and Chemical Cartels, but actually, they are controlled by
Prince Travann. They, in turn, control between them about seventy per
cent of the nonworkers in Asgard."

"And you think this adds up to a plot against the Throne?"

"A plot to seize the Throne, Your Majesty."

"Oh, come, Prince Ganzay! You're talking like Dorflay!"

"Hear me out, Your Majesty. His Imperial Highness is fourteen years old;
it will be eleven years before he will be legally able to assume the
powers of emperor. In the dreadful event of your immediate death, it
would mean a regency for that long. Of course, your Ministers and
Counselors would be the ones to name the Regent, but I know how they
would vote with Security Guard bayonets at their throats. And regency
might not be the limit of Prince Travann's ambitions."

"In your own words, quite plausible, Prince Ganzay. It rests, however,
on a very questionable foundation. The assumption that Prince Travann is
stupid enough to want the Throne."

He had to terminate the conversation himself and blank the screen.
Viktor Ganzay was still staring at him in shocked incredulity when his
image vanished. Viktor Ganzay could not imagine anybody not wanting the
Throne, not even the man who had to sit on it.

       *       *       *       *       *

He sat, for a while, looking at the darkened screen, a little worried.
Viktor Ganzay had a much better intelligence service than he had
believed. He wondered how much Ganzay had found out that he hadn't
mentioned. Then he went back to the reports. He had gotten down to the
Ministry of Fine Arts when the communications screen began calling
attention to itself again.

When he flipped the switch, a woman smiled out of it at him. Her blond
hair was rumpled, and she wore a dressing gown; her smile brightened as
his face appeared in her screen.

"Hi!" she greeted him.

"Hi, yourself. You just get up?"

She raised a hand to cover a yawn. "I'll bet you've been up reigning for
hours. Were Rod and Snooks in to see you yet?"

He nodded. "They just left. Rod's going on a picnic with Olva in the
mountains." How long had it been since he and Marris had been on a
picnic--a real picnic, with less than fifty guards and as many courtiers
along? "Do you have much reigning to do, this afternoon?"

She grimaced. "Flower Festivals. I have to make personal tri-di
appearances, live, with messages for the loving subjects. Three minutes
on, and a two-minute break between. I have forty for this afternoon."

"Ugh! Well, have a good time, sweetheart. All I have is lunch with the
Bench, and then this Plenary Session." He told her about Ganzay's fear
of outright controversy.

"Oh, fun! Maybe somebody'll pull somebody's whiskers, or something. I'm
in on that, too."

The call-indicator in front of him began glowing with the code-symbol of
the Minister of Security.

"We can always hope, can't we? Well, Yorn Travann's trying to get me,
now."

"Don't keep him waiting. Maybe I can see you before the Session." She
made a kissing motion with her lips at him, and blanked the screen.

He flipped the switch again, and Prince Travann was on the screen. The
Security Minister didn't waste time being sorry to bother him.

"Your Majesty, a report's just come in that there's a serious riot at
the University; between five and ten thousand students are attacking the
Administration Center, lobbing stench bombs into it, and threatening to
hang Chancellor Khane. They have already overwhelmed and disarmed the
campus police, and I've sent two companies of the Gendarme riot brigade,
under an officer I can trust to handle things firmly but intelligently.
We don't want any indiscriminate stunning or tear-gassing or shooting;
all sorts of people can have sons and daughters mixed up in a student
riot."

"Yes. I seem to recall student riots in which the sons of his late
Highness Prince Travann and his late Majesty Rodrik XXI were involved."
He deliberated the point for a moment, and added: "This scarcely sounds
like a frat-fight or a panty-raid, though. What seems to have triggered
it?"

"The story I got--a rather hysterical call for help from Khane
himself--is that they're protesting an action of his in dismissing a
faculty member. I have a couple of undercovers at the University, and
I'm trying to contact them. I sent more undercovers, who could pass for
students, ahead of the Gendarmes to get the student side of it and the
names of the ring-leaders." He glanced down at the indicator in front of
him, which had begun to glow. "If you'll pardon me, sir, Count Tammsan's
trying to get me. He may have particulars. I'll call Your Majesty back
when I learn anything more."

       *       *       *       *       *

There hadn't been anything like that at the University within the memory
of the oldest old grad. Chancellor Khane, he knew, was a stupid and
arrogant old windbag with a swollen sense of his own importance. He made
a small bet with himself that the whole thing was Khane's fault, but he
wondered what lay behind it, and what would come out of it. Great
plagues from little microbes start. Great and frightening changes----

The screen got itself into an uproar, and he flipped the switch. It was
Viktor Ganzay again. He looked as though his permanent toothache had
deserted him for the moment.

"Sorry to bother Your Majesty, but it's all fixed up," he reported.
"First Citizen Yaggo agreed to alternate in precedence with King Ranulf,
and Lord Koreff has withdrawn all his objections. As far as I can see,
at present, there should be no trouble."

"Fine. I suppose you heard about the excitement at the University?"

"Oh, yes, Your Majesty. Disgraceful affair!"

"Simply shocking. What seems to have started it, have you heard?" he
asked. "All I know is that the students were protesting the dismissal of
a faculty member. He must have been exceptionally popular, or else he
got a more than ordinary raw deal from Khane."

"Well, as to that, sir, I can't say. All I learned was that it was the
result of some faculty squabble in one of the science departments; the
grounds for the dismissal were insubordination and contempt for
authority."

"I always thought that when authority began inspiring contempt, it had
stopped being authority. Did you say science? This isn't going to help
Duklass and Tammsan any."

"I'm afraid not, Your Majesty." Ganzay didn't look particularly
regretful. "The News Cartel's gotten hold of it and are using it; it'll
be all over the Empire."

He said that as though it meant something. Well, maybe it did; a lot of
Ministers and almost all the Counselors spent most of their time
worrying about what people on planets like Chermosh and Zarathustra and
Deirdre and Quetzalcoatl might think, in ignorance of the fact that
interest in Empire politics varied inversely as the square of the
distance to Odin and the level of corruption and inefficiency of the
local government.

"I notice you'll be at the Bench luncheon. Do you think you could invite
our guests, too? We could have an informal presentation before it
starts. Can do? Good. I'll be seeing you there."

When the screen was blanked, he returned to the reports, ran them off
hastily to make sure that nothing had been red-starred, and called a
robot to clear the projector. After a while, Prince Travann called
again.

"Sorry to bother Your Majesty, but I have most of the facts on the riot,
now. What happened was that Chancellor Khane sacked a professor, physics
department, under circumstances which aroused resentment among the
science students. Some of them walked out of class and went to the
stadium to hold a protest meeting, and the thing snowballed until half
the students were in it. Khane lost his head and ordered the campus
police to clear the stadium; the students rushed them and swamped them.
I hope, for their sakes, that none of my men ever let anything like that
happen. The man I sent, a Colonel Handrosan, managed to talk the
students into going back to the stadium and continuing the meeting under
Gendarme protection."

"Sounds like a good man."

"Very good, Your Majesty. Especially in handling disturbances. I have
complete confidence in him. He's also investigating the background of
the affair. I'll give Your Majesty what he's learned, to date. It seems
that the head of the physics department, a Professor Nelse Dandrik, had
been conducting an experiment, assisted by a Professor Klenn Faress, to
establish more accurately the velocity of subnucleonic particles, beta
micropositos, I believe. Dandrik's story, as relayed to Handrosan by
Khane, is that he reached a limit and the apparatus began giving erratic
results."

Prince Travann stopped to light a cigarette. "At this point, Professor
Dandrik ordered the experiment stopped, and Professor Faress insisted on
continuing. When Dandrik ordered the apparatus dismantled, Faress became
rather emotional about it--obscenely abusive and threatening, according
to Dandrik. Dandrik complained to Khane, Khane ordered Faress to
apologize, Faress refused, and Khane dismissed Faress. Immediately, the
students went on strike. Faress confirmed the whole story, and he added
one small detail that Dandrik hadn't seen fit to mention. According to
him, when these micropositos were accelerated beyond sixteen and a
fraction times light-speed, they began registering at the target before
the source registered the emission."

"Yes, I--_What did you say_?"

Prince Travann repeated it slowly, distinctly and tonelessly.

"That was what I thought you said. Well, I'm going to insist on a
complete investigation, including a repetition of the experiment. Under
direction of Professor Faress."

"Yes, Your Majesty. And when that happens, I mean to be on hand
personally. If somebody is just before discovering time-travel, I think
Security has a very substantial interest in it."

The Prime Minister called back to confirm that First Citizen Yaggo and
King Ranulf would be at the luncheon. The Chamberlain, Count Gadvan,
called with a long and dreary problem about the protocol for the
banquet. Finally, at noon, he flashed a signal for General Dorflay,
waited five minutes, and then left his desk and went out, to find the
mad general and his wirehaired soldiers drawn up in the hall.

       *       *       *       *       *

There were more Thorans on the South Upper Terrace, and after a flurry
of porting and presenting and ordering arms and hand-saluting, the Prime
Minister advanced and escorted him to where the Bench of Counselors, all
thirty of them, total age close to twenty-eight hundred years, were
drawn up in a rough crescent behind the three distinguished guests. The
King of Durendal wore a cloth-of-silver leotard and pink tights, and a
belt of gold links on which he carried a jeweled dagger only slightly
thicker than a knitting needle. He was slender and willowy, and he had
large and soulful eyes, and the royal beautician must have worked on him
for a couple of hours. Wait till Marris sees this; oh, brother!

Koreff, the Lord Marshal, wore what was probably the standard costume of
Durendal, a fairly long jerkin with short sleeves, and knee-boots, and
his dress dagger looked as though it had been designed for use. Lord
Koreff looked as though he would be quite willing and able to use it; he
was fleshy and full-faced, with hard muscles under the flesh.

First Citizen Yaggo, People's Manager-in-Chief of and for the Planetary
Commonwealth of Aditya, wore a one-piece white garment like a mechanic's
coveralls, with the emblem of his government and the numeral 1 on his
breast. He carried no dagger; if he had worn a dress weapon, it would
probably have been a slide rule. His head was completely shaven, and he
had small, pale eyes and a rat-trap mouth. He was regarding the
Durendalians with a distaste that was all too evidently reciprocated.

King Ranulf appeared to have won the toss for first presentation. He
squeezed the Imperial hand in both of his and looked up adoringly as he
professed his deep honor and pleasure. Yaggo merely clasped both his
hands in front of the emblem on his chest and raised them quickly to the
level of his chin, saying: "At the service of the Imperial State," and
adding, as though it hurt him, "Your Imperial Majesty." Not being a
chief of state, Lord Koreff came third; he merely shook hands and said,
"A great honor, Your Imperial Majesty, and the thanks, both of myself
and my royal master, for a most gracious reception." The attempt to grab
first place having failed, he was more than willing to forget the whole
subject. There was a chance that finding a way to dispose of the grain
surplus might make the difference between his staying in power at home
or not.

Fortunately, the three guests had already met the Bench of Counselors.
Immediately after the presentation of Lord Koreff, they all started the
two hundred yards march to the luncheon pavilion, the King of Durendal
clinging to his left arm and First Citizen Yaggo stumping dourly on his
right, with Prince Ganzay beyond him and Lord Koreff on Ranulf's left.

"Do you plan to stay long on Odin?" he asked the king.

"Oh. I'd _love_ to stay for simply _months_! Everything is so
_wonderful_, here in Asgard; it makes our little capital of Roncevaux
seem so _utterly_ provincial. I'm going to tell Your Imperial Majesty a
secret. I'm going to see if I can lure some of your _wonderful_ ballet
dancers back to Durendal with me. Aren't I _naughty_, raiding Your
Imperial Majesty's theaters?"

"In keeping with the traditions of your people," he replied gravely.
"You Sword-Worlders used to raid everywhere you went."

"I'm afraid those bad old days are long past, Your Imperial Majesty,"
Lord Koreff said. "But we Sword-Worlders got around the galaxy, for a
while. In fact, I seem to remember reading that some of our brethren
from Morglay or Flamberge even occupied Aditya for a couple of
centuries. Not that you'd guess it to look at Aditya now."

       *       *       *       *       *

It was First Citizen Yaggo's turn to take precedence--the seat on the
right of the throne chair. Lord Koreff sat on Ranulf's left, and, to
balance him, Prince Ganzay sat beyond Yaggo and dutifully began
inquiring of the People's Manager-in-Chief about the structure of his
government, launching him on a monologue that promised to last at least
half the luncheon. That left the King of Durendal to Paul; for a start,
he dropped a compliment on the cloth-of-silver leotard.

King Ranulf laughed dulcetly, brushed the garment with his fingertips,
and said that it was just a simple thing patterned after the Durendalian
peasant costume.

"You have peasants on Durendal?"

"Oh, _dear_, yes! Such quaint, _charming_ people. Of course, they're all
poor, and they wear such _funny_ ragged clothes, and travel about in
rackety old aircars, it's a wonder they don't fall apart in the air. But
they're so _wonderfully_ happy and carefree. I often wish I were one of
them, instead of king."

"Nonworking class, Your Imperial Majesty," Lord Koreff explained.

"On Aditya," First Citizen Yaggo declared, "there are no classes, and on
Aditya everybody works. 'From each according to his ability; to each
according to his need.'"

"On Aditya," an elderly Counselor four places to the right of him said
loudly to his neighbor, "they don't call them classes, they call them
sociological categories, and they have nineteen of them. And on Aditya,
they don't call them nonworkers, they call them occupational reservists,
and they have more of them than we do."

"But of course, I was born a king," Ranulf said sadly and nobly. "I have
a duty to my people."

"No, they don't vote at all," Lord Koreff was telling the Counselor on
his left. "On Durendal, you have to pay taxes before you can vote."

"On Aditya the crime of taxation does not exist," the First Citizen told
the Prime Minister.

"On Aditya," the Counselor four places down said to his neighbor,
"there's nothing to tax. The state owns all the property, and if the
Imperial Constitution and the Space Navy let them, the State would own
all the people, too. Don't tell me about Aditya. First big-ship command
I had was the old _Invictus_, 374, and she was based on Aditya for four
years, and I'd sooner have spent that time in orbit around Niffelheim."

Now Paul remembered who he was; old Admiral--now
Prince-Counselor--Gaklar. He and Prince-Counselor Dorflay would get
along famously. The Lord Marshal of Durendal was replying to some
objection somebody had made:

[Illustration]

"No, nothing of the sort. We hold the view that every civil or political
right implies a civil or political obligation. The citizen has a right
to protection from the Realm, for instance; he therefore has the
obligation to defend the Realm. And his right to participate in the
government of the Realm includes his obligation to support the Realm
financially. Well, we tax only property; if a nonworker acquires taxable
property, he has to go to work to earn the taxes. I might add that our
nonworkers are very careful to avoid acquiring taxable property."

"But if they don't have votes to sell, what do they live on?" a
Counselor asked in bewilderment.

"The nobility supports them; the landowners, the trading barons, the
industrial lords. The more nonworking adherents they have, the greater
their prestige." And the more rifles they could muster when they
quarreled with their fellow nobles, of course. "Beside, if we didn't do
that, they'd turn brigand, and it costs less to support them than to
have to hunt them out of the brush and hang them."

"On Aditya, brigandage does not exist."

"On Aditya, all the brigands belong to the Secret Police, only on Aditya
they don't call them Secret Police, they call them Servants of the
People, Ninth Category."

A shadow passed quickly over the pavilion, and then another. He glanced
up quickly, to see two long black troop carriers, emblazoned with the
Sun and Cogwheel and armored fist of Security, pass back of the Octagon
Tower and let down on the north landing stage. A third followed. He rose
quickly.

"Please remain seated, gentlemen, and continue with the luncheon. If you
will excuse me for a moment, I'll be back directly." I hope, he added
mentally.

       *       *       *       *       *

Captain-General Dorflay, surrounded by a dozen officers, Thoran and
human, had arrived on the lower terrace at the base of the Octagon
Tower. They had a full Thoran rifle company with them. As he went down
to them, Dorflay hurried forward.

"It has come, Your Majesty!" he said, as soon as he could make himself
heard without raising his voice. "We are all ready to die with Your
Majesty!"

"Oh, I doubt it'll come quite to that, Harv," he said. "But just to be
on the safe side, take that company and the gentlemen who are with you
and get up to the mountains and join the Crown Prince and his party.
Here." He took a notepad from his belt pouch and wrote rapidly, sealing
the note and giving it to Dorflay. "Give this to His Highness, and place
yourself under his orders. I know; he's just a boy, but he has a good
head. Obey him exactly in everything, but under no circumstances return
to the Palace or allow him to return until I call you."

"Your Majesty is ordering me away?" The old soldier was aghast.

"An emperor who has a son can be spared. An emperor's son who is too
young to marry can't. You know that."

Harv Dorflay was only mad on one subject, and even within the frame of
his madness he was intensely logical. He nodded. "Yes, Your Imperial
Majesty. We both serve the Empire as best we can. And I will guard the
little Princess Olva, too." He grasped Paul's hand, said, "Farewell,
Your Majesty!" and dashed away, gathering his staff and the company of
Thorans as he went. In an instant, they had vanished down the nearest
rampway.

The emperor watched their departure, and, at the same time, saw a big
black aircar, bearing the three-mooned planet, argent on sable, of
Travann, let down onto the south landing stage, and another troop
carrier let down after it. Four men left the aircar--Yorn, Prince
Travann, and three officers in the black of the Security Guard. Prince
Ganzay had also left the table: he came from one direction as Prince
Travann advanced from the other. They converged on the emperor.

"What's happening here, Prince Travann?" Prince Ganzay demanded. "Why
are you bringing all these troops to the Palace?"

"Your Majesty," Prince Travann said smoothly, "I trust that you will
pardon this disturbance. I'm sure nothing serious will happen, but I
didn't dare take chances. The students from the University are marching
on the Palace--perfectly peaceful and loyal procession; they're bringing
a petition for Your Majesty--but on the way, while passing through a
nonworkers' district, they were attacked by a gang of hooligans
connected with a voting-bloc boss called Nutchy the Knife. None of the
students were hurt, and Colonel Handrosan got the procession out of the
district promptly, and then dropped some of his men, who have since been
re-enforced, to deal with the hooligans. That's still going on, and
these riots are like forest fires; you never know when they'll shift and
get out of control. I hope the men I brought won't be needed here.
Really, they're a reserve for the riot work; I won't commit them,
though, until I'm sure the Palace is safe."

He nodded. "Prince Travann, how soon do you estimate that the student
procession will arrive here?" he asked.

"They're coming on foot, Your Majesty. I'd give them an hour, at least."

"Well, Prince Travann, will you have one of your officers see that the
public-address screen in front is ready; I'll want to talk to them when
they arrive. And meanwhile, I'll want to talk to Chancellor Khane,
Professor Dandrik, Professor Faress and Colonel Handrosan, together. And
Count Tammsan, too; Prince Ganzay, will you please screen him and invite
him here immediately?"

"Now, Your Majesty?" At first, the Prime Minister was trying to suppress
a look of incredulity; then he was trying to keep from showing
comprehension. "Yes, Your Majesty; at once." He frowned slightly when he
saw two of the Security Guard officers salute Prince Travann instead of
the emperor before going away. Then he turned and hurried toward the
Octagon Tower.

       *       *       *       *       *

The officer who had gone to the aircar to use the radio returned and
reported that Colonel Handrosan was bringing the Chancellor and both
professors from the University in his command-car, having anticipated
that they would be wanted. Paul nodded in pleasure.

"You have a good man there, Prince," he said. "Keep an eye on him."

"I know it, Your Majesty. To tell the truth, it was he who organized
this march. Thought they'd be better employed coming here to petition
you than milling around the University getting into further mischief."

The other officer also returned, bringing a portable viewscreen with him
on a contragravity-lifter. By this time, the Bench of Counselors and the
three off-planet guests had become anxious and left the luncheon
pavilion in a body. The Counselors were looking about uneasily,
noticing the black uniformed Security Guards who had left the troop
carrier and were taking position by squads all around the emperor. First
Citizen Yaggo, and King Ranulf and Lord Koreff, also seemed uneasy. They
were avoiding the proximity of Paul as though he had the green death.

The viewscreen came on, and in it the city, as seen from an aircar at
two thousand feet, spread out with the Palace visible in the distance,
the golden pile of the Octagon Tower jutting up from it. The car
carrying the pickup was behind the procession, which was moving toward
the Palace along one of the broad skyways, with Gendarmes and Security
Guards leading, following and flanking. There were a few Imperial and
planetary and school flags, but none of the quantity-made banners and
placards which always betray a planned demonstration.

Prince Ganzay had been gone for some time, now. When he returned, he
drew Paul aside.

"Your Majesty," he whispered softly, "I tried to summon Army troops, but
it'll be hours before any can get here. And the Militia can't be
mobilized in anything less than a day. There are only five thousand Army
Regulars on Odin, now, anyhow."

And half of them officers and noncoms of skeleton regiments. Like the
Navy, the Army had been scattered all over the Empire--on Behemoth and
Amida and Xipetotec and Astarte and Jotunnheim--in response to calls for
support from Security.

"Let's have a look at this rioting, Prince Travann," one of the less
decrepit Counselors, a retired general, said. "I want to see how your
people are handling it."

The officers who had come with Prince Travann consulted briefly, and
then got another pickup on the screen. This must have been a regular
public pickup, on the front of a tall building. It was a couple of miles
farther away; the Palace was visible only as a tiny glint from the
Octagon Tower, on the skyline. Half a dozen Security aircars were
darting about, two of them chasing a battered civilian vehicle and
firing at it. On rooftops and terraces and skyways, little clumps of
Security Guards were skirmishing, dodging from cover to cover, and
sometimes individuals or groups in civilian clothes fired back at them.
There was a surprising absence of casualties.

"Your Majesty!" the old general hissed in a scandalized whisper. "That's
nothing but a big fake! Look, they're all firing blanks! The rifles
hardly kick at all, and there's too much smoke for propellant-powder."

"I noticed that." This riot must have been carefully prepared, long in
advance. Yet the student riot seemed to have been entirely spontaneous.
That puzzled him; he wished he knew just what Yorn Travann was up to.
"Just keep quiet about it," he advised.

       *       *       *       *       *

More aircars were arriving, big and luxurious, emblazoned with the arms
of some of the most distinguished families in Asgard. One of the first
to let down bore the device of Duklass, and from it the Minister of
Economics, the Minister of Education, and a couple of other Ministers,
alighted. Count Duklass went at once to Prince Travann, drawing him away
from King Ranulf and Lord Koreff and talking to him rapidly and
earnestly. Count Tammsan approached at a swift half-run.

"Save Your Majesty!" he greeted, breathlessly. "What's going on, sir? We
heard something about some petty brawl at the University, that Prince
Ganzay had become alarmed about, but now there seems to be fighting all
over the city. I never saw anything like it; on the way here we had to
go up to ten thousand feet to get over a battle, and there's a vast
crowd on the Avenue of the Arts, and----" He took in the Security
Guards. "Your Majesty, just what _is_ going on?"

"Great and frightening changes." Count Tammsan started; he must have
been to a psi-medium, too. "But I think the Empire is going to survive
them. There may even be a few improvements, before things are done."

A blue-uniformed Gendarme officer approached Prince Travann, drawing him
away from Count Duklass and speaking briefly to him. The Minister of
Security nodded, then turned back to the Minister of Economics. They
talked for a few moments longer, then clasped hands, and Travann left
Duklass with his face wreathed in smiles. The Gendarme officer
accompanied him as he approached.

"Your Majesty, this is Colonel Handrosan, the officer who handled the
affair at the University."

"And a very good piece of work, colonel." He shook hands with him.
"Don't be surprised if it's remembered next Honors Day. Did you bring
Khane and the two professors?"

"They're down on the lower landing-stage, Your Majesty. We're delaying
the students, to give Your Majesty time to talk to them."

"We'll see them now. My study will do." The officer saluted and went
away. He turned to Count Tammsan. "That's why I asked Prince Ganzay to
invite you here. This thing's become too public to be ignored; some sort
of action will have to be taken. I'm going to talk to the students; I
want to find out just what happened before I commit myself to anything.
Well, gentlemen, let's go to my study."

Count Tammsan looked around, bewildered. "But I don't understand----" He
fell into step with Paul and the Minister of Security; a squad of
Security Guards fell in behind them. "I don't understand what's
happening," he complained.

An emperor about to have his throne yanked out from under him, and a
minister about to stage a _coup d'etat_, taking time out to settle a
trifling academic squabble. One thing he did understand, though, was
that the Ministry of Education was getting some very bad publicity at a
time when it could be least afforded. Prince Travann was telling him
about the hooligans' attack on the marching students, and that worried
him even more. Nonworking hooligans acted as voting-bloc bosses ordered;
voting-bloc bosses acted on orders from the political manipulators of
Cartels and pressure-groups, and action downward through the nonworkers
was usually accompanied by action upward through influences to which
ministers were sensitive.

       *       *       *       *       *

There were a dozen Security Guards in black tunics, and as many
Household Thorans in red kilts, in the hall outside the study,
fraternizing amicably. They hurried apart and formed two ranks, and the
Thoran officer with them saluted.

Going into the study, he went to his desk; Count Tammsan lit a cigarette
and puffed nervously, and sat down as though he were afraid the chair
would collapse under him. Prince Travann sank into another chair and
relaxed, closing his eyes. There was a bit of wafer on the floor by
Paul's chair, dropped by the little dog that morning. He stooped and
picked it up, laying it on his desk, and sat looking at it until the
door screen flashed and buzzed. Then he pressed the release button.

Colonel Handrosan ushered the three University men in ahead of
him--Khane, with a florid, arrogant face that showed worry under the
arrogance; Dandrik, gray-haired and stoop-shouldered, looking irritated;
Faress, young, with a scrubby red mustache, looking bellicose. He
greeted them collectively and invited them to sit, and there was a brief
uncomfortable silence which everybody expected him to break.

"Well, gentlemen," he said, "we want to get the facts about this affair
in some kind of order. I wish you'd tell me, as briefly and as
completely as possible, what you know about it."

"There's the man who started it!" Khane declared, pointing at Faress.

"Professor Faress had nothing to do with it," Colonel Handrosan stated
flatly. "He and his wife were in their apartment, packing to move out,
when it started. Somebody called him and told him about the fighting at
the stadium, and he went there at once to talk his students into
dispersing. By that time, the situation was completely out of hand; he
could do nothing with the students.

"Well, I think we ought to find out, first of all, why Professor Faress
was dismissed," Prince Travann said. "It will take a good deal to
convince me that any teacher able to inspire such loyalty in his
students is a bad teacher, or deserves dismissal."

"As I understand," Paul said, "the dismissal was the result of a
disagreement between Professor Faress and Professor Dandrik about an
experiment on which they were working. I believe, an experiment to fix
more exactly the velocity of accelerated subnucleonic particles. Beta
micropositos, wasn't it, Chancellor Khane?"

Khane looked at him in surprise. "Your Majesty, I know nothing about
that. Professor Dandrik is head of the physics department; he came to
me, about six months ago, and told me that in his opinion this
experiment was desirable. I simply deferred to his judgment and
authorized it."

"Your Majesty has just stated the purpose of the experiment," Dandrik
said. "For centuries, there have been inaccuracies in mathematical
descriptions of subnucleonic events, and this experiment was undertaken
in the hope of eliminating these inaccuracies." He went into a lengthy
mathematical explanation.

"Yes, I understand that, professor. But just what was the actual
experiment, in terms of physical operations?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Dandrik looked helpless for a moment. Faress, who had been choking back
a laugh, interrupted:

"Your Majesty, we were using the big turbo-linear accelerator to project
fast micropositos down an evacuated tube one kilometer in length, and
clocking them with light, the velocity of which has been established
almost absolutely. I will say that with respect to the light, there were
no observable inaccuracies at any time, and until the micropositos were
accelerated to 16.067543333-1/3 times light-speed, they registered much
as expected. Beyond that velocity, however, the target for the
micropositos began registering impacts before the source registered
emission, although the light target was still registering normally. I
notified Professor Dandrik about this, and----"

"You notified him. Wasn't he present at the time?"

"No, Your Majesty."

"Your Majesty, I am head of the physics department of the University. I
have too much administrative work to waste time on the technical aspects
of experiments like this," Dandrik interjected.

"I understand. Professor Faress was actually performing the experiment.
You told Professor Dandrik what had happened. What then?"

"Why, Your Majesty, he simply declared that the limit of accuracy had
been reached, and ordered the experiment dropped. He then reported the
highest reading before this anticipation effect was observed as the
newly established limit of accuracy in measuring the velocity of
accelerated micropositos, and said nothing whatever in his report about
the anticipation effect."

"I read a summary of the report. Why, Professor Dandrik, did you omit
mentioning this slightly unusual effect?"

"Why, because the whole thing was utterly preposterous, that's why!"
Dandrik barked; and then hastily added, "Your Imperial Majesty." He
turned and glared at Faress; professors do not glare at galactic
emperors. "Your Majesty, the limit of accuracy had been reached. After
that, it was only to be expected that the apparatus would give erratic
reports."

"It might have been expected that the apparatus would stop registering
increased velocity relative to the light-speed standard, or that it
would begin registering disproportionately," Faress said. "But, Your
Majesty, I'll submit that it was not to be expected that it would
register impacts before emissions. And I'll add this. After registering
this slight apparent jump into the future, there was no proportionate
increase in anticipation with further increase of acceleration. I wanted
to find out why. But when Professor Dandrik saw what was happening, he
became almost hysterical, and ordered the accelerator shut down as
though he were afraid it would blow up in his face."

       *       *       *       *       *

"I think it has blown up in his face," Prince Travann said quietly.
"Professor, have you any theory, or supposition, or even any wild guess,
as to how this anticipation effect occurs?"

"Yes, Your Highness. I suspect that the apparent anticipation is simply
an observational illusion, similar to the illusion of time-reversal
experienced when it was first observed, though not realized, that
positrons sometimes exceeded light-speed."

"Why, that's what I've been saying all along!" Dandrik broke in. "The
whole thing is an illusion, due----"

"To having reached the limit of observational accuracy; I understand,
Professor Dandrik. Go on, Professor Faress."

"I think that beyond 16.067543333-1/3 times light-speed, the
micropositos ceased to have any velocity at all, velocity being defined
as rate of motion in four-dimensional space-time. I believe they moved
through the three spatial dimensions without moving at all in the
fourth, temporal, dimension. They made that kilometer from source to
target, literally, in nothing flat. Instantaneity."

That must have been the first time he had actually come out and said it.
Dandrik jumped to his feet with a cry that was just short of being a
shriek.

"He's crazy! Your Majesty, you mustn't ... that is, well, I
mean--Please, Your Majesty, don't listen to him. He doesn't know what
he's saying. He's raving!"

"He knows perfectly well what he's saying, and it probably scares him
more than it does you. The difference is that he's willing to face it
and you aren't."

The difference was that Faress was a scientist and Dandrik was a science
teacher. To Faress, a new door had opened, the first new door in eight
hundred years. To Dandrik, it threatened invalidation of everything he
had taught since the morning he had opened his first class. He could no
longer say to his pupils, "You are here to learn from me." He would have
to say, more humbly, "_We_ are here to learn from the Universe."

It had happened so many times before, too. The comfortable and
established Universe had fitted all the known facts--and then new facts
had been learned that wouldn't fit it. The third planet of the Sol
system had once been the center of the Universe, and then Terra, and
Sol, and even the galaxy, had been forced to abdicate centricity. The
atom had been indivisible--until somebody divided it. There had been
intangible substance that had permeated the Universe, because it had
been necessary for the transmission of light--until it was demonstrated
to be unnecessary and nonexistent. And the speed of light had been the
ultimate velocity, once, and could be exceeded no more than the atom
could be divided. And light-speed had been constant, regardless of
distance from source, and the Universe, to explain certain observed
phenomena, had been believed to be expanding simultaneously in all
directions. And the things that had happened in psychology, when
psi-phenomena had become too obvious to be shrugged away.

"And then, when Dr. Dandrik ordered you to drop this experiment, just
when it was becoming interesting, you refused?"

"Your Majesty, I couldn't stop, not then. But Dr. Dandrik ordered the
apparatus dismantled and scrapped, and I'm afraid I lost my head. Told
him I'd punch his silly old face in, for one thing."

"You admit that?" Chancellor Khane cried.

"I think you showed admirable self-restraint in not doing it. Did you
explain to Chancellor Khane the importance of this experiment?"

"I tried to, Your Majesty, but he simply wouldn't listen."

"But, Your Majesty!" Khane expostulated. "Professor Dandrik is head of
the department, and one of the foremost physicists of the Empire, and
this young man is only one of the junior assistant-professors. Isn't
even a full professor, and he got his degree from some school away
off-planet. University of Brannerton on Gimli."

"Were you a pupil of Professor Vann Evaratt?" Prince Travann asked
sharply.

"Why, yes, sir. I----"

"Ha, no wonder!" Dandrik crowed. "Your Majesty, that man's an
out-and-out charlatan! He was kicked out of the University here ten
years ago, and I'm surprised he could even get on the faculty of a
school like Brannerton, on a planet like Gimli."

"Why, you stupid old fool!" Faress yelled at him. "You aren't enough of
a physicist to oil robots in Vann Evaratt's lab!"

"There, Your Majesty," Khane said. "You see how much respect for
authority this hooligan has!"

On Aditya, such would be unthinkable; on Aditya, everybody respects
authority. Whether it's respectable or not.

Count Tammsan laughed, and he realized that he must have spoken aloud.
Nobody else seemed to have gotten the joke.

"Well, how about the riot, now?" he asked. "Who started that?"

"Colonel Handrosan made an investigation on the spot," Prince Travann
said. "May I suggest that we hear his report?"

"Yes indeed. Colonel?"

Handrosan rose and stood with his hands behind his back, looking fixedly
at the wall behind the desk.

[Illustration]

"Your Majesty, the students of Professor Faress' advanced subnuclear
physics class, postgraduate students, all of them, were told of
Professor Faress' dismissal by a faculty member who had taken over the
class this morning. They all got up and walked out in a body, and
gathered outdoors on the campus to discuss the matter. At the next class
break, they were joined by other science students, and they went into
the stadium, where they were joined, half an hour later, by more
students who had learned of the dismissal in the meantime. At no time
was the gathering disorderly. The stadium is covered by a viewscreen
pickup which is fitted with a recording device; there is a complete
audio-visual of the whole thing, including the attack on them by the
campus police.

"This attack was ordered by Chancellor Khane, at about 1100; the chief
of the campus police was told to clear the stadium, and when he asked if
he was to use force, Chancellor Khane told him to use anything he wanted
to."

"I did not! I told him to get the students out of the stadium, but----"

"The chief of campus police carries a personal wire recorder," Handrosan
said, in his flat monotone. "He has a recording of the order, in
Chancellor Khane's own voice. I heard it myself. The police," he
continued, "first tried to use gas, but the wind was against them. They
then tried to use sono-stunners, but the students rushed them and
overwhelmed them. If Your Majesty will permit a personal opinion, while
I do not sympathize with their subsequent attack on the Administration
Center, they were entirely within their rights in defending themselves
in the stadium, and it's hard enough to stop trained and disciplined
troops when they are winning. After defeating the police, they simply
went on by what might be called the momentum of victory."

"Then you'd say that it's positively established that the students were
behaving in a peacable and orderly manner in the stadium when they were
attacked, and that Chancellor Khane ordered the attack personally?"

"I would, emphatically, Your Majesty."

"I think we've done enough here, gentlemen." He turned to Count Tammsan.
"This is, jointly, the affair of Education and Security. I would suggest
that you and Prince Travann join in a formal and public inquiry, and
until all the facts have been established and recorded and action
decided upon, the dismissal of Professor Faress be reversed and he be
restored to his position on the faculty."

"Yes, Your Majesty," Tammsan agreed. "And I think it would be a good
idea for Chancellor Khane to take a vacation till then, too."

"I would further suggest that, as this microposito experiment is crucial
to the whole question, it should be repeated. Under the personal
direction of Professor Faress."

"I agree with that, Your Majesty," Prince Travann said. "If it's as
important as I think it is, Professor Dandrik is greatly to be censured
for ordering it stopped and for failing to report this anticipation
effect."

"We'll consult about the inquiry, including the experiment, tomorrow,
Your Highness," Tammsan told Travann.

Paul rose, and everybody rose with him. "That being the case, you
gentlemen are all excused. The students' procession ought to be
arriving, now, and I want to tell them what's going to be done. Prince
Travann, Count Tammsan; do you care to accompany me?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Going up to the central terrace in front of the Octagon Tower, he turned
to Count Tammsan.

"I notice you laughed at that remark of mine about Aditya," he said.
"Have you met the First Citizen?"

"Only on screen, sir. He was at me for about an hour, this morning. It
seems that they are reforming the educational system on Aditya. On
Aditya, everything gets reformed every ten years, whether it needs it or
not. He came here to find somebody to take charge of the reformation."

He stopped short, bringing the others to a halt beside him, and laughed
heartily.

"Well, we'll send First Citizen Yaggo away happy; we'll make him a
present of the most distinguished educator on Odin."

"Khane?" Tammsan asked.

"Khane. Isn't it wonderful; if you have a few problems, you have
trouble, but if you have a whole lot of problems, they start solving
each other. We get a chance to get rid of Khane and create a vacancy
that can be filled by somebody big enough to fill it; the Ministry of
Education gets out from under a nasty situation; First Citizen Yaggo
gets what he thinks he wants----"

"And if I know Khane and if I know the People's Commonwealth of Aditya,
it won't be a year before Yaggo has Khane shot or stuffs him into jail,
and then the Space Navy will have an excuse to visit Aditya, and
Aditya'll never be the same afterward," Prince Travann added.

The students massed on the front lawns were still cheering as they went
down after addressing them. The Security Guards were conspicuously
absent and it was a detail of red-kilted Thoran riflemen who met them as
they entered the hall to the Session Chamber. Prince Ganzay approached,
attended by two Household Guard officers, a human and a Thoran. Count
Tammsan looked from one to the other of his companions, bewildered. The
bewildering thing was that everything was as it should be.

"Well, gentlemen," Paul said, "I'm sure that both of you will want to
confer for a moment with your colleagues in the Rotunda before the
Session. Please don't feel obliged to attend me further."

Prince Ganzay approached as they went down the hall. "Your Majesty, what
_is_ going on here?" he demanded querulously. "Just who is in control of
the Palace--you or Prince Travann? And where is His Imperial Highness,
and where is General Dorflay?"

"I sent Dorflay to join Prince Rodrik's picnic party. If you're upset
about this, you can imagine what he might have done here."

Prince Ganzay looked at him curiously for a moment. "I thought I
understood what was happening," he said. "Now I---- This business about
the students, sir; how did it come out?"

Paul told him. They talked for a while, and then the Prime Minister
looked at his watch, and suggested that the Session ought to be getting
started. Paul nodded, and they went down the hall and into the Rotunda.

The big semicircular lobby was empty, now, except for a platoon of
Household Guards, and the Empress Marris and her ladies-in-waiting. She
advanced as quickly as her sheath gown would permit, and took his arm;
the ladies-in-waiting fell in behind her, and Prince Ganzay went ahead,
crying: "My Lords, Your Venerable Highnesses, gentlemen; His Imperial
Majesty!"

Marris tightened her grip on his arm as they started forward. "Paul!"
she hissed into his ear. "What is this silly story about Yorn Travann
trying to seize the Throne?"

"Isn't it? Yorn's been too close the Throne for too long not to know
what sort of a seat it is. He'd commit any crime up to and including
genocide to keep off it."

She gave a quick skip to get into step with him. "Then why's he filled
the Palace with these blackcoats? Is Rod all right?"

"Perfectly all right; he's somewhere out in the mountains, keeping Harv
Dorflay out of mischief."

       *       *       *       *       *

They crossed the Session Hall and took their seats on the double throne;
everybody sat down, and the Prime Minister, after some formalities,
declared the Plenary Session in being. Almost at once, one of the
Prince-Counselors was on his feet begging His Majesty's leave to
interrogate the Government.

"I wish to ask His Highness the Minister of Security the meaning of all
this unprecedented disturbance, both here in the Palace and in the
city," he said.

Prince Travann rose at once. "Your Majesty, in reply to the question of
His Venerable Highness," he began, and then launched himself into an
account of the student riot, the march to petition the emperor, and the
clash with the nonworking class hooligans. "As to the affair at the
University, I hesitate to speak on what is really the concern of His
Lordship the Minister of Education, but as to the fighting in the city,
if it is still going on, I can assure His Venerable Highness that the
Gendarmes and Security Guards have it well in hand; the persons
responsible are being rounded up, and, if the Minister of Justice
concurs, an inquiry will be started tomorrow."

The Minister of Justice assured the Minister of Security that his
Ministry would be quite ready to co-operate in the inquiry. Count
Tammsan then got up and began talking about the riot at the University.

"What did happen, Paul?" Marris whispered.

"Chancellor Khane sacked a science professor for being too interested in
science. The students didn't like it. I think Khane's successor will
rectify that. Have a good time at the Flower Festivals?"

She raised her fan to hide a grimace. "I made my schedule," she said.
"Tomorrow, I have fifty more booked."

"Your Imperial Majesty!" The Counselor who had risen paused, to make
sure that he had the Imperial attention, before continuing: "Inasmuch as
this question also seems to involve a scientific experiment, I would
suggest that the Ministry of Science and Technology is also interested
and since there is at present no Minister holding that portfolio, I
would suggest that the discussion be continued after a Minister has been
elected."

The Minister of Health and Sanity jumped to his feet.

"Your Imperial Majesty; permit me to concur with the proposal of His
Venerable Highness, and to extend it with the subproposal that the
Ministry of Science and Technology be abolished, and its functions and
personnel divided among the other Ministries, specifically those of
Education and of Economics."

The Minister of Fine Arts was up before he was fully seated.

"Your Imperial Majesty; permit me to concur with the proposal of Count
Guilfred, and to extend it further with the proposal that the Ministry
of Defense, now also vacant, be likewise abolished, and its functions
and personnel added to the Ministry of Security under His Highness
Prince Travann."

So that was it! Marris, beside him, said, "Well!" He had long ago
discovered that she could pack more meaning into that monosyllable than
the average counselor could into a half-hour's speech. Prince Ganzay was
thunderstruck, and from the Bench of Counselors six or eight voices were
babbling loudly at once. Four Ministers were on their feet clamoring for
recognition; Count Duklass of Economics was yelling the loudest, so he
got it.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Your Imperial Majesty; it would have been most unseemly in me to have
spoken in favor of the proposal of Count Guilfred, being an interested
party, but I feel no such hesitation in concurring with the proposal of
Baron Garatt, the Minister of Fine Arts. Indeed, I consider it a most
excellent proposal----"

"And I consider it the most diabolically dangerous proposal to be made
in this Hall in the last six centuries!" old Admiral Gaklar shouted.
"This is a proposal to concentrate all the armed force of the Empire in
the hands of one man. Who can say what unscrupulous use might be made of
such power?"

"Are you intimating, Prince-Counselor, that Prince Travann is
contemplating some tyrannical or subversive use of such power?" Count
Tammsan, of all people, demanded.

There was a concerted gasp at that; about half the Plenary Session were
absolutely sure that he was. Admiral Geklar backed quickly away from the
question.

"Prince Travann will not be the last Minister of Security," he said.

"What I was about to say, Your Majesty, is that as matters stand,
Security has a virtual monopoly on armed power on this planet. When
these disorders in the city--which Prince Travann's men are now bringing
under control--broke out, there was, I am informed, an order sent out to
bring Regular Army and Planetary Militia into Asgard. It will be hours
before any of the former can arrive, and at least a day before the
latter can even be mobilized. By the time any of them get here, there
will be nothing for them to do. Is that not correct, Prince Ganzay?"

The Prime Minister looked at him angrily, stung by the realization that
somebody else had a personal intelligence service as good as his own,
then swallowed his anger and assented.

"Furthermore," Count Duklass continued, "the Ministry of Defense,
itself, is an anachronism, which no doubt accounts for the condition in
which we now find it. The Empire has no external enemies whatever; all
our defense problems are problems of internal security. Let us therefore
turn the facilities over to the Ministry responsible for the tasks."

The debate went on and on; he paid less and less attention to it, and it
became increasingly obvious that opposition to the proposition was
dwindling. Cries of, "Vote! Vote!" began to be heard from its
supporters. Prince Ganzay rose from his desk and came to the throne.

"Your Imperial Majesty," he said softly. "I am opposed to this
proposition, but I am convinced that enough favor it to pass it, even
over Your Majesty's veto. Before the vote is called, does Your Majesty
wish my resignation?"

He rose and stepped down beside the Prime Minister, putting an arm over
Prince Ganzay's shoulder.

"Far from it, old friend," he said, in a distinctly audible voice. "I
will have too much need for you. But, as for the proposal, I don't
oppose it. I think it an excellent one; it has my approval." He lowered
his voice. "As soon as it's passed, place General Dorflay's name in
nomination."

The Prime Minister looked at him sadly for a moment, then nodded,
returning to his desk, where he rapped for order and called for the
vote.

"Well, if you can't lick them, join them," Marris said as he sat down
beside her. "And if they start chasing you, just yell, 'There he goes;
follow me!'"

The proposal carried, almost unanimously. Prince Ganzay then presented
the name of Captain-General Dorflay for elevation to the Bench of
Counselors, and the emperor decreed it. As soon as the Session was
adjourned and he could do so, he slipped out the little door behind the
throne, into an elevator.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the room at the top of the Octagon Tower, he laid aside his belt and
dress dagger and unfastened his tunic, than sat down in his deep chair
and called a serving robot. It was the one which had brought him his
breakfast, and he greeted it as a friend; it lit a cigarette for him,
and poured a drink of brandy. For a long time he sat, smoking and
sipping and looking out the wide window to the west, where the orange
sun was firing the clouds behind the mountains, and he realized that he
was abominably tired. Well, no wonder; more Empire history had been made
today than in the years since he had come to the Throne.

Then something behind him clicked. He turned his head, to see Yorn
Travann emerge from the concealed elevator. He grinned and lifted his
drink in greeting.

"I thought you'd be a little late," he said. "Everybody trying to climb
onto the bandwagon?"

Yorn Travann came forward, unbuckling his belt and laying it with
Paul's; he sank into the chair opposite, and the robot poured him a
drink.

"Well, do you blame them? What would it have looked like to you, in
their place?"

"A _coup d'etat_. For that matter, wasn't that what it was? Why didn't
you tell me you were springing it?"

"I didn't spring it; it was sprung on me. I didn't know a thing about it
till Max Duklass buttonholed me down by the landing stage. I'd intended
fighting this proposal to partition Science and Technology, but this
riot blew up and scared Duklass and Tammsan and Guilfred and the rest of
them. They weren't too sure of their majority--that's why they had the
election postponed a couple of times--but they were sure that the riot
would turn some of the undecided Counselors against them. So they
offered to back me to take over Defense in exchange for my supporting
their proposal. It looked too good to pass up."

"Even at the price of wrecking Science and Technology?"

"It was wrecked, or left to rust into uselessness, long ago. The main
function of Technology has been to suppress anything that might threaten
this state of economic _rigor mortis_ that Duklass calls stability, and
the function of Science has been to let muttonheads like Khane and
Dandrik dominate the teaching of science. Well, Defense has its own
scientific and technical sections, and when we come to carving the bird,
Duklass and Tammsan are going to see a lot of slices going onto my
plate."

"And when it's all cut up, it will be discovered that there is no
provision for original research. So it will please My Majesty to
institute an Imperial Office of Scientific Research, independent of any
Ministry, and guess who'll be named to head it."

"Faress. And, by the way, we're all set on Khane, too. First Citizen
Yaggo is as delighted to have him as we are to get rid of him. Why don't
we get Vann Evaratt back, and give him the job?"

"Good. If he takes charge there at the opening of the next academic
year, in ten years we'll have a thousand young men, maybe ten times that
many, who won't be afraid of new things and new ideas. But the main
thing is that now you have Defense, and now the plan can really start
firing all jets."

"Yes." Yorn Travann got out his cigarettes and lit one. Paul glanced at
the robot, hoping that its feelings hadn't been hurt. "All these native
uprisings I've been blowing up out of inter-tribal knife fights, and all
these civil wars my people have been manufacturing; there'll be more of
them, and I'll start yelling my head off for an adequate Space Navy, and
after we get it, these local troubles will all stop, and then what'll we
be expected to do? Scrap the ships?"

They both knew what would be done with some of them. It would have to be
done stealthily, while nobody was looking, but some of those ships would
go far beyond the boundaries of the Empire, and new things would happen.
New worlds, new problems. Great and frightening changes.

"Paul, we agreed upon this long ago, when we were still boys at the
University. The Empire stopped growing, and when things stop growing,
they start dying, the death of petrifaction. And when petrifaction is
complete, the cracking and the crumbling starts, and there's no way of
stopping it. But if we can get people out onto new planets, the Empire
won't die; it'll start growing again."

"You didn't start that thing at the University, this morning, yourself,
did you?"

"Not the student riot, no. But the hooligan attack, yes. That was some
of my own men. The real hooligans began looting after Handrosan had
gotten the students out of the district. We collared all of them,
including their boss, Nutchy the Knife, right away, and as soon as we
did that, Big Moogie and Zikko the Nose tried to move in. We're cleaning
them up now. By tomorrow morning there won't be one of these nonworkers'
voting blocks left in Asgard, and by the end of the week they'll be
cleaned up all over Odin. I have discovered a plot, and they're all
involved in it."

"Wait a moment." Paul got to his feet. "That reminds me; Harv Dorflay's
hiding Rod and Olva out in the mountains. I wanted him out of here while
things were happening. I'll have to call him and tell him it's safe to
come in, now."

"Well, zip up your tunic and put your dagger on; you look as though
you'd been arrested, disarmed and searched."

"That's right." He hastily repaired his appearance and went to the
screen across the room, punching out the combination of the screen with
Rodrik's picnic party.

       *       *       *       *       *

A young lieutenant of the Household Troops appeared in it, and had to be
reassured. He got General Dorflay.

"Your Majesty! You are all right?"

"Perfectly all right, general, and it's quite safe to bring His Imperial
Highness in. The conspiracy against the Throne has been crushed."

"Oh, thank the gods! Is Prince Travann a prisoner?"

"Quite the contrary, general. It was our loyal and devoted subject,
Prince Travann, who crushed the conspiracy."

"But--But, Your Majesty----!"

"You aren't to be blamed for suspecting him, general. His agents were
working in the very innermost councils of the conspirators. Every one of
the people whom you suspected--with excellent reason--was actually
working to defeat the plot. Think back, general; the scheme to put the
gun in the viewscreen, the scheme to sabotage the elevator, the scheme
to introduce assassins into the orchestra with guns built into their
trumpets--every one came to your notice because of what seemed to be
some indiscretion of the plotters, didn't it?"

"Why ... why, yes, Your Majesty!" By this time tomorrow, he would have a
complete set of memories for each one of them. "You mean, the
indiscretions were deliberate?"

"Your vigilance and loyalty made it necessary for them to resort to
these fantastic expedients, and your vigilance defeated them as fast as
they came to your notice. Well, today, Prince Travann and I struck back.
I may tell you, in confidence, that every one of the conspirators is
dead. Killed in this afternoon's rioting--which was incited for that
purpose by Prince Travann."

"Then---- Then there will be no more plots against your life?" There was
a note of regret in the old man's voice.

"No more, Your Venerable Highness."

"But---- What did Your Majesty call me?" he asked incredulously.

"I took the honor of being the first to address you by your new title,
Prince-Counselor Dorflay."

He left the old man overcome, and blubbering happily on the shoulder of
the Crown Prince, who winked at his father out of the screen. Prince
Travann had gotten a couple of fresh drinks from the robot and handed
one to him when he returned to his chair.

"He'll be finding the Bench of Counselors riddled with treason inside a
week," Travann said. "You handled that just right, though. Another case
of making problems solve each other."

"You were telling me about a plot you'd discovered."

"Oh, yes: this is one to top Dorflay's best efforts. All the voting-bloc
bosses on Odin are in a conspiracy to start a civil war to give them a
chance to loot the planet. There isn't a word of truth in it, of course,
but it'll do to arrest and hold them for a few days, and by that time
some of my undercovers will be in control of every nonworker vote on the
planet. After all, the Cartels put an end to competition in every other
business; why not a Voting Cartel, too? Then, whenever there's an
election, we just advertise for bids."

"Why, that would mean absolute control----"

"Of the nonworking vote, yes. And I'll guarantee, personally, that in
five years the politics of Odin will have become so unbearably corrupt
and abusive that the intellectuals, the technicians, the business
people, even the nobility, will be flocking to the polls to vote, and if
only half of them turn out, they'll snow the nonworkers under. And
that'll mean, eventually, an end to vote-selling, and the nonworkers'll
have to find work. We'll find it for them."

"Great and frightening changes." Yorn Travann laughed; he recognized the
phrase. Probably started it himself. Paul lifted his glass. "To the
Minister of Disturbance!"

"Your Majesty!" They drank to each other, and then Yorn Travann said,
"We had a lot of wild dreams, when we were boys; it looks as though
we're starting to make some of them come true. You know, when we were in
the University, the students would never have done what they did today.
They didn't even do it ten years ago, when Vann Evaratt was dismissed."

"And Van Evaratt's pupil came back to Odin and touched this whole thing
off." He thought for a moment. "I wonder what Faress has, in that
anticipation effect."

"I think I can see what can come out of it. If he can propagate a wave
that behaves like those micropositos, we may not have to depend on ships
for communication. We may be able, some day, to screen Baldur or Vishnu
or Aton or Thor as easily as you screened Dorflay, up in the mountains."
He thought silently for a moment. "I don't know whether that would be
good or bad. But it would be new, and that's what matters. That's the
only thing that matters."

"Flower Festivals," Paul said, and, when Yorn Travann wanted to know
what he meant, he told him. "When Princess Olva's Empress, she's going
to curse the name of Klenn Faress. Flower Festivals, all around the
galaxy, without end."


THE END


+--------------------------------------------------------------+
|                                                              |
| Transcriber's Note & Errata                                  |
|                                                              |
| There were 2 instances of 'cooking-robot' and one of         |
|   'cooking robot'                                            |
|                                                              |
| There was one instance of 'patriarchial' which was not       |
|   corrected.                                                 |
|                                                              |
| The following typographical errors were corrected:           |
|                                                              |
| Page  Error           Correction                             |
|                                                              |
| 15    attion          attention                              |
| 19    Ranuf's         Ranulf's                               |
| 25    Tammsen         Tammsan                                |
| 29    rerespectable   respectable                            |
| 33    student's       students                               |
| 34    Geklar          Gaklar                                 |
| 34    tyranical       tyrannical                             |
| 36    Duklas          Duklass                                |
+--------------------------------------------------------------+





End of Project Gutenberg's Ministry of Disturbance, by Henry Beam Piper

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MINISTRY OF DISTURBANCE ***

***** This file should be named 20659-8.txt or 20659-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/0/6/5/20659/

Produced by Greg Weeks, LN Yaddanapudi and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
