Project Gutenberg's Sweet Their Blood and Sticky, by Albert Teichner

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Sweet Their Blood and Sticky

Author: Albert Teichner

Release Date: May 22, 2007 [EBook #21568]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SWEET THEIR BLOOD AND STICKY ***




Produced by Robert Cicconetti, Tamise Totterdell and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







    Transcriber's Note: This e-text was produced from "Worlds of If"
    November 1961. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence
    that the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.


They weren't human--weren't even related to humanity through ties of
blood--but they were our heirs!


SWEET
Their blood and sticky


By ALBERT R. TEICHNER


The machine had stood there a long time. It was several hundred feet
long and could run on a thimbleful of earth or water. Complete in
itself, the machine drew material from the surrounding landscape,
transmuting matter to its special purposes. It needed sugar, salt, water
and many other things but never failed to have them. It was still
working. And at the delivery end, where the packaging devices had been
broken down, it turned out a steady turgid stream on the ground of
pink-striped, twisting taffy.

Once the whole vast desert area had been filled with such devices,
producing all the varied needs of a very needful human race. But there
had been no machine to produce peace. The crossing shock waves of fused
hydrogen had destroyed the machines by the tens of thousands, along with
all the automatic shipping lines, leaving only, in the quirk of a
pressure cross-pattern, an undisturbed taffy-making machine, oozing its
special lava on the plateau floor.

It had been working seven and a half million years.

It continued to repair itself, as if a child of the race that had
started all this would come by it at any moment to tip an eager pinky in
the still-warm taffy to taste its tangy sweetness. But there were no
human beings. There had been none since the day when the packager
collapsed, at the edge of the total-evaporation zone.

       *       *       *       *       *

Creno set a few of his legs on the edge of the glassy, weathered ridge
and gazed over the plateau. Harta, next to him, trembled as she
adjusted to the strange hardness of these four dimensions. "Being is a
thin thing here," she said.

"Thin, yes," Creno smiled. "An almost dead world. But there is a mystery
in that almost to make the journey worth the coming."

"What mystery?" But Creno was of the wisest on the home planet and her
sense feelers scanned once more to find what he must mean. "I _do_ feel
it! Everything dead but that one great mental thing moving, and a
four-dimensional stream coming out in the vibrations of this world!"

"I have been watching it," said Creno. "What kind of life can that be?
You are a sharp sensor, Harta. Focus to it."

She strained and then relaxed, speaking: "The circuits are closed into
themselves. It learns nothing from outside itself except to move and
extend its metal feelers for food. Soil is its food. Soil is its energy.
Soil is its being."

"Can it be alive?"

"It is alive."

All his legs rested now in a row along the ridge. He too was relaxed as
one mystery disappeared. "I feel your feelings, but the thing is not
alive. It is a machine."

"I do not understand. A machine in the middle of a dead world?"

"Whether we understand why or not, that is what it is--a machine."

Harta throbbed with excitement. How could Creno be wrong? He knew
everything as soon as the facts were in his mind. Yet here now were
living things crawling toward the machine, just like the excrescence at
one end but in no way a part of it! The feeling of _willed_ effort as
they crawled slowly toward it, white and pink striped, reaching grasping
feelers into the turgid product, taking it in, then rising on easing
legs as the food spread within them.

"There _are_ living creatures here!" Creno pondered. "I feel your
messages. Twenty, thirty--a horde is crawling from that mountain toward
it."

"Four thousand three hundred and ninety-one," said Harta. She
concentrated. "There are three thousand and five more in the mountain
caves, waiting to come out as the others return."

       *       *       *       *       *

They came in groups of about a hundred, pulling themselves slowly toward
the edges of the great sticky lake that lay within the vaster area where
the pink matter dried and crumbled into the strong breeze. Some were
smaller than others, offspring who were nudged along by their elders.
But these small creatures were the ones who scampered most of all after
they had fed. Joyously they danced back toward the mountain. A few of
medium height went back in pairs, firm taffy fingers intertwined in each
other.

"They mate," said Creno. "It is their custom."

"How tiring they are," said Harta. "I have lost interest. We have seen
thirty-one worlds with such customs and these creatures are too simple
to be interesting. Let us go home or try some other system."

"Not yet," Creno insisted. "We passed through the ocean and surveyed the
lands of this tiny planet. Nowhere else has there been the tiniest unit
of life. Why at this one spot should something exist?"

"But we have several parallel situations," Harta protested. "They were
colonies landed in one spot by the civilization of another planet. They
landed here with their feeder machine. And that is the explanation."

"Your mind does not function well in a four-dimension continuum, Harta.
You will need more training--"

"But these cases are rare, and, Creno--"

"I know they are rare, my child. But still they exist. You will have to
learn eventually, a little at a time. Now then, it is a rule of such
limited dimensional realms that the movement of matter and events from
place to place is highly difficult. Certain compacting procedures must
be observed. To transport a machine this size across their space would
have required enormous effort and an intelligence they do not yet have.
More than that, it would have been unnecessary. A smaller device would
have supplied them with food. I am forced to conclude that--somehow--we
are approaching this problem backwards."

"Backwards? You mean they made the machine here after they came?"

He did not reply to that. "We must concentrate together on thinking
ourselves into their functioning in their manifold."

Harta followed his suggestion, and soon their thoughts were moving among
and within the striped creatures. The insides of their bodies consisted
of fundamentally the same taffy substance; but it had been modified by
various organic structures. All, though, were built of the same
fundamental units: elongated, thin cells which readily aligned
themselves in semi-crystalline patterns.

"Enough," Creno said, "back to the hill."

Their rows of thin limbs rested on the ridge crest once more. "We have
seen such cell crystals before," she sighed. "The inefficiencies in such
a poverty of dimensions! Do you still think we have looked at it
backwards?"

"Of course we have. They did not bring the machine or make it--the
machine made them!"

"That is not possible, Creno, great as you are in these matters. We have
never seen life created by a machine before. No one ever has, from the
millions of reports I have seen at home."

"Maybe we have and not known it. The life we have seen always evolved
through enormous eons and we could not see its origins clearly in most
cases. Here we are dealing with something that has taken comparatively
little time." He stopped, shocked that he, an elder, had said so much.
"No, disregard such theories. You are still too young to bother with
them. Here is the important thing--this machine was left by an earlier
race that disappeared. Everything else was destroyed but it went right
on producing its substance."

"The substance is not life."

"It is only four-dimensional matter, right. But over a long enough
time--you know this as well as I do--random factors will eventually
produce a life form. By some trick of radiation this process has been
speeded up here. The substance the machine produces has in turn produced
life!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Creno sensed with a tremor some dangerous shifting in Harta's
consciousness. As an elder it was his duty to prevent a premature
insight in the young. It had been a mistake to bring this up. He must go
no further.

It was not necessary. Harta took it up for him.

"Then any substance producing life and modified by it could--if you go
far enough back--be the product of a machine. But it would have taken so
long to produce life that the original matter, that bore the direct
imprint of the machine, would have disappeared."

"An error," said Creno desperately. "There is just this case."

"By the time these creatures have arrived at self-knowledge the machine
will be gone. They will not know it ever existed, and--"

"That is all it means. There is just this one case. Now we must leave
this unimportant example of minor dimensions!"

He strained consciousness to a forward movement but Harta remained
behind. He had to pull back. "Start," he ordered.

Her mind's obstinately frozen stance made him freeze too. He applied all
his force to bring her back into control, but she still held fast.

"Something more is hidden from me. I will be back," she said. And she
disappeared from the ridge.

He had never faced such a quandary before on a training trip with a
younger one. If he went in pursuit he would find her ultimately--that
was in the nature of being older and wiser--but, if she revolted against
his pursuit, she could extend the time considerably on this forsaken
planet. And he wanted to get her away as soon as possible.

The more time here the more chance that the awful truth would come to
her before her time.

He watched the growing waves of creatures floundering toward the vast
oozing puddle, which refilled itself as quickly as it was diminished by
them, and the receding waves of those that had already fed. This, he
could see, was an endless process. The whole life of the species moved
in continuous systole-diastole around the machine.

Soon he would have to go in search of her.

But then she was back at his side, her being for this world once more
solidified. She concentrated for a moment on the pink-striped waves of
rippling inward and outward around the great sustaining pool, then
communicated with him.

"We can leave now. There is nothing more to see."

Something in her mind remained closed to his, as the mind of younger
never should be to older. But at least he could see with relief that the
worst had not happened. The deeper knowledge had not arrived to her too
early when it could only hurt. All he found turned to him--as they
receded from this thin-manifold universe, then moved up the dimension
ladder to their home level--was a surface of happiness.

Suddenly, though, as they prepared for flight in that hyperspace all her
joy was gone.

"I saw it," she said. "In my free and unrestricted spirit I moved deep
into the substance of that world, below all the total ruin, far below.
And there was a monstrous machine, near the molten core, almost
infinitely older than the feeding one far above it. And it, too, had
been left in a stratum where all else was destroyed. I could see it had
once produced the ooze from which came the life from which in turn come
the beings by whom the machine above it was made. Maybe they, too,
thought they were free and unrestricted!"

He sighed for the bitter cost of knowledge.

This one would no longer go forth in the joy of mere exploration, and he
would no longer live vicariously in the happiness of another being's
innocence. Now Harta, too, would be seeking the answer to the question
of original creation, the answer that he had not found in his journeys
across a myriad worlds and dimensions....

That no one had ever found.


END





End of Project Gutenberg's Sweet Their Blood and Sticky, by Albert Teichner

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SWEET THEIR BLOOD AND STICKY ***

***** This file should be named 21568.txt or 21568.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/1/5/6/21568/

Produced by Robert Cicconetti, Tamise Totterdell and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
