The Project Gutenberg EBook of Exile, by Horace Brown Fyfe

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Exile

Author: Horace Brown Fyfe

Release Date: August 16, 2007 [EBook #22346]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK EXILE ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Alexander Bauer and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                              EXILE

                          BY H. B. FYFE

                       ILLUSTRATED BY EMSH


      The Dome of Eyes made it almost impossible for Terrans
      to reach the world of Tepokt. For those who did land
      there, there was no returning--only the bitterness of
      respect--and justice!


The Tepoktan student, whose blue robe in George Kinton's opinion clashed
with the dull purple of his scales, twiddled a three-clawed hand for
attention. Kinton nodded to him from his place on the dais before the
group.

"Then you can give us no precise count of the stars in the galaxy,
George?"

Kinton smiled wrily, and ran a wrinkled hand through his graying hair.
In the clicking Tepoktan speech, his name came out more like "Chortch."

Questions like this had been put to him often during the ten years since
his rocket had hurtled through the meteorite belt and down to the
surface of Tepokt, leaving him the only survivor. Barred off as they
were from venturing into space, the highly civilized Tepoktans
constantly displayed the curiosity of dreamers in matters related to the
universe. Because of the veil of meteorites and satellite fragments
whirling about their planet, their astronomers had acquired torturous
skills but only scraps of real knowledge.

"As I believe I mentioned in some of my recorded lectures," Kinton
answered in their language, "the number is actually as vast as it seems
to those of you peering through the Dome of Eyes. The scientists of my
race have not yet encountered any beings capable of estimating the
total."

[Illustration]

He leaned back and scanned the faces of his interviewers, faces that
would have been oddly humanoid were it not for the elongated snouts and
pointed, sharp-toothed jaws. The average Tepoktan was slightly under
Kinton's height of five-feet-ten, with a long, supple trunk. Under the
robes their scholars affected, the shortness of their two bowed legs was
not obvious; but the sight of the short, thick arms carried high before
their chests still left Kinton with a feeling of misproportion.

He should be used to it after ten years, he thought, but even the reds
or purples of the scales or the big teeth seemed more natural.

"I sympathize with your curiosity," he added. "It is a marvel that your
scientists have managed to measure the distances of so many stars."

He could tell that they were pleased by his admiration, and wondered yet
again why any little show of approval by him was so eagerly received.
Even though he was the first stellar visitor in their recorded history,
Kinton remained conscious of the fact that in many fields he was unable
to offer the Tepoktans any new ideas. In one or two ways, he believed,
no Terran could teach their experts anything.

"Then will you tell us, George, more about the problems of your first
space explorers?" came another question.

       *       *       *       *       *

Before Kinton had formed his answer, the golden curtains at the rear of
the austerely simple chamber parted. Klaft, the Tepoktan serving the
current year as Kinton's chief aide, hurried toward the dais. The
twenty-odd members of the group fell silent on their polished stone
benches, turning their pointed visages to follow Klaft's progress.

The aide reached Kinton and bent to hiss and cluck into the latter's ear
in what he presumably considered an undertone. The Terran laboriously
spelled out the message inscribed on the limp, satiny paper held before
his eyes. Then he rose and took one step toward the waiting group.

"I regret I shall have to conclude this discussion," he announced. "I
am informed that another ship from space has reached the surface of
Tepokt. My presence is requested in case the crew are of my own planet."

Klaft excitedly skipped down to lead the way up the aisle, but Kinton
hesitated. Those in the audience were scholars or officials to whom
attendance at one of Kinton's limited number of personal lectures was
awarded as an honor.

They would hardly learn anything from him directly that was not
available in recordings made over the course of years. The Tepoktan
scientists, historians, and philosophers had respectfully but eagerly
gathered every crumb of information Kinton knowingly had to offer--and
some he thought he had forgotten. Still ... he sensed the disappointment
at his announcement.

"I shall arrange for you to await my return here in town," Kinton said,
and there were murmurs of pleasure.

Later, aboard the jet helicopter that was basically like those Kinton
remembered using on Terra twenty light years away, he shook his head at
Klaft's respectful protest.

"But George! It was enough that they were present when you received the
news. They can talk about that the rest of their lives! You must not
waste your strength on these people who come out of curiosity."

Kinton smiled at his aide's earnest concern. Then he turned to look out
the window as he recalled the shadow that underlay such remonstrances.
He estimated that he was about forty-eight now, as nearly as he could
tell from the somewhat longer revolutions of Tepokt. The time would come
when he would age and die. Whose wishes would then prevail?

Maybe he was wrong, he thought. Maybe he shouldn't stand in the way of
their biologists and surgeons. But he'd rather be buried, even if that
left them with only what he could tell them about the human body.

       *       *       *       *       *

To help himself forget the rather preoccupied manner in which some of
the Tepoktan scientists occasionally eyed him, he peered down at the big
dam of the hydro-electric project being completed to Kinton's design.
Power from this would soon light the town built to house the staff of
scientists, students, and workers assigned to the institute organized
about the person of Kinton.

Now, there was an example of their willingness to repay him for whatever
help he had been, he reflected. They hadn't needed that for themselves.

In some ways, compared to those of Terra, the industries of Tepokt were
underdeveloped. In the first place, the population was smaller and had
different standards of luxury. In the second, a certain lack of drive
resulted from the inability to break out into interplanetary space.
Kinton had been inexplicably lucky to have reached the surface even in
a battered hulk. The shell of meteorites was at least a hundred miles
thick and constantly shifting.

"We do not know if they have always been meteorites," the Tepoktans had
told Kinton, "or whether part of them come from a destroyed satellite;
but our observers have proved mathematically that no direct path through
them may be predicted more than a very short while in advance."

Kinton turned away from the window as he caught the glint of Tepokt's
sun upon the hull of the spaceship they had also built for him. Perhaps
... would it be fair to encourage the newcomer to attempt the barrier?

For ten years, Kinton had failed to work up any strong desire to try it.
The Tepoktans called the ever-shifting lights the Dome of Eyes, after
a myth in which each tiny satellite bright enough to be visible was
supposed to watch over a single individual on the surface. Like their
brothers on Terra, the native astronomers could trace their science back
to a form of astrology; and Kinton often told them jokingly that he felt
no urge to risk a physical encounter with his own personal Eye.

       *       *       *       *       *

The helicopter started to descend, and Kinton remembered that the city
named in his message was only about twenty miles from his home. The
brief twilight of Tepokt was passing by the time he set foot on the
landing field, and he paused to look up.

The brighter stars visible from this part of the planet twinkled back at
him, and he knew that each was being scrutinized by some amateur or
professional astronomer. Before an hour had elapsed, most of them would
be obscured by the tiny moonlets, some of which could already be seen.
These could easily be mistaken for stars or the other five planets of
the system, but in a short while the tinier ones in groups would cause
a celestial haze resembling a miniature Milky Way.

Klaft, who had descended first, leaving the pilot to bring up the rear,
noticed Kinton's pause.

"Glory glitters till it is known for a curse," he remarked, quoting a
Tepoktan proverb often applied by the disgruntled scientists to the Dome
of Eyes.

Kinton observed, however, that his aide also stared upward for a long
moment. The Tepoktans loved speculating about the unsolvable. They had
even founded clubs to argue whether two satellites had been destroyed or
only one.

Half a dozen officials hastened up to escort the party to the vehicle
awaiting Kinton. Klaft succeeded in quieting the lesser members of the
delegation so that Kinton was able to learn a few facts about the new
arrival. The crash had been several hundred miles away, but someone had
thought of the hospital in this city which was known to have a doctor
rating as an expert in human physiology. The survivor--only one occupant
of the wreck, alive or dead, had been discovered--had accordingly been
flown here.

With a clanging of bells, the little convoy of ground cars drew up in
front of the hospital. A way was made through the chittering crowd
around the entrance. Within a few minutes, Kinton found himself looking
down at a pallet upon which lay another Terran.

A man! he thought, then curled a lip wrily at the sudden, unexpected
pang of disappointment. Well, he hadn't realized until then what he was
really hoping for!

       *       *       *       *       *

The spaceman had been cleaned up and bandaged by the native medicos.
Kinton saw that his left thigh was probably broken. Other dressings
suggested cracked ribs and lacerations on the head and shoulders. The
man was dark-haired but pale of skin, with a jutting chin and a nose
that had been flattened in some earlier mishap. The flaring set of his
ears somehow emphasized an overall leanness. Even in sleep, his mouth
was thin and hard.

"Thrown across the controls after his belt broke loose?" Kinton guessed.

"I bow to your wisdom, George," said the plump Tepoktan doctor who
appeared to be in charge.

Kinton could not remember him, but everyone on the planet addressed the
Terran by the sound they fondly thought to be his first name.

"This is Doctor Chuxolkhee," murmured Klaft.

Kinton made the accepted gesture of greeting with one hand and said,
"You seem to have treated him very expertly."

Chuxolkhee ruffled the scales around his neck with pleasure.

"I have studied Terran physiology," he admitted complacently. "From your
records and drawings, of course, George, for I have not yet had the good
fortune to visit you."

"We must arrange a visit soon," said Kinton. "Klaft will--"

He broke off at the sound from the patient.

"A Terran!" mumbled the injured man.

He shook his head dazedly, tried to sit up, and subsided with a groan.

_Why, he looked scared when he saw me_, thought Kinton.

"You're all right now," he said soothingly. "It's all over and you're in
good hands. I gather there were no other survivors of the crash?"

The man stared curiously. Kinton realized that his own language
sputtered clumsily from his lips after ten years. He tried again.

"My name is George Kinton. I don't blame you if I'm hard to understand.
You see, I've been here ten years without ever having another Terran to
speak to."

The spaceman considered that for a few breaths, then seemed to relax.

"Al Birken," he introduced himself laconically. "Ten years?"

"A little over," confirmed Kinton. "It's extremely unusual that anything
gets through to the surface, let alone a spaceship. What happened to
you?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Birken's stare was suspicious.

"Then you ain't heard about the new colonies? Naw--you musta come here
when all the planets were open."

"We had a small settlement on the second planet," Kinton told him. "You
mean there are new Terran colonies?"

"Yeah. Jet-hoppers spreadin' all over the other five. None of the
land-hungry poops figured a way to set down here, though, or they'd be
creepin' around this planet too."

"How did you happen to do it? Run out of fuel?"

The other eyed him for a few seconds before dropping his gaze. Kinton
was struck with sudden doubt. The outposts of civilization were followed
by less desirable developments as a general rule--prisons, for instance.
He resolved to be wary of the visitor.

"Ya might say I was explorin'," Birken replied at last. "That's why I
come alone. Didn't want nobody else hurt if I didn't make it. Say, how
bad am I banged up?"

Kinton realized guiltily that the man should be resting. He had lost
track of the moments he had wasted in talk while the others with him
stood attentively about.

He questioned the doctor briefly and relayed the information that
Birken's leg was broken but that the other injuries were not serious.

"They'll fix you up," he assured the spaceman. "They're quite good at
it, even if the sight of one does make you think a little of an iguana.
Rest up, now; and I'll come back again when you're feeling better."

For the next three weeks, Kinton flew back and forth from his own town
nearly every day. He felt that he should not neglect the few meetings
which were the only way he could repay the Tepoktans for all they did
for him. On the other hand, the chance to see and talk with one of his
own kind drew him like a magnet to the hospital.

The doctors operated upon Birken's leg, inserting a metal rod inside the
bone by a method they had known before Kinton described it. The new
arrival expected to be able to walk, with care, almost any day; although
the pin would have to be removed after the bone had healed. Meanwhile,
Birken seemed eager to learn all Kinton could tell him about the planet,
Tepokt.

About himself, he was remarkably reticent. Kinton worried about this.

"I think we should not expect too much of this Terran," he warned Klaft
uneasily. "You, too, have citizens who do not always obey, your laws,
who sometimes ... that is--"

"Who are born to die under the axe, as we say," interrupted Klaft, as if
to ease the concern plain on Kinton's face. "In other words, criminals.
You suspect this Albirken is such a one, George?"

"It is not impossible," admitted Kinton unhappily. "He will tell me
little about himself. It may be that he was caught in Tepokt's gravity
while fleeing from justice."

To himself, he wished he had not told Birken about the spaceship. He
didn't think the man exactly believed his explanation of why there was
no use taking off in it.

       *       *       *       *       *

Yet he continued to spend as much time as he could visiting the other
man. Then, as his helicopter landed at the city airport one gray dawn,
the news reached him.

"The other Terran has gone," Klaft reported, turning from the
breathless messenger as Kinton followed him from the machine.

"Gone? Where did they take him?"

Klaft looked uneasy, embarrassed. Kinton repeated his question,
wondering about the group of armed police on hand.

"In the night," Klaft hissed and clucked, "when none would think to
watch him, they tell me ... and quite rightly, I think--"

"Get on with it, Klaft! Please!"

"In the night, then, Albirken left the chamber in which he lay. He can
walk some now, you know, because of Dr. Chuxolkhee's metal pin. He--he
stole a ground car and is gone."

"He did?" Kinton had an empty feeling in the pit of his stomach. "Is it
known where he went? I mean ... he has been curious to see some of
Tepokt. Perhaps--"

He stopped, his own words braying in his ears. Klaft was clicking two
claws together, a sign of emphatic disagreement.

"Albirken," he said, "was soon followed by three police constables in
another vehicle. They found him heading in the direction of our town."

"Why did he say he was traveling that way?" asked Kinton, thinking to
himself of the spaceship! Was the man crazy?

"He did not say," answered Klaft expressionlessly. "Taking them by
surprise, he killed two of the constables and injured the third before
fleeing with one of their spears."

"_What?_"

Kinton felt his eyes bulging with dismay.

"Yes, for they carried only the short spears of their authority, not
expecting to need fire weapons."

       *       *       *       *       *

Kinton looked from him to the messenger, noticing for the first time
that the latter was an under-officer of police. He shook his head
distractedly. It appeared that his suspicions concerning Birken had been
only too accurate.

Why was it one like him who got through? he asked himself in silent
anguish. After ten years. The Tepoktans had been thinking well of
Terrans, but now--

He did not worry about his own position. That was well enough
established, whether or not he could again hold up his head before the
purple-scaled people who had been so generous to him.

Even if they had been aroused to a rage by the killing, Kinton told
himself, he would not have been concerned about himself. He had reached
a fairly ripe age for a spaceman. In fact, he had already enjoyed a
decade of borrowed time.

But they were more civilized than that wanton murderer, he realized.

He straightened up, forcing back his early-morning weariness.

"We must get into the air immediately," he told Klaft. "Perhaps we may
see him before he reaches--"

He broke off at the word "spaceship" but he noticed a reserved
expression on Klaft's pointed face. His aide had probably reached a
conclusion similar to his own.

They climbed back into the cabin and Klaft gave brisk orders to the lean
young pilot. A moment later, Kinton saw the ground outside drop away.

Only upon turning around did he realize that two armed Tepoktans had
materialized in time to follow Klaft inside.

One was a constable but the other he recognized for an officer of
some rank. Both wore slung across their chests weapons resembling
long-barreled pistols with large, oddly indented butts to fit Tepoktan
claws. The constable, in addition, carried a contraption with a
quadruple tube for launching tiny rockets no thicker than Kinton's
thumb. These, he knew, were loaded with an explosive worthy of respect
on any planet he had heard of.

To protect him, he wondered. Or to get Birken?

The pilot headed the craft back toward Kinton's town in the brightening
sky of early day. Long before the buildings of Kinton's institute came
into view, they received a radio message about Birken.

"He has been seen on the road passing the dam," Klaft reported soberly
after having been called to the pilot's compartment. "He stopped to
demand fuel from some maintenance workers, but they had been warned and
fled."

"Couldn't they have seized him?" demanded Kinton, his tone sharp with
the worry he endeavored to control. "He has that spear, I suppose; but
he is only one and injured."

Klaft hesitated.

"Well, couldn't they?"

The aide looked away, out one of the windows at some sun-dyed clouds
ranging from pink to orange. He grimaced and clicked his showy teeth
uncomfortably.

"Perhaps they thought you might be offended, George," he answered at
last.

Kinton settled back in the seat especially padded to fit the contours
of his Terran body, and stared silently at the partition behind the
pilot.

In other words, he thought, he was responsible for Birken, who was a
Terran, one of his own kind. Maybe they really didn't want to risk
hurting his feelings, but that was only part of it. They were leaving
it up to him to handle what they considered his private affair.

He wondered what to do. He had no actual faith in the idea that Birken
was delirious, or acting under any influence but that of a criminally
self-centered nature.

"I _shouldn't_ have told him about the ship!" Kinton muttered, gnawing
the knuckle of his left thumb. "He's on the run, all right. Probably
scared the colonial authorities will trail him right down through the
Dome of Eyes. Wonder what he did?"

He caught himself and looked around to see if he had been overheard.
Klaft and the police officers peered from their respective windows, in
calculated withdrawal. Kinton, disturbed, tried to remember whether he
had spoken in Terran or Tepoktan.

Would Birken listen if he tried reasoning, he asked himself. Maybe if
he showed the man how they had proved the unpredictability of openings
through the shifting Dome of Eyes--

An exclamation from the constable drew his attention. He rose, and room
was made for him at the opposite window.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the distance, beyond the town landing field they were now
approaching, Kinton saw a halted ground car. Across the plain which was
colored a yellowish tan by a short, grass-like growth, a lone figure
plodded toward the upthrust bulk of the spaceship that had never flown.

"Never mind landing at the town!" snapped Kinton. "Go directly out to
the ship!"

Klaft relayed the command to the pilot. The helicopter swept in a
descending curve across the plain toward the gleaming hull.

As they passed the man below, Birken looked up. He continued to limp
along at a brisk pace with the aid of what looked like a short spear.

"Go down!" Kinton ordered.

The pilot landed about a hundred yards from the spaceship. By the time
his passengers had alighted, however, Birken had drawn level with them,
about fifty feet away.

"Birken!" shouted Kinton. "Where do you think you're going?"

Seeing that no one ran after him, Birken slowed his pace, but kept
walking toward the ship. He watched them over his shoulder.

"Sorry, Kinton," he shouted with no noticeable tone of regret. "I figure
I better travel on for my health."

"It's not so damn healthy up there!" called Kinton. "I told you how
there's no clear path--"

"Yeah, yeah, you told me. That don't mean I gotta believe it."

"Wait! Don't you think they tried sending unmanned rockets up? Every one
was struck and exploded."

Birken showed no more change of expression than if the other had
commented on the weather.

Kinton had stepped forward six or eight paces, irritated despite his
anxiety at the way Birken persisted in drifting before him.

Kinton couldn't just grab him--bad leg or not, he could probably break
the older man in two.

He glanced back at the Tepoktans beside the helicopter, Klaft, the
pilot, the officer, the constable with the rocket weapon.

They stood quietly, looking back at him.

The call for help that had risen to his lips died there.

"Not _their_ party," he muttered. He turned again to Birken, who still
retreated toward the ship. "But he'll only get himself killed _and_
destroy the ship! Or if some miracle gets him through, that's worse!
He's nothing to turn loose on a civilized colony again."

       *       *       *       *       *

A twinge of shame tugged down the corners of his mouth as he realized
that keeping Birken here would also expose a highly cultured people to
an unscrupulous criminal who had already committed murder the very first
time he had been crossed.

"Birken!" he shouted. "For the last time! Do you want me to send them to
drag you back here?"

Birken stopped at that. He regarded the motionless Tepoktans with a
derisive sneer.

"They don't look too eager to me," he taunted.

Kinton growled a Tepoktan expression the meaning of which he had deduced
after hearing it used by the dam workers.

He whirled to run toward the helicopter. Hardly had he taken two steps,
however, when he saw startled changes in the carefully blank looks of
his escort. The constable half raised his heavy weapon, and Klaft sprang
forward with a hissing cry.

By the time Kinton's aging muscles obeyed his impulse to sidestep, the
spear had already hurtled past. It had missed him by an error of over
six feet.

He felt his face flushing with sudden anger. Birken was running as best
he could toward the spaceship, and had covered nearly half the distance.

Kinton ran at the Tepoktans, brushing aside the concerned Klaft. He
snatched the heavy weapon from the surprised constable.

He turned and raised it to his chest. Because of the shortness of
Tepoktan arms, the launcher was constructed so that the butt rested
against the chest with the sighting loops before the eyes. The little
rocket tubes were above head height, to prevent the handler's catching
the blast.

The circles of the sights weaved and danced about the running figure.
Kinton realized to his surprise that the effort of seizing the weapon
had him panting. Or was it the fright at having a spear thrown at him?
He decided that Birken had not come close enough for that, and wondered
if he was afraid of his own impending action.

It wasn't fair, he complained to himself. The poor slob only had a
spear, and a man couldn't blame him for wanting to get back to his own
sort. He was limping ... hurt ... how could they expect him to
realize--?

Then, abruptly, his lips tightened to a thin line. The sights steadied
on Birken as the latter approached the foot of the ladder leading to the
entrance port of the spaceship.

Kinton pressed the firing stud.

Across the hundred-yard space streaked four flaring little projectiles.
Kinton, without exactly seeing each, was aware of the general lines of
flight diverging gradually to bracket the figure of Birken.

One struck the ground beside the man just as he set one foot on the
bottom rung of the ladder, and skittered away past one fin of the ship
before exploding. Two others burst against the hull, scattering metal
fragments, and another puffed on the upright of the ladder just above
Birken's head.

       *       *       *       *       *

The spaceman was blown back from the ladder. He balanced on his heels
for a moment with outstretched fingers reaching toward the grips from
which they had been torn. Then he crumpled into a limp huddle on the
yellowing turf.

Kinton sighed.

The constable took the weapon from him, reloaded deftly, and proffered
it again. When the Terran did not reach for it, the officer held out a
clawed hand to receive it. He gestured silently, and the constable
trotted across the intervening ground to bend over Birken.

"He is dead," said Klaft when the constable straightened up with a curt
wave.

"Will ... will you have someone see to him, please?" Kinton requested,
turning toward the helicopter.

"Yes, George," said Klaft. "George...?"

"Well?"

"It would be very instructive--that is, I believe Dr. Chuxolkhee would
like to--"

"All right!" yielded Kinton, surprised at the harshness of his own
voice. "Just tell him not to bring around any sketches of the various
organs for a few months!"

He climbed into the helicopter and slumped into his seat. Presently, he
was aware of Klaft edging into the seat across the aisle. He looked up.

"The police will stay until cars from town arrive. They are coming now,"
said his aide.

       *       *       *       *       *

Kinton stared at his hands, wondering at the fact that they were not
shaking. He felt dejected, empty, not like a man who had just been at
a high pitch of excitement.

"Why did you not let him go, George?"

"What? Why ... why ... he would have destroyed the ship you worked so
hard to build. There is no safe path through the Dome of Eyes."

"No predictable path," Klaft corrected. "But what then? We would have
built you another ship, George, for it was you who showed us how."

Kinton flexed his fingers slowly.

"He was just no good. You know the murder he did here; we can only guess
what he did among my own ... among Terrans. Should he have a chance to
go back and commit more crimes?"

"I understand, George, the logic of it," said Klaft. "I meant ... it is
not my place to say this ... but you seem unhappy."

"Possibly," grunted Kinton wrily.

"We, too, have criminals," said the aide, as gently as was possible in
his clicking language. "We do not think it necessary to grieve for the
pain they bring upon themselves."

"No, I suppose not," sighed Kinton. "I ... it's just--"

He looked up at the pointed visage, at the strange eyes regarding him
sympathetically from beneath the sloping, purple-scaled forehead.

"It's just that now I'm lonely ... again," he said.



   Transcriber's Note:

   This e-text was produced from Space Science Fiction February
   1953. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the
   U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Exile, by Horace Brown Fyfe

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK EXILE ***

***** This file should be named 22346.txt or 22346.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/2/3/4/22346/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Alexander Bauer and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
