Project Gutenberg's Beyond the Vanishing Point, by Raymond King Cummings

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Beyond the Vanishing Point

Author: Raymond King Cummings

Release Date: September 6, 2007 [EBook #22527]
Last updated: January 22, 2009

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BEYOND THE VANISHING POINT ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                     THEY OPENED THE PANDORA'S BOX
                            OF ATOMIC TRAVEL


When George Randolph first caught sight of Orena, he was astounded by
its gleaming perfection. Here were hills and valleys, lakes and streams,
glowing with the light of the most precious of metals. And, more
astonishing than that, it was a world of _miniature_ perfection--an
infinitely tiny universe within a golden atom!

But for Randolph it was also a world aglow with danger. Somewhere in its
tiny vastness were the friends he had to rescue. Captives of a madman,
they had been reduced to native Orena size; to return to Earth they
needed the growth capsules Randolph was bringing them. It was up to
Randolph to find them--and quickly--for the longer they stayed tiny, the
closer they came to passing BEYOND THE VANISHING POINT!




CAST OF CHARACTERS


 FRANZ POLTER
 He found a gold mine in a land where there was no gold.

 DR. KENT
 His scientific studies could mean life or death to an entire universe!

 GEORGE RANDOLPH
 He crossed the border into Canada, and found himself in another world.

 ALAN KENT
 Twenty feet tall, or two inches high--which should he be?

 GLORA
 She was only as large as a thumbnail, but she carried a gigantic secret.

 BABS KENT
 Did she live in a golden cage or a magnificent palace?




           BEYOND THE
              VANISHING POINT


                   by
              RAY CUMMINGS


             ACE BOOKS, INC.
 23 West 47th Street, New York 36, N. Y.




 BEYOND THE VANISHING POINT
 Copyright Â©, 1958, by Ace Books, Inc.
 All Rights Reserved

 Printed in U.S.A.




CHAPTER I


It was shortly after noon of December 31, 1970, when the series of weird
and startling events began which took me into the tiny world of an atom
of gold, beyond the vanishing point, beyond the range of even the
highest-powered electric-microscope. My name is George Randolph. I was,
that momentous afternoon, assistant chemist for the Ajax International
Dye Company, with main offices in New York City.

It was twelve-twenty when the local exchange call-sorter announced
Alan's connection from Quebec.

"Hello, George? Look here, you've got to come up here at once. Chateau
Frontenac, Quebec. Will you come?"

I could see his face imaged in the little mirror on my desk; the
anxiety, tenseness in his voice, was duplicated in his expression.

"Well--" I began.

"You must, George. Babs and I need you. See here...."

He tried at first to make it sound like an invitation for a New Year's
Eve holiday. But I knew it was not that. Alan and Barbara were my best
friends. They were twins, eighteen years old. I felt that Alan would
always be my best friend; but for Babs, my hopes, longings, went far
deeper, though as yet I had never brought myself to the point of telling
her so.

"I'd like to come, Alan. But--"

"You've got to George! I can't tell you everything over the public air.
But I've seen _him_: He's diabolical. I know it now!"

_Him_! It could only mean, of all the world, one person!

"He's here!" he went on. "Near here. We saw him today! I didn't want to
tell you, but that's why we came. It seemed a long chance, but it's he,
I'm positive!"

I was staring at the image of Alan's eyes; there was horror in them. And
his voice too. "God, George, it's weird! Weird, I tell you. His
looks--he--oh I can't tell you now! Only, come!"

       *       *       *       *       *

I was busy at the office in spite of the holiday season, but I dropped
everything and went. By one o'clock that afternoon I was wheeling my
little sport Midge from its cage on the roof of the Metropole building,
and went into the air.

It was a cold gray afternoon with the feel of coming snow. I made a good
two hundred and fifty miles at first, taking the northbound
through-traffic lane which today the meteorological conditions had
placed at an altitude of 6,200 feet.

Flying is largely automatic. There was not enough traffic to bother me.
The details of leaving the office so hastily had been too engrossing for
thought of Alan and Babs. But now, in my little pit at the controls, my
mind flung ahead. They had located him. That meant Franz Polter, for
whom we had been searching nearly four years. And my memory went back
into the past with vivid vision....

       *       *       *       *       *

The Kents, four years ago, were living on Long Island. Alan and Babs
were fourteen at the time, and I was seventeen. Even then Babs was
something kind of special to me. I lived in a neighboring house that
summer and saw them every day.

To my adolescent mind a thrilling mystery hung upon the Kent family. The
mother was dead. Dr. Kent, father of Alan and Babs, maintained a
luxurious home, with only a housekeeper and no other servant. Dr. Kent
was a retired chemist. He had, in his home, a laboratory in which he was
working upon some mysterious problem. His children did not know what it
was, nor, of course, did I. And none of us had ever been in the
laboratory, except that when occasion offered we stole surreptitious
peeps.

I recall Dr. Kent as a kindly, iron-gray haired gentleman. He was stern
with the discipline of his children; but he loved them, and was
indulgent in many ways. They loved him; and I, an orphan, began looking
upon him almost as a father. I was interested in chemistry. He knew it,
and did his best to help and encourage me in my studies.

There came an afternoon in the summer of 1966, when arriving at the Kent
home, I ran upon a startling scene. The only other member of the
household was a young fellow of twenty-five, named Franz Polter. He was
a foreigner, born, I understood, in one of the Balkan Protectorates; he
was here, employed by Dr. Kent as laboratory assistant.

He had been with the Kents, at this time, two years. Alan and Babs
didn't like him, nor did I. He must have been a clever, skillful
chemist. No doubt he was. But he was, to us, repulsive. A hunchback,
with a short, thick body; dangling arms that suggested a gorilla; barrel
chest; a lump set askew on his left shoulder, and his massive head
planted down with almost no neck. His face was rugged in feature; a wide
mouth, a high-bridged heavy nose; and above the face a great shock of
wavy black hair. It was an intelligent face; in itself, not repulsive.

But I think we all three feared Franz Polter. There was always something
sinister about him, that had nothing to do with his deformity.

When I came, that afternoon, Babs and Polter were under a tree on the
Kent lawn. Babs, at fourteen, with long black braids down her back,
bare-legged and short-skirted in a summer sport costume, was standing
against the tree with Polter facing her. They were about the same
height. To my youthful imaginative mind rose the fleeting picture of a
young girl in a forest menaced by a gorilla.

I came upon them suddenly. I heard Polter say:

"But I lof you. And you are almos' a woman. Some day you lof me."

He put out his thick hand and gripped her shoulder. She tried to twist
away. She was frightened, but she laughed.

"You--you're crazy!"

He was suddenly holding her in his arms, and she was fighting him. I
dashed forward. Babs was always a spunky sort of girl. In spite of her
fear now, she kept on struggling, and she shouted:

"You--let me go, you--you hunchback!"

He did let her go; but in a frenzy of rage he hauled back his hand and
struck her in the face. I was upon him the next second. I had him down
on the lawn, punching him; but though at seventeen I was a reasonably
husky lad, the hunchback with his thick, hairy gorilla arms proved much
stronger. He heaved me off. The commotion had brought Alan and without
waiting to find out what the trouble was, he jumped on Polter. Between
us, I think we would have beaten him pretty badly. But the housekeeper
summoned Dr. Kent and the fight was over.

Polter left for good within an hour. He did not speak to any of us. But
I saw him as he put his luggage into the taxi which Dr. Kent had
summoned. I was standing silently nearby with Babs and Alan. The look he
flung us as he drove away carried an unmistakable menace--the promise of
vengeance. And I think now that in his warped and twisted mind he was
telling himself that he would some day make Babs regret that she had
repulsed his love.

What happened that night none of us ever knew. Dr. Kent worked late in
his laboratory; he was there when Alan and Babs and the housekeeper went
to bed. He had written a note to Alan; it was found on his desk in a
corner of the laboratory next morning, addressed in care of the family
lawyer to be given Alan in the event of his death. It said very little.
Described a tiny fragment of gold quartz rock the size of a walnut which
would be found under the giant microscope in the laboratory; and told
Alan to give it to the American Scientific Society to be guarded and
watched very carefully.

This note was found, but Dr. Kent had vanished! There had been a
midnight marauder. The laboratory was on the lower floor of the house.
Through one of its open windows, so the police said, an intruder had
entered. There was evidence of a struggle, but it must have been short,
because neither Babs, Alan, the housekeeper, nor any of the neighbors
had heard anything. And the fragment of golden quartz was gone!

The police investigation came to nothing. Polter was found in New York.
He withstood the police questions. There was nothing except suspicion
upon which he could be held, and he was finally released. Immediately
thereafter, he disappeared.

Neither Alan, Babs nor I saw Polter again. Dr. Kent had never been heard
from to this day, four years later when I flew to join the twins in
Quebec. And now Alan told me that Polter was up there! We had never
ceased to believe that Dr. Kent was alive, and that Polter was the
midnight marauder. As we grew older, we began to search for Polter. It
seemed to us, that if we could once get our hands on him, we could drag
from him the truth which the police had failed to get.

The call of a traffic director in mid-Vermont brought me back from these
memories. My buzzer was clanging; a peremptory halting signal day-beam
came darting up at me from below. It caught me and clung. I shouted down
at it.

"What's the matter?" I gave my name and number and all the details in
one breath. Above everything I had no wish to be halted now. "What's the
matter? I haven't done anything wrong."

"The hell you haven't," the director roared. "Come down to three
thousand. That lane's barred."

I dove obediently and his beam followed me. "Once more, like that, young
fellow--" But he went busy with somebody else and I didn't hear the end
of his threat.

I crossed into Maine in mid-afternoon. It was already twilight. The sky
was solid lead and the landscape all up through here was gray-white with
snow in the gathering darkness. I passed the City of Jackman, crossing
full over it to take no chances of annoying the border officials; and a
few miles further, I dropped to the glaring lights of International
Inspection Field. The formalities were soon finished. I was ready to
take-off when Alan rushed at me.

"George! I thought I could connect here." He gripped me. He was
wild-eyed, incoherent. He waved his taxiplane away. "I'm going with you,
George. I'm almost out of my mind. I can't--I don't know what's happened
to her. She's gone, now--"

"Who's gone? Babs?"

"Yes." He pushed me into my plane and climbed in after me. "Don't talk.
Get us up! I'll tell you then. I shouldn't have left."

When we were up in the air, I swung on him. "What are you talking about?
Babs gone?"

I could feel myself shuddering with a nameless horror.

"I don't know what I'm talking about, George. I'm about crazy. The
Quebec police think I am, anyway. I've been raising hell with them for
an hour. Babs is gone! I can't find her. I don't know where she is."

He finally calmed down enough to tell me what happened. Shortly after
his radiophone to me in New York, he had missed Babs. They had had lunch
in the huge hotel and then walked on the Dufferin Terrace--the famous
promenade outside looking down over the Lower City, the great sweep of
the St. Lawrence River and the gray-white distant Laurentian mountains.

"I was to meet her inside. I went in ahead of her. But she didn't come.
I went back to the Terrace but she was gone. She wasn't in our rooms.
Nor the library, the lobby--anywhere."

But it was afternoon, in the public place of a civilized city. In the
daylight of the Dufferin Terrace, beside the long ice toboggan slide,
under the gaze of skaters on the ice-rink and several hundred holiday
merrymakers, a young girl could hardly be murdered, or kidnapped,
without attracting attention! The Quebec police thought the young
American unduly excited about his sister, who was missing only an hour.
They would do what they could, if by dark she had not rejoined him. They
suggested that doubtless the young lady had gone shopping.

"Maybe she did," I agreed. But in my heart, I felt differently. "She'll
be waiting for us in the Hotel when we get there, Alan."

"But I'm telling you we saw Polter this morning. He lives here--not
thirty miles from Quebec. We saw him on the Terrace after breakfast.
Recognized him immediately of course."

"Did he see you?"

"I don't know. He was lost in the crowd in a minute. But I asked a
young French fellow if he knew him. He did know him, as Frank Rascor.
That must be the name he wears now. He's a famous man up here--well
known, immensely rich. I didn't know if he saw us or not. What a fool I
was to leave Babs alone, even for a minute."

We were speeding over a white-clad valley with a little frozen river
winding down its middle. Night had almost come. The leaden sky was low
above us. It began snowing. The lights of the small villages along the
river were barely visible.

"Can you land us, Alan?"

"Yes, surely. At the Municipal Field just beyond the Citadel. We can get
to the Hotel in five minutes."

       *       *       *       *       *

It was a flight of only half an hour. During it, Alan told me about
Polter. The hunchback, known now as Frank Rascor, owned a mine in the
Laurentians, some thirty miles from Quebec City--a fabulously productive
mine of gold. It was an anomaly that gold should be produced in this
region. No vein of gold-bearing rock had been found, except the one on
Polter's property. Alan had seen a newspaper account of the strangeness
of it; and on a hunch had come to Quebec, being intrigued by the
description of the mine owner. He had seen Frank Rascor on the Dufferin
Terrace, and recognized him as Polter.

Again my thoughts went back into the past. Had Polter stolen that
missing fragment of golden quartz the size of a walnut which had been
beneath Dr. Kent's microscope? We always thought so. Dr. Kent had some
secret, some great problem upon which he was working. Polter, his
assistant, had evidently known, or partially known, its details. And
now, four years later, Polter was immensely rich, with a "gold mine" in
mountains where there was no other evidence of gold!

I seemed to see some connection. Alan, I knew, was groping with a dim
idea, so strange he hardly dared voice it.

"I tell you, it's weird, George. The sight of him. Polter--heavens, one
couldn't mistake that build--and his face, his features, just the same
as when we knew him."

"Then what's so weird?" I demanded.

"His age." There was a queer solemn hush in Alan's voice. "George, when
we knew Polter, he was about twenty-five, wasn't he? Well, that was four
years ago. But he isn't twenty-nine now. I swear it is the same man, but
he isn't around thirty. Don't ask me what I'm talking about. I don't
know. But he isn't thirty. He's nearer fifty! Unnatural! Weird! I felt
it, and so did Babs, just that brief look we had of him."

I didn't answer. My attention was on managing the plane. The lights of
Levis were under us. Beyond the City cliffs, the St. Lawrence lay in its
deep valley; the Quebec lights, the light-dotted ramparts with the
Terrace and the great fortresslike Hotel showed across the river.

"Better take the stick, Alan. I don't know where the field is. And don't
you worry about Babs. She'll be back by now."

       *       *       *       *       *

But she was not. We went to the two connecting rooms in the tower of the
Hotel which Alan and Babs had engaged. We inquired with half a dozen
phone calls. No one had seen or heard from her. The Quebec police were
sending a man up to talk with Alan.

"Well, we won't be here," Alan called to me. He was standing by the
window in Babs' room; he was trembling too much to use the phone. I hung
up the receiver and went though the connecting door to join him.

Babs' room! It sent a pang through me. A few of her garments were lying
around. A negligee was laid out on the large bed. A velvet boudoir
doll--she had always loved them--stood on the dresser. Upon this Hotel
room, in one day, she had impressed her personality. Her perfume was in
the air. And now she was gone.

"We won't be here," Alan was repeating. He gripped me at the window.
"Look." In his hand was an ugly-looking, smokeless, soundless automatic
of the Essen type. "And I've got another one for you. Brought them with
me."

His face was white and drawn, but his hands had steadied. The tremble
was gone out of his voice.

"I'm going after him, George! Now! Understand that? Now? His place is
only thirty miles from here, out there in the mountains. You can see it
in the daylight--a wall around his property and a stone castle which he
built in the middle of it. A gold mine? Hell!"

There was nothing to be seen now out of the window but the snow-filled
darkness, the blurred lights of Lower Quebec and the line of dock lights
five hundred feet below us.

"Will you fly me, George?"

"Of course."

I was the one trembling now; the cool feel of the automatic which Alan
thrust into my hand seemed suddenly to crystallize Babs' peril. I was
here in her room, with the scent of her perfume around me, and this
deadly weapon was needed! But the trembling was gone in a moment.

"Yes, of course, Alan. No use talking to the police. I gave them all the
information--a description of her, what you said she was wearing. No
sense dragging Polter's name into it, with nothing tangible to go on.
The police won't ransack the castle of a rich man just because you can't
find your sister. Come on. You can tell me what this place is like as we
go."

       *       *       *       *       *

Bundled in our flying suits we hurried from the Hotel, climbed the
Citadel slope and in ten minutes were in the air. The wind sucked at us.
The snow now was falling with thick, huge flakes. Directed by Alan, I
headed out over this ice-filled St. Lawrence, past the frozen Ile
d'Orleans, toward Polter's mysterious mountain castle.

Suddenly Alan burst out, "I know what father's secret was! I can piece
it together now, from little things that were meaningless when I was a
kid. He invented the electro-microscope. You know that. The infinitely
small fascinated him. I remember he once said that if we could see far
enough down into smallness, we would come upon human life!"

Alan's low, tense voice was more vehement than I had ever heard it
before. "It's clear to me now, George. That little fragment of golden
quartz which he wanted me to be so careful of contained a world with
human inhabitants! Father knew it, or suspected it. And I think the
chemical problem on which he was working aimed for some drug. I know it
was a drug they were compounding, Polter said so once, a radioactive
drug; I remember listening at the door. A drug, George, capable of
making a human being infinitely small!"

I did not answer when momentarily Alan paused. So strange a thing. My
mind whirled with it; struggled to encompass it. And like the
meaningless individual pieces of a puzzle, dropping so easily into place
when the key piece is fitted, I saw Polter stealing that fragment of
gold; abducting Dr. Kent--perhaps because Polter himself was not fully
acquainted with the secret. And now, Polter up here with a fabulously
rich "gold mine." And Babs, abducted by him, to be taken--where?

It set me shuddering.

"That's what it was," Alan reiterated. "And Polter, here now with what
he calls a 'mine.' It isn't a mine, it's a laboratory! He's got father
too, hidden God knows where! And now Babs. We've got to get them,
George! The police can't help us! It's just you and me, to fight this
thing. And it's diabolical!"




CHAPTER II


We soared over the divided channel of the St. Lawrence, between Orleans
and the mainland. Montmorency Falls in a moment showed dimly white
through the murk to our left, a great hanging veil of ice higher than
Niagara. Further ahead, the lights of the little village of St. Anne de
BeauprÃ© were visible with the gray-black towering hills behind them.

"Swing left, George. Over the mainland. That's St. Anne. We pass this
side of it. Put the mufflers on. This damn thing roars like a tower
siren."

I cut in the muffler and switched off our wing-lights. It was illegal
but we were past all thought of that. We were both desperate; the slow
prudent process of acting within the law had nothing to do with this
affair. We both knew it.

Our little plane was dark, and amid the sounds of this night blizzard
our muffled engine couldn't be heard.

Alan touched me. "There are his lights; see them?"

We had passed St. Anne. The hills lay ahead--a wild mountainous country
stretching northward to the foot of Hudson Bay. The blizzard was roaring
out of the North and we were heading into it. I saw, on what seemed like
a dome-shaped hill perhaps a thousand feet above the river level, a
small cluster of lights which marked Polter's property.

"Fly over it once, George," Alan said. "Low--we can chance it. And find
a place to land near the walls."

We presently had it under us. I held the plane at five hundred feet, and
cut our speed to the minimum of twenty miles an hour facing the gale,
though it was sixty or seventy when we turned. There were a score or two
of hooded ground lights. But there was little reflection aloft, and in
the murk of the snowfall I felt we could escape notice.

We crossed, turned and went back in an arc following Polter's curved
outer wall. We had a good view of it. A weird enough looking place, here
on its lonely hilltop. No wonder the wealthy "Frank Rascor" had attained
local prominence!

The whole property was irregularly circular, perhaps a mile in diameter
covering the almost flat dome of the hilltop. Around it, completely
enclosing it, Polter had built a stone and brick wall. A miniature of
the Great Wall in China! We could see that it was fully thirty feet high
with what evidently were naked high-voltage wires protecting its top.
There were half a dozen little gates, securely barred, with doubtless a
guard at each of them.

Within the walls there were several buildings: a few small stone houses
suggesting workmen's dwellings; an oblong stone structure with smoke
funnels which looked like a smelter; a huge domelike spread of
translucent glass over what might have been the top of a mineshaft. It
looked more like the dome of an observatory--an inverted bowl fully a
hundred feet wide and equally as high, set upon the ground. What did it
cover?

And there was Polter's residence--a castlelike brick and stone building
with a tower not unlike a miniature of the Chateau Frontenac. We saw a
stone corridor on the ground connecting the lower floor of the castle
with the dome, which lay about a hundred feet to one side.

Could we chance landing inside the wall? There was a dark, level expanse
of snow where we could have done it, but our descending plane doubtless
would have been discovered. But the mile-wide inner area was dark in
many places. Spots of light were at the little wall-gates. There was a
glow all along the top of the wall. Lights were on in Polter's house;
they slanted out in yellow shafts to the nearby white ground. But for
the rest, the whole place was dark, save a dim glow from under the dome.

I shook my head at Alan's suggestion that we land inside the walls. We
had circled back and were a mile or so off toward the river. "The
trees--and you saw guards down there. But that low stretch outside the
gate on this side...."

A plan was coming to me. Heaven knows it was desperate enough, but we
had no alternative. We would land and accost one of the gate guards.
Force our way in. Once inside the wall, on foot in the darkness of this
blizzard, we could hide; slip up to that dome. Beyond that my
imagination could not go.

We landed in the snow a quarter of a mile from one of the gates. We left
the plane and plunged into the darkness.

It was a steady upward slope. A packed snowfield was underfoot, firm
enough to hold our weight, with a foot or so of loose, soft snow on its
top. The falling flakes whirled around us. The darkness was solid. Our
helmeted leather-furred flying suits were soon shapeless with a
gathering white shroud. We carried our Essens in our gloved hands. The
night was cold, around zero I imagine, though with that biting wind it
felt far colder.

From the gloom a tiny spot of light loomed up.

"There it is, Alan. Easy now! Let me go first." The wind tore away my
words. We could see the narrow rectangle of bars at the gate, with a
glow of light behind them.

"Hide your gun, Alan." I gripped him. "Do you hear me?"

"Yes."

"Let me go first. I'll do the talking. When he opens the gate, let me
handle him. You--if there are two of them--you take the other."

We emerged from the darkness, into the glow of light by the gate. I had
the horrible feeling that a shot would greet us. A challenge came, at
first in French and then in English.

"Stop! What do you want?"

"To see Mr. Rascor."

We were up to the bars now, shapeless hooded bundles of snow and frost.
A man stood in the doorway of a lighted little cubby behind the bars. A
black muzzle in his hand was leveled at us.

"He sees no one. Who are you?"

Alan was pressing at me from behind. I shoved him back, and took a step
forward. I touched the bars.

"My name is Fred Davis. Newspaperman from Montreal I must see Mr.
Rascor."

"You cannot. You may send in your call. The mouthpiece is there--out
there to the left. Bare your face; he talks to no one without the face
image."

The guard had drawn back into his cubby; there was only his extended
hand and the muzzle of his weapon left visible.

I took a step forward. "I don't want to talk by phone. Won't you open
the gate? It's cold out here. We have important business. We'll wait
with you."

Abruptly the gate lattice slid aside. Beyond the cubby doorway was the
open darkness within the wall. A scuffed path leading inward from the
gate showed for a few feet.

I walked over the threshold, with Alan crowding me. The Essen in my coat
pocket was leveled. But from the cubby doorway, I saw that the guard was
gone! Then I saw him crouching behind a metal shield. His voice rang
out.

"Stand!"

A light struck my face--a thin beam from a television sender beside me.
It all happened in an instant, so quickly Alan and I had barely time to
make a move. I realized my image was now doubtless being presented to
Polter. He would recognize me!

I ducked my head, yelling, "Don't do that!"

It was too late! The guard had received a signal. I heard its buzz.

From the shield a tiny jet of fluid leapt at me. It struck my hood.
There was a heavy sickening-sweet smell. It seemed like chloroform. I
felt my senses going. The cubby room was turning dark, was roaring.

I think I fired at the shield. And Alan leapt aside. I heard the faint
hiss of his Essen, and his choked, horrified voice:

"George, run! Don't fall!"

I crumpled; slid into blackness. And it seemed, as I went down, that
Alan's inert body was falling on top of me....

       *       *       *       *       *

I recovered after a nameless interval, a phantasmagoria of wild, drugged
dreams. My senses came slowly. At first, there were dim muffled voices
and the tread of footsteps. Then I knew that I was lying on the ground,
and that I was indoors. It was warm. My overcoat was off. Then I
realized that I was bound and gagged.

I opened my eyes. Alan was lying inert beside me, roped and with a black
gag around his face and in his mouth. We were in a huge dim open space.
Presently, as my vision cleared, I saw that the dome was overhead. This
was a circular, hundred-foot-wide room. It was dimly lighted. The
figures of men were moving about, their great misshapen shadows shifting
with them. Twenty feet from me there was a pile of golden rock--chunks
of gold the size of a man's fist, or his head, and larger, heaped
loosely into a mound ten feet high.

Beyond this pile of ore, near the center of the room, twenty feet above
the concrete floor, there was a large hanging electrolier. It cast a
circular glow downward. Under it I saw a low platform raised a foot or
two above the ground. A giant electro-microscope was hung with its
twenty foot cylinder above the platform. Its intensification tubes were
glowing in a dim phosphorescent row on a nearby bracket. A man sat in a
chair on the platform at the microscope's eyepiece.

I saw all this with a brief glance, then my attention went to a white
stone slab under the giant lense. It rested on the platform floor, a
two-foot square surface of smooth white marble. A little roped railing a
few inches high fenced it. And in its center lay a fragment of golden
quartz the size of a walnut!

There was a movement across my line of vision. Two figures advanced. I
recognized both of them. And I strained at my bonds; mouthed the gag
with futile, frenzied effort. I could no more than writhe; and I
couldn't make a sound. I lay, after a moment exhausted, and stared with
horror.

The familiar hunched figure of Polter advanced toward the microscope.
And with him, his huge hand holding her wrists, was Babs. They were
nearly fifty feet from me, but with the light over them I could see them
clearly. Babs' slim figure was clad in a long skirted dress--pale blue,
now, with the light on it. Her long black hair had fallen disheveled to
her shoulders. I couldn't see her face. She did not cry out. Polter was
half dragging her as she resisted him; and then abruptly she ceased
struggling.

I heard his guttural voice. "That iss better."

They mounted the platform. They were very small and seemed to be far
away. I blinked. Horror surged over me. Their figures were dwindling as
they stood there. Polter was saying something to the man at the
microscope. Other men were nearby, watching. All were normal, save
Polter and Babs. A moment passed. Polter was standing by the chair in
which the man at the microscope was sitting. And Polter's head barely
reached its seat! Babs was clinging to him now. Another moment and they
were both tiny figures down by the chair-leg. Then they began walking
with swaying steps toward the miniature railing of the white slab. The
white reflection from the slab plainly illumined them. Polter's arm was
around Babs. I had not realized how small they were until I saw Polter
lift the rope of the little four-inch fence, and he and Babs stooped and
walked under it. The fragment of quartz lay a foot from them in the
center of the white surface. They walked unsteadily toward it. But soon
they were running.

My horrified senses whirled. Then abruptly I felt something touch my
face! Alan and I were lying in shadow. No one had noticed my writhing
movements, and Alan was still in drugged unconsciousness. Something tiny
and light and soundless as a butterfly wing brushed my face! I jerked my
head aside. On the floor, within six inches of my eyes, I saw the tiny
figure of a girl an inch high! She stood, with a warning gesture to her
lips--a human girl in a filmy flowing robe. Long, pale golden tresses
lay on her white shoulders; her face, small as my little fingernail,
colorful as a miniature painted on ivory, was so close to my eyes that I
could see her expression--warning me not to move.

There was a faint glow of light on the floor where she stood, but in a
moment she moved out of it. Then I felt her brush against the back of my
head. My ear was near the ground. A tiny warm hand touched my ear lobe;
clung to it. A tiny voice sounded in my ear.

"Please do not move your head. You might kill me!"

There was a pause. I held myself rigid. Then the tiny voice came again.

"I am Glora, a friend. I have the drug! I will help you!"




CHAPTER III


It seemed that Alan was stirring. I felt the tiny hand leave my ear. I
thought that I could hear faint little footfalls as the girl scampered
away, fearful that a sudden movement by Alan would crush her. I turned
cautiously after a moment and saw Alan's eyes upon me. He too had seen,
with a blurred returning consciousness, the dwindling figures of Babs
and Polter. I followed his gaze. The while slab with the golden quartz
under the microscope seemed empty. The several men in this huge circular
dome-room were dispersing to their affairs; three of them sat whispering
by what I now saw was a pile of gold ingots stacked crosswise. But the
fellow at the microscope held his place, his eyes glued to its aperture
as he watched the vanishing figures of Polter and Babs on the
rock-fragment.

Alan was trying to convey something to me. He could only gaze and jerk
his head. I saw behind his head the figures of the tiny girl on the
floor behind him. She wanted evidently to approach his head, but didn't
dare. When for an instant he was quiet, she ran forward, but at once
scampered back.

From the group by the ingots, one of the men rose and came toward us.
Alan held still, watching. And the girl, Glora, seized the opportunity
to come nearer. We both heard her tiny voice:

"Do not move! Close your eyes! Make him think you are still
unconscious."

Then she was gone, like a mouse hiding in the shadows near us.

Amazement swept Alan's face; he twisted, mouthed at his gag. But he saw
my eager nod and took his cue from me.

I closed my eyes and lay stiff, breathing slowly. Footsteps approached.
A man bent over Alan and me.

"Are you no conscious yet?" It was the voice of a foreigner, with a
queer, indescribable intonation. A foot prodded us. "Wake up!"

Then the footsteps retreated, and when I dared to look, the man was
rejoining his fellows. It was a strange looking trio. They were
heavy-set men in leather jackets and short, wide knee-length trousers.
One wore tight, high boots, and the others a sort of white buckskin,
with ankle straps. All were bare-headed--round, bullet heads of
close-clipped black hair.

I suddenly had another startling realization. These men were not of
normal size as I had assumed! They were eight or ten feet tall at the
very least! And they and the pile of ingots, instead of being close to
me, were more distant than I had thought.

Alan was trying to signal me. The tiny girl was again at his ear,
whispering to him. And then she came to me.

"I have a knife. See?" She backed away. I caught the pinpoint gleam of
what might have been a knife in her hand. "I will get a little larger. I
am too small to cut your ropes. You lie still, even after I have cut
them."

I nodded. The movement frightened her so that she leaped backward; but
she came again, smiling. The three men were talking earnestly by the
ingots. No one else was near us.

Glora's tiny voice was louder, so that we both could hear it at once.

"When I free you, do not move or they may see that you are loose. I get
larger now--a little larger--and return."

She darted away and vanished. Alan and I lay listening to the voices of
the three men. Two were talking in a strange tongue. One called to the
man at the microscope, and he responded. The third man said suddenly:

"Say, talk English. You know damn well I can't understand that lingo."

"We say, McGuire, the two prisoners soon wake up."

"What we oughta do is kill 'em. Polter's a fool."

"The doctor say, wait for him return. Not long, what you call three,
four hours."

"And have the Quebec police up here lookin' for 'em? An' that damn girl
he stole off the Terrace. What did he call her, Barbara Kent?"

"These two who are drugged, their bodies can be thrown in a gully down
behind St. Anne. That what the doctor plan to do, I think. Then the
police find them--days maybe from now--and their smashed airship with
them."

Gruesome suggestion!

The man at the microscope called, "They are almost gone I can hardly see
them any more." He left the platform and joined the others. And I saw
that he was much smaller than they--about my own size possibly.

There seemed six men here altogether. Four now, by the ingots, and two
others far across the room where I saw the dark entrance of the
corridor-tunnel which led to Polter's castle.

Again I felt a warning hand touch my face, and saw the figure of Glora
standing by my head. She was larger now--about a foot tall. She moved
past my eyes; stood by my mouth; bent down over my gag. I felt the
cautious slide of a tiny knife-blade inserted under the fabric of the
gag. She hacked, tugged at it, and in a moment ripped it through.

She stood panting from the effort. My heart was pounding with fear that
she would be seen; but the man had turned the central light off when he
left the microscope, and it was far darker here now than before.

I moistened my dry mouth. My tongue was thick, but I could talk.

"Thank you, Glora."

"Quiet!"

I felt her hacking at the ropes around my wrists. And then at my ankles.
It took her a long time, but at last I was free! I rubbed my arms and
legs; felt the returning circulation in them.

And presently Alan was free. "George, what--" he began.

"Wait," I whispered. "Easy! Let her tell us what to do."

We were unarmed. Two, against these six, three of whom were giants.

Glora whispered, "Do not move! I have the drugs. But I can not give them
to you when I am still so small. I have not enough. I will hide--there."
Her little arm gestured to where, near us, half a dozen boxes were
piled. "When I am large as you, I come back. Be ready, quickly to act. I
may be seen. I give you then the drug."

"But wait," Alan whispered. "Tell us--"

"The drug to make you large. Large enough to fight these men. I had
planned to do that myself, until I saw you held captive. That girl of
your world the doctor just now steal, she is friend of yours?"

"Yes! But--" A thousand questions were springing in my mind, but this
was no time to ask them. I amended, "Go on! Hurry! Give us the drug when
you can."

The little figure moved away from us and disappeared. Alan and I lay as
we had before. But now we could whisper. We tried to anticipate what
would happen; tried to plan, but that was futile. The thing was too
strange, too astoundingly fantastic.

How long Glora was gone I don't know. I think, not over three or four
minutes. She came from her hiding place, crouching this time, and joined
us. She was, probably, of normal Earth size--a small, frail-looking girl
something over five feet tall. We saw now that she was quite young,
still in her teens. We lay staring at her, amazed at her beauty. Her
small oval face was pale, with the flush of pink upon her cheeks--a face
queerly, transcendingly beautiful. It was wholly human, yet somehow
unearthly, as though unmarked by even the heritage of our Earthly
strifes.

"Now! I am ready." She was fumbling at her robe. "I will give you each
the same."

Her gestures were rapid. She flung a quick glance at the distant men.
Alan and I were tense. We could easily be discovered now, but we had to
chance it. We were sitting erect. Alan murmured:

"But what do we do? What happens? What--"

On the palm of her hand were two pink-white pellets. "Take these--one
for each of you. Quickly!"

Involuntarily we drew back. The thing abruptly was gruesome,
frightening. Horribly frightening.

"Quickly," she urged. "The drug is what you call highly radioactive. And
volatile. Exposed to the air, it is gone very soon. You are afraid? No,
I assure you it is not harmful."

With a muttered curse at his own reluctance, Alan seized the small
pellet. I stopped him.

"Wait!"

The men momentarily were engaged in a low-voiced, earnest discussion. I
dared to hesitate a moment longer.

"Glora, where will you be?"

"Here. Right here. I will hide."

"We want to go after Mr. Polter," I gestured. "Into the little piece of
golden rock. That's where he went with the Earth girl, isn't it?"

"Yes. My world is there--within an atom there in that rock."

"Will you take us?"

"Yes! But later."

Alan whispered vehemently, "Why not now? We could get smaller, now."

But she shook her head. "That is not possible. We would be seen as we
climbed the platform and crossed the white slab."

"No," I protested, "not if we get very small, hiding here first."

She was smiling, but urgently fearful of this delay. "Should we get that
small, then it would be, from here"--she gestured toward the
microscope--"to there, a journey of very many miles. Don't you
understand?"

This thing so strange!

Alan was plucking at me. "Ready, George?"

"Yes."

I put the pellet on my tongue. It tasted slightly sweet, but seemed to
melt quickly and I swallowed it hastily. My heart, was pounding, but
that was apprehension, not the drug. A thrill of heat ran through my
veins as though my blood were on fire.

Alan was clinging to me as we sat together. Glora again had vanished. In
the background of my whirling consciousness the sudden thought hovered
that she had tricked us; done to us something diabolical. But the
thought was swept away in the confused flood of impressions upon me.

I turned dizzily. "You all right, Alan?"

"Yes, I--I guess so."

My ears were roaring, the room seemed whirling, but in a moment that
passed. I felt a sudden growing sense of lightness. A humming was within
me--a soundless tingle. The drug had gone to every tiny microscopic cell
in my body. The myriad pores of my skin seemed thrilling with activity.
I know now that it was the exuding volatile gas of this disintegrating
drug. Like an aura it enveloped me, acted upon my garments.

I learned later much of the principles of this and its companion drug
but I had no thought for such things now. The huge dimly illumined room
under the dome was swaying. Then abruptly it steadied. The strange
sensations within me were lessening, or I forgot them, and I became
aware of externals.

The room was shrinking! As I stared, not with horror now, but with
amazement and a coming triumph, I saw everywhere a slow, steady,
crawling movement. The whole place was dwindling. The platform, the
microscope, were nearer than before, and smaller. The pile of ingots,
and men near there, were shifting toward me.

"George! My God--this is weird!"

I saw Alan's white face as I turned toward him. He was growing at the
same rate as myself evidently, for in all the scene he only was
unchanged.

We could feel the movement. The floor under us was shifting, crawling
slowly. From all directions it contracted as though it was being
squeezed beneath us. In reality our expanding bodies were pushing
outward.

The pile of boxes which had been a few feet away, were thrusting
themselves at me. I moved incautiously and knocked them over. They
seemed small now, perhaps half their former size. Glora was standing
behind them. I was sitting and she was standing, but across the litter
our faces were level.

"Stand up!" she murmured. "You all right now. I hide!"

I struggled to my feet, drawing Alan up with me. Now! The time for
action was upon us! We had already been discovered. The men were
shouting, clambering to their feet. Alan and I stood swaying. The
dome-room had contracted to half its former size. Near us was a little
platform, chair and microscope. Small figures of men were rushing at us.

I shouted, "Alan! Watch yourself!"

We were unarmed. These men might have automatic weapons. But evidently
they did not. Only knives were in their hands. The whole place was
ringing with shouts. And then a shrill siren alarm from outside started
clanging.

The first of the men--a few moments before he had seemed a giant--flung
himself upon me. His head was lower than my shoulders. I met him with a
blow of my fist in his face. He toppled backward; but from one side
another figure came at me. A knife-blade bit into the flesh of my thigh.

The pain seemed to fire my brain. A madness descended upon me. It was
the madness of abnormality. I saw Alan with two dwarfed figures clinging
to him. But he threw them off, and they turned and ran.

The man at my thigh stabbed again, but I caught his wrist and, as though
he were a child, whirled him around me and flung him away. He landed
with a crash against the shrunken pile of gold nuggets and lay still.

The place was in a turmoil. Other men were appearing from outside. But
they now stood well away from us. Alan backed against me. His laugh rang
out, half hysterical with the madness upon him as it was upon me.

"God! George, look at them! So small!"

They were now hardly the height of our knees. This was now a small
circular room, under a lowering concave dome. A shot came from the group
of Pygmy figures. I saw the small stab of flame, heard the zing of the
bullet.

We rushed, with the full frenzy of madness upon us--enraged giants. What
actually happened I cannot recount. I recall scattering the little
figures; seizing them; flinging them headlong. A bullet, tiny now, stung
the calf of my leg. Little chairs and tables under my feet were
crashing. Alan was lunging back and forth; stamping; flinging his tiny
adversaries away.

There were twenty or thirty of the figures here now. I feared that they
might produce more up-to-date weapons. But my fears were unfounded: soon
I saw these figures making their escape.

The room was littered with wreckage. I saw that by some miracle of
chance the microscope was still standing, and I had a moment of sanity.

"Alan! Watch out! The microscope--the platform! Don't smash them! And
Glora be careful not to hurt her!"

I suddenly became aware that my head and my shoulders had struck the
dome roof. Why, this was a tiny room! Alan and I found ourselves backed
together, panting in the small confines of a circular cubby with an
arching dome close over us. At our feet the platform with the microscope
over it hardly reached our boot tops. There was a sudden silence, broken
only by our heavy breathing. The tiny forms of humans strewn around us
were all motionless. The others had fled.

Then we heard a small voice. "Here! Take this! Quickly! You are too
large. Quickly!"

Alan took a step. And sudden panic was on us both. Glora was here at our
feet. We did not dare turn; hardly dared to move. To change position
might have crushed her now that she had left her hiding place. My leg
hit the top of the microscope cylinder. It rocked but did not fall.

Where was Glora? In the gloom we could not see her. We were in a panic.

Alan began, "George, I--"

The contracting inner curve of the dome bumped gently against my head.
Our panic and confusion turned into cold fear. The room was closing in
to crush us.

I muttered, "Alan! I'm going out!" I braced myself and heaved against
the side and top curve of the dome. Its metal ribs and heavy
translucent, reinforced glass plates resisted me. There was an instant
when Alan and I were desperately frightened. We were trapped, to be
crushed in here by our own horrible growth. Then the dome yielded under
our smashing blows. The ribs bent; the plates cracked.

We straightened, pushed upward and emerged through the broken dome, with
head and shoulders towering into the outside darkness and the wind and
snow of the blizzard howling around us.




CHAPTER IV


"Glora--that was horrible!"

We stood, again in normal size, with the wrecked dome-laboratory around
us. The dome had a great jagged hole halfway up one of its sides,
through which the snow was falling. The broken bodies strewn around were
gruesome.

Alan repeated, "Horrible, Glora. The power of this drug is diabolical."

Glora had grown large after us and had given us the companion drug. I
need not detail the strange sensations of our dwindling. We were so soon
to experience them again!

We had searched, when still large, all of Polter's grounds. Some of his
men undoubtedly escaped, made off into the blizzard. How many, we never
knew. None of them ever made themselves known again.

We were ready to start into the atom. The fragment of golden quartz
still lay under the microscope on the white square of stone slab. We had
hurried with our last preparations. The room was chilling. We were all
inadequately dressed for such cold.

I left a note scribbled on a square of paper by the microscope. With
daylight Polter's wrecked place would be discovered and the police would
surely come.

_Guard this piece of golden quartz. Take it at once, very carefully, to
the Royal Canadian Scientific Society. Have it watched day and night. We
will return._

I signed it George Randolph. And as I did so, the extra ordinary aspect
of these events swept me anew. Here in Polter's weird place I had been
living in some strange fantastic realm. But this was the Province of
Quebec, in civilized Canada. These were the Quebec authorities I was
addressing.

I flung the thoughts away. "Ready, Glora?"

"Yes."

Then doubts assailed me. None of Polter's men had gotten large enough to
fight us. Evidently he did not trust them with the drug. We could well
believe that, for the thing misused, was diabolical beyond human
conception. A single giant, a criminal, a madman, by the power of giant
size alone, could menace and destroy beyond belief. The drug lost, or
carelessly handled, could get loose. Animals, insects eating it, could
roam the Earth, gigantic monsters. Vegetation nourished with the drug,
might in a day overrun a big city, burying it with jungle growth!

How terrible a thing, if the realm of smallness were suddenly to emerge,
consume this awe inspiring drug! Monsters of the sea, marine organisms,
could expand until even the ocean was too small for them. Microbes of
disease, feeding upon it--

Alan was prodding me. "We're ready, George."

"Okay, let's go."

This was not the largeness we were facing now, but smallness. I thought
of Babs, down there with Polter, beyond the vanishing point in the realm
of infinitely small. They had been gone an hour at least. Every moment
lost now was adding to Babs' danger.

Glora sat with us on the platform. Strange little creature! She was
wholly calm now; methodical with her last directions. There had been no
time for her to tell us anything about herself. Alan had asked her why
she had come here and how she had gotten the drugs. She waved him away.

"On the way down. Plenty of time then."

"How long will it take us?" Alan demanded.

"Not too long if we are careful with managing the trip. About ten
hours."

And now we were ready to start. She told us calmly:

"I will give you each your share of the drugs, but then you take only as
I tell you."

She produced from her robe several small vials a few inches long. They
were tightly stoppered. The feel of them was cool and sleek; they seemed
to be made of some strange, polished metal. Some of them were tinted
black while the others glowed opalescent. She gave each of us one vial
of each kind.

"The light ones are for diminishing," she said. "We take them very
carefully, one small pellet only at first."

Alan was opening one of his, but she checked him.

"Wait! The drug evaporates very quickly. I have more to say. First we
sit here together. Then you follow me to the white slab. We climb upon
the little rock."

She laid her hands on my arms. Her blue eyes regarded us earnestly. Her
manner was naive; childlike. But I could not mistake her intelligence or
the force of character stamped on her face for all its dainty, ethereal
beauty.

"Alan--" She smiled at him, and tossed back a straying lock of her hair
which was annoying her. "You pay attention, Alan. You are very young,
reckless. You listen. We must not be separated. You understand that,
both of you? We will be always in that little piece of rock. But there
will be miles of distance. And to be lost in size--"

What a strange journey upon which we were now starting! Lost in size?

"You understand me? Lost in size. If that happens, we might never find
each other. And if we come upon the Doctor Polter and the girl he holds
captive--if we can overtake them--"

"We must!" I exclaimed. "And we must get started."

She showed us which pellet to select. They were of several sizes, I
found. And as she afterward told us, the larger ones were not only
larger but of an intensified strength. We took the smallest. It was
barely a thousandth part of the strength of the largest. In unison we
placed the pellets on our tongues, and hastily swallowed.

The first sensations were as before. And, familiar now, they caused no
more than a fleeting discomfort. But I think I could never get used to
the outward strangeness!

The room in a moment was expanding. I could feel the platform floor
crawling outward beneath me, so that I had to hitch and change my
position as it pulled. We were seated together, Alan and I on each side
of Glora. My fingers were on her arm. It did not change size, but it
slowly drew away with a space opening between us. Overhead, the dome
roof, the great jagged hole there, was receding, lifting, moving upward
and away.

Glora pulled us to our feet. "We had better start now. The distance
grows very far, so quickly."

We had been sitting within five feet of the stone slab with its four
inch high railing around it. A chair was by the microscope eyepiece. As
we stood swaying I saw that the chair was huge, and its seat level with
my head. The great barrel-cylinder of the microscope slanted sixty feet
upward. The dome roof was a distant spread three hundred feet up in the
dimness. The dome-room was a vast arena now.

Alan and I must have hesitated, confused by the expanding scene--a slow,
steady movement everywhere. Everything was drawing away from us. Even as
we stood together, the creeping platform floor was separating us.

A moment passed. Glora was urging us on vehemently:

"Come! You must not stand there!"

We started walking. The railing around the slab was knee-high. The slab
itself was a broad, square surface. The fragment of golden quartz lay in
its center. It was now a jagged lump nearly a foot in diameter.

The platform seemed to shift as we walked; the railing hardly came
closer as we advanced toward it. Then suddenly I realized that it was
receding. Thirty feet away? No, now it was more than that--a great,
thick rope, waist-high, with a huge spread of white surface behind it.

"Faster!" urged Glora. We ran, and reached the railing. It was higher
than our heads. We ran under it, and cut out upon the white slab--a
level surface, larger now than the whole dome-room had been.

Glora, like a fawn, ran in advance of us, her robe flying in the wind.
She turned to look back.

"Faster! Faster, or it will be too hard a climb!"

Ahead lay a golden mound of rock. It was widening; raising its top
steadily higher. Beyond it and over it was a vast dim distance. We
reached the rock, breathless, winded. It was a jagged mound like a great
fifty-foot butte. We plunged upon it and began climbing.

The ascent was steep; precipitous in places. There were little gullies,
which expanded as we climbed up them. It seemed as if we would never
reach the top, but at last we were there. I was aware that the drug had
ceased its action. The yellow, rocky ground was no longer expanding.

We came to the summit and stood to get back our breath. Alan and I gazed
with awe upon the top of a rocky hill. Little buttes and strewn boulders
lay everywhere. It was all naked rock, ridged and pitted, and everywhere
yellow-tinged.

Overhead was distance. I could not call it a sky. A blur was
there--something almost but not quite distinguishable. Then I thought
that I could make out a more solid blur which might be the lower lens of
the microscope above us. And there were blurred, very distant spots of
light, like huge suns masked by a haze, and I knew that they were the
hooded lights of the laboratory room.

Before us, over the brink of a five hundred-foot drop, a great
glistening plain stretched into the distance. I seemed to see where it
ended in a murky blur. And far higher than our hilltop level a
horizontal streak marked the rope railing of the slab.

"Well," said Alan. "We're here." He gazed behind us, back across the
rocky summit which seemed several hundred feet across to its opposite
brink. He was smiling, but the smile faded. "Now what, Glora? Another
pellet?"

"No. Not yet. There is a place where we go down. It is marked in my
mind."

I had a sudden ominous sense that we three were not alone up here.
Glora led us back from the cliff. As we picked our way among the naked
crags, it seemed behind each of them an enemy might be lurking.

"Glora, do you know if any of Dr. Polter's men might have the drug? I
mean, do they come in and out of here?"

She shook her head. "I think not. He lets no one have the drug. He
trusts not anyone. I stole it. I will tell you later. Much I have to
tell you before we arrive."

Alan made a sudden, sidewise leap, and dashed around a rock. He came
back to us, smiling ruefully.

"Gets on your nerves, all of this. I had the same idea you had, George.
Might be someone around here. But I guess not." He took Glora's hand and
they walked in advance of me. "We haven't thanked you yet, Glora," he
added.

"Not needed. I came for help from your world. I followed the Dr. Polter
when he came outward. He has made my world and my people, his slaves. I
came for help. And because I have helped you, needs no thanks."

"But we do thank you, Glora." Alan turned his flushed, earnest face back
to me. I thought I had never seen him so handsome, with his boyish,
rugged features and shock of tousled brown hair. The grimness of
adventure was upon him, but in his eyes there was something else. It was
not for me to see it. That was for Glora; and I think that even then its
presence and its meaning did not escape her.

We reached a little gully near the center of the hilltop. It was some
twenty feet deep.

Glora paused. "We descend here."

The gully was an unmistakable landmark--open at one end, forty feet
long, with the other end terminating in a blind wall which now loomed
above us.

"A pit is here--a hole. I cannot tell just how large it will look when
we are in this size."

We found it and stood over it--a foot-wide circular hole extending
downward. Alan knelt and shoved his hand and arm into it, but Glora
sprang at him.

"Don't do that!"

"Why not? How deep is it?"

She retorted sharply, "The Doctor Polter is ahead of us. How far away in
size, who knows? Do you want to crush him, and crush that young girl
with him?"

Alan's jaw dropped. "Good Lord!"

We stood with the little pit before us, and another of the pellets
ready.

"Now!" said Glora.

Again we took the drug, a somewhat larger pellet this time. The familiar
sensations began. Everywhere the rocks were creeping with a slow
inexorable movement, the landscape expanding around us. The gully walls
drew back and upward. In a moment they were cliff walls and we were in a
broad valley.

We had been standing close together. We had not moved, except to shift
our feet as the expanding ground drew them apart. I became aware that
Alan and Glora were a distance from me. Glora called:

"Come, George! We're going down--quickly now."

We ran to the pit. It had expanded to a great round hole some six feet
wide and equally as deep. Glora let herself down, peered anxiously
beneath her, and dropped. Alan and I followed. We jammed the pit; but as
we stood there, the walls were receding and lifting.

I had remarked Glora's downward glance, and shuddered. Suppose, in some
slightly smaller size, Babs had been among these rocks!

The pit widened steadily. The movement was far swifter now. We stood
presently in a great circular valley. It seemed fully a mile in
diameter, with huge encircling walls like a crater rim towering
thousands of feet into the air. We ran along the base of one expanding
wall, following Glora.

I noticed now that overhead the turgid murk had turned into the blue of
distance. A sky. It was faintly sky-blue, and seemed hazy, almost as
though clouds were forming. It had been cold when we started. The
exertion had kept us fairly comfortable; But now I realized that it was
far warmer. This was different air, more humid, and I thought the smell
of moist earth was in it. Rocks and boulders were strewn here on the
floor of this giant valley, and I saw occasional pools of water. There
had been rain recently!

The realization came with a shock of surprise. This was a new world! A
faint, luminous twilight was around us. And then I noticed that the
light was not altogether coming from overhead. It seemed inherent to the
rocks themselves. They glowed, very faintly luminous, as though
phosphorescent.

We were now well embarked upon this strange journey. We seldom spoke.
Glora was intent upon guiding us. She was trying to make the best
possible speed. I realized that it was a case of judgment, as well as
physical haste. We had dropped into that six-foot pit. Had we waited a
few moments longer, the depth would have been a hundred feet, two
hundred, a thousand! It would have involved hours of arduous descent--if
we had lingered until we were a trifle smaller!

We took other pellets. We traveled perhaps an hour more. There were many
instances of Glora's skill. We squeezed into a gully and waited until it
widened; we leapt over expanding caverns; we slid down a smooth
yellowish slide of rocks, and saw it behind and over us, rising to
become a great spreading ramp extending upward into the blue of the sky.
Now, up there, little sailing white clouds were visible. And down where
we stood it was deep twilight, queerly silvery with the dim light from
the luminous rocks, as though some hidden moon were shining.

Strange, new world! I suddenly envisaged the full strangeness of it.
Around me were spreading miles of barren, naked landscape. I gazed off
to where, across the rugged plateau we were traversing, there was a
range of hills. Behind and above them were mountains; serrated tiers;
higher and more distant. An infinite spread of landscape! And, as we
dwindled, still other vast reaches opened before us. I gazed overhead.
Was it--compared to my stature now--a thousand miles, perhaps even a
million miles up to where we had been two or three hours ago? I thought
so.

Then suddenly I caught the other viewpoint. This was all only an inch of
golden quartz--if one were large enough to see it that way!

Alan had been trying to memorize the main topographical features of our
route. It was not as difficult as it seemed at first. We were always far
larger than normal in comparison to our environment, and the main
distinguishing characteristics of the landscape were obvious--the blind
gully, with the round pit, for instance, or the ramp slide.

We had been traveling some three or four hours when Glora suggested a
rest. We were at the edge of a broad canyon. The wall towered several
hundred feet above us; but a few moments before, we had jumped down it
with a single leap!

The last pellet we had taken had ceased its action. We sat down to rest.
It was a wild, mountainous scene around us, deep with luminous gloom. We
could barely see across the canyon to its distant cliff wall. The wall
beside us had been smooth, but now it was broken and ridged. There were
ravines in it, and dark holes resembling cave-mouths. One was near us.
Alan gazed at it apprehensively.

"I say, Glora, I don't like sitting here."

I had been telling her all we knew of Polter. She listened quietly,
seldom interrupting me. Then she said:

"I understand. I tell you now about Polter as I have seen him."

She talked for five or ten minutes. I listened, amazed, awed by what she
said.

But Alan's insistence interrupted her. "Come on, let's get out of here.
That tunnel-mouth, or cave, or whatever it is--"

"But we go in there," she protested. "A little tunnel. That is our way
to travel. We are not far from my city now."

Perhaps Alan felt what once was called a hunch, a premonition, the
presage of evil which I think comes strangely to us more often than we
realize. Whatever it was, we had no time to act upon it. The
tunnel-mouth which had caused Alan's apprehension was about a hundred
feet away. It was a ten-foot, yawning hole in the cliff. Perhaps Alan
sensed a movement in there. As I turned to look at it a great, hairy
human arm came out of the opening! Then a shoulder! A head!

The giant figure of a man came squeezing through the hole on his hands
and knees! He gathered himself, and as he stood erect, I saw that he was
growing in size! Already he was twenty feet tall compared to us--a
thick-set fellow, dressed in leather garments, his legs and arms heavily
matted with black hair. He stood swaying, gazing around him. I stared up
at his round bullet head, his villainous face.

He saw us! Stupid amazement struck him, then comprehension.

He let out a roar and came at us!




CHAPTER V


Glora shouted, "Into the tunnel! This way!" She held her wits and darted
to one side, with Alan and me after her. We ran through a narrow passage
between two fifty-foot boulders which lay close together. Momentarily
the giant was out of sight, but we could hear his heavy tread and
panting breath. We emerged having passed him. He was taller now. He
seemed confused at our sudden scampering activity. He checked his
forward rush, and ran around the twin boulders. But we had squeezed into
a narrow ravine. He could not follow. He threw a rock. To us it was a
boulder. It crashed behind us. To him, we were like scampering insects;
he could not tell which way we were about to dart.

Alan panted, "Glora, does this lead out?"

The little ravine seemed to open fifty feet ahead of us. Alan stopped,
seized a chunk of rock, flung it up. I saw the giant's face above us. He
was kneeling to reach in. The rock hit him on the forehead--a pebble,
but it stung him. His face rose away.

Again we emerged. The tunnel-mouth was near us. We reached it and flung
ourselves into its ten-foot width just as the giant came lunging up. He
was far larger than before. Looking back, I could see only the lower
part of his legs blocked against the outer light.

"Glora! Alan, where are you?"

For a moment I did not see them. It was darker in this tunnel of broken
rocky walls, and jagged arching roof than outside.

Then I heard Alan's voice: "George! Over here!"

They came running to me. For a moment we stood, undecided. My eyes were
becoming accustomed to the gloom. The tunnel was illumined by a dim
phosphorescence from the rocks. I saw Alan fumbling for his vials, but
Glora stopped him.

"No. We are the right size."

We were about a hundred feet back from the opening. The giant's legs
disappeared. But in a moment the round, light hole of the exit was
obscured again. His head and shoulders! He was lying prone. His great
arms came in. He hitched forward. The width of his expanding shoulders
wedged.

I think that he expected to reach us with a single snatch of his
tremendous arms. Or perhaps he was confused, or forgot his growth. He
did not reach us. His shoulders stuck. Then suddenly he was trying to
back out, but could not!

It was only a moment. We stood in the radiant gloom of the tunnel,
confused and frightened. The giant's voice roared, reverberating around
us. Anger. A note of fear. Finally stark terror. He heaved, but the
rocks of the opening held solid. Then there was a crack, a gruesome
rattling, splintering--his shoulder bones breaking. His whole gigantic
body gave a last convulsive lunge, and he emitted a deafening shrill
scream of agony.

I was aware of the tunnel-mouth breaking upward. Falling rocks--an
avalanche, a cataclysm around us. Then light overhead.

The giant's crushed body lay motionless. A pile of boulders, rocks and
loose metallic earth was strewn upon his head and torso, illumined by
the outer light through a jagged rent where the cliff-face had fallen
down.

We were unhurt, crouching back from the avalanche. The giant's mangled
body was still expanding; shoving at the litter of loose rocks. In a
moment it would again be too small for the broken cliff opening.

I found my wits. "Alan, we've got to get out of here. God--don't you see
what's happening?"

But Glora restrained us. She realized that the effect of the drug the
giant had taken was about at its end. The growth presently stopped. That
huge noisome mass of pulp which once had been human shoulders no longer
expanded.

I shoved Glora away. "Don't look!" I was shaking; my head was reeling.
Alan's face, painted by the phosphorescence, was ghastly.

Glora pulled at us. "This way! The tunnel is not too long. We go."

But the giant had drugs, and perhaps weapons. "Wait!" I urged. "You two
wait here. I'll climb over him."

I told them why, and ran. I can only leave to the imagination that brief
exploratory climb. The broken body seemed at least a hundred feet long;
the mangled shoulders and chest filled the great torn hole in the cliff.
I climbed over the litter. Indescribable, horrible scene! A river of
warm blood was flowing down the declivity outward....

I came back to Glora and Alan. Under my arm was a huge cylinder vial. It
was black, the enlarging drug. I set it down. They stared at me in my
bloodstained garments.

"George! You're--"

"His blood, not mine." I tried to smile. "Here's the drug he carried.
Evidently Polter was only sending him out because I found just the one
drug."

"What'll we do with it?" Alan demanded. "Look at the size of it!"

"Destroy it," said Glora. "See, that is not difficult." She tugged at
the huge stopper, and exposed a few of the pellets--to us as large as
apples. "The air will soon spoil it."

We left it in the tunnel. I also had with me a great roll of paper which
had been folded in the giant's belt, with the drug cylinder. We unrolled
it, and hauled its folds to a spread some ten feet long. It was covered
with a scrawled handwriting in pencil, but its giant characters seemed
thick blurred strokes of charcoal. We could not read it; we were too
close. Alan and Glora held it up against the tunnel wall. From a
distance I could make it out. It was a note written in English, signed
"Polter," evidently to one of his men.

It read:

_The two prisoners, kill them at once. That is better. It will be too
dangerous to wait for my return. Put their bodies with their airplane.
Crash it a mile from my gate._

Full directions for our death followed. And Polter said he would return
by dawn or soon after.

That gave me a start. By dawn! We had been traveling four or five hours.
It was already dawn up there now!

"No," Glora explained, "the time in here is different. A different
time-rate. I do not know how much difference. My world speeds faster;
yours is very slow. It is not the dawn up there quite yet."

Again my mind strove to encompass these things--so strange. A faster
time-rate prevailed in here? Then our lives were passing more quickly.
We were living, experiencing things, compressed into a shorter interval.
It was not apparent: there was nothing to which comparison could be
made. I recalled Alan's description of Polter--not thirty years old as
he should have been, but nearer fifty. I could understand that, now. A
day in here was equal to only a few hours on our gigantic world outside.

We walked the length of the tunnel. I suppose it was a quarter of a
mile, to us in this size. It wound through the cliff with a steady
downward slope. And suddenly I realized that we had turned downward
nearly half the diameter of a circle! We had turned over--or at least it
seemed so. But the gravity was the same. I had noticed from the
beginning very little change.

The realization of this tunnel brought a mental confusion. I lost all
sense of direction. The outer world of Earth was under my feet, instead
of overhead. Then we went level. I forgot the confusion: this was
normality here. We turned upward a little. Cross tunnels intersected
ours at intervals. I saw caverns, open, widened tunnels, as though this
mountain were honeycombed.

"Look!" said Glora. "There is the way out. All these passages lead the
same way."

There was a glow of light ahead. I recall that I was at that moment
fumbling at my belt in two small compartments in which I was carrying
the two vials of the drugs which Glora had given me. Alan wore the same
sort of belt. We had found them in the wrecked dome-room. I heard a
click on the ground at my feet. I was about to stoop to see what I had
kicked--only a loose stone, perhaps--but Glora's words distracted me. I
did not stoop. If only I had, how different events might have been!

The glow of light ahead of us widened as we approached, and presently we
stood at the end of the tunnel. A spread of open distance was outside.
We were on a ledge of a steep rocky wall some fifty feet above a wide
level landscape. Vegetation! I saw trees--a forest off to the left. A
range of naked hills lay behind it. A mile away, in front and to the
right, a little town nestled on the shore of shining water. There was
starlight on the water! And over it a vast blue-purple sky was studded
with stars.

I gazed, with that first sudden shock of emotion, into the infinite
depths of interplanetary space! Light years of distance. Gigantic
worlds, blazing suns off there shrunken by distance now to little points
of light. A universe was here!

But this was an inch of golden quartz!

Above my head were stars which, compared to my bodily size now, were
vast worlds ten thousand light-years away! Yet, from the other
viewpoint, I had only descended perhaps an eighth, or a quarter of an
inch, beneath the broken pitted surface of a little fragment of golden
quartz the size of a walnut--into just one of its myriads of golden
atoms!




CHAPTER VI


"My world," Glora was saying. "You like it? See the starlight on the
lake? I have heard that your world looks like this at night, in summer.
Ours is always like this. No day, no night. Just like this--starlight."
Her hand went to Alan's shoulder. "You like it? My world?"

"Yes, Glora. It's very beautiful."

There was a sheen on everything, a soft, glowing sheen of
phosphorescence from the rocks rising to meet the pale wan starlight.
The night air was soft, with a gentle breeze that rippled the distant
lake into a great spread of gold and silver light.

The city was called Orena. I saw at once that we were about normal size
in relation to its houses and people. There were fields beneath our
ledge, with farm implements lying in them; no workers, for this was the
time for sleep. Ribbons of roads wound over the country, pale streamers
in the starlight.

Glora gestured, "The giants are on their island. Everyone sleeps now.
You see the island off there?"

Beyond the city, over the low stone roofs of its flat-topped dwellings,
the silver spread of lake showed a green-clad island some three miles
off shore. The distance made its white stone houses seem small. But as
I gazed, I realized that they were large compared to their environment,
all far larger than those of the little town. The island was perhaps a
mile in length. Between it and the mainland a boat was coming toward us.
It was a dark blob of hull on the shining water, and above it a queerly
shaped circular sail was puffed out, like a balloon parachute, by the
wind.

"The giants live there?" said Alan. "You mean Polter's men?"

"And women. Yes."

"Are there many giants?"

"No."

"How many?" I put in. "How large are they? In relation to us now, I
mean. And to your normal size?"

"You ask so many questions so fast, George. There are two hundred or
more of the giants. And there are more than that many thousands of our
people, here. Slaves, because the giants are four times as large. This
little city, these fields, these hills of stone and metal, all this was
ours to have in peace and happiness until your Polter came."

She gestured. "Everywhere is a great reach of desert and forest. There
are insects, but no wild beasts--nothing to harm us. Nature is kind
here. The weather is always like this. We were happy, until Polter
came."

"And only a few thousand people," Alan said. "No other cities?"

"What lies off in the great distance, we do not know. Our nation is ten
times what is here. We have a few other cities, and some of our people
live in the forests."

She broke off. "That boat is coming for Polter. He is in the city no
doubt of that. The boat will take him and that girl you call Babs, to
the giant's island. His castle is there."

I turned to Alan. "They must have arrived only recently. Before we go
any further we have to decide what size to be. We can't be gigantic
because I'm sure he'd kill Babs if he sees us. We've got to plan!"

If we could get on that boat and go with him to the island--But in what
size? Very small? But then, if we were very small it would take us hours
to get from here to the boat. Glora pointed out where it would
land--just beyond the village where the houses were set in a sparse
fringe. It would be there, apparently, in ten or fifteen minutes. Polter
probably was there now with Babs, waiting for it.

In our present size we could not get there in time. It was two or three
miles at least. But a trifle larger--the size of one of Polter's
giants--we would be able to make it. We would be seen, but in the pale
starlight, keeping away from the city as much as possible, we might only
be mistaken for Polter's people. And when we got closer we would
diminish our size, creep into the boat, get near Babs and Polter and
then plan what to do.

We climbed down from the ledge and stood at the base of the towering
cliff which reared its jagged wall against the stars. A field and a road
were near us. The road seemed of normal size. A man was in the field. He
was apparently about my height. He presently discarded his work, walked
away from us and vanished.

"Hurry, Glora." Alan and I stood beside her while she took pellets from
her vials. We wanted our stature now to be four times what it was. Glora
gave us pellets of both drugs, one of which was slightly more intense
than the other.

"Polter made them this way," she said. "The two taken at once give just
the growth to take us from this normal size to the stature of the
giants."

Alan and I did not touch our own vials. We had used none of our
enlarging drug upon the journey, and the supply she had given us of the
other was almost gone.

As I took these pellets which Glora now gave us, standing there by the
side of that road, I recall that I was struck with the realization that
never once upon this journey had I conceived myself to be other than
normal stature. I am normally about six feet tall. I still felt--there
in that golden atom--the same height. This landscape seemed of normal
size. There were trees nearby--spreading, fantastic-looking growths with
great strings of pods hanging from them. But still--as I looked up to
see one arching over me with its blue-brown leaves and an air-vine
carrying vivid yellow blossoms--whatever the size of the tree, I could
only conceive of myself as a normal man of six-foot stature standing
beneath it. The human ego always supreme! Around each man's
consciousness of himself the entire universe revolves.

We crouched on the ground when this growth now began; it would not do to
be observed changing size. Polter's giants never did that. Years before,
he had made them large--his few hundred men and women. They were, Glora
said, people both of this realm and from our great world
above--dissolute criminal characters who had now set themselves up here
as the nucleus of a ruling race.

In a moment now, we were the size of these giants. Twenty to twenty-five
feet tall, in relation to the environment. But I did not feel so. As I
stood up--still feeling myself in normal stature--I saw around me a
shrunken little landscape. The trees, as though in a Japanese garden,
were about my own height; the road was a smooth, level path; the little
field near us had a toy fence around it. On another road nearby a man
was walking. In height he would barely have reached my knees. He saw us
rise beside the trees. He darted off in alarm, and disappeared.

I have taken longer to tell all this than the actual time which passed.
We could see the boat coming from the island, and it was still a fair
distance off shore. We ran along the road, skirting the edge of the
little town. None of its houses were taller than ourselves. The windows
and doorways were ovals into which we could only have inserted a head or
an arm. Most of them were dark. Little people occasionally stared out,
saw us run past, and ducked back, thankful that we did not stop to
harass them.

"This way," said Glora. She ran like a faun, hardly winded, with Alan
and me heavily panting behind her. "There are trees--thick trees--quite
near where the boat lands. We can get in them and hide and change our
size to smallness. But hurry, for we shall need a great deal of time
when we are small!"

The little spread of town and the shining lake remained always to our
right. In five minutes we were past most of the houses. A patch of
woods, with thick, interlacing treetops about our own height, lay ahead.
It extended a few hundred feet over to the lake shore. The sailboat was
heading in close. There was a broad starlit roadway at the edge of the
lake, and a dock at which the boat was preparing to land.

Would we be in time? I suddenly feared not. To get small now, with
distance lengthening between us and the boat, would be disastrous. And
where was Polter?

Abruptly we saw him. There had been only little people visible to us:
none of our own height. The lake roadway by the dock was brightly
starlit. As we approached the intervening patch of woods it seemed that
a crowd of little people were near the dock. Polter must have been
sitting. But now he rose up. We could not mistake his thick hunched
figure, the lump on his shoulders clear in the starlight with the
gleaming lake as a background. The crowd of little figures were milling
around his knees. In the silence of the night the murmur of their voices
floated over to us.

"There he is!" Alan gasped. We all three checked our running; we were at
the edge of the patch of woods. "By God, there he is! Let's get larger
and rush him! He's only a few hundred feet away!"

But Babs? Where was Babs?

"Alan, get down!" I crouched, pulling Alan and Glora with me. "Don't let
him see us! We can't rush him Alan, 'til we find Babs. He'd see us
coming and kill her."

Of all the strange events that had been flung at us, I think this sudden
crisis now most confused Alan and me.... To get larger, or smaller?
Which? Yet something had to be done at once.

Glora said, "We can get through the woods best in this size. We won't be
seen and will be closer to the landing."

We crouched so that the treetops were always well over us. The patch of
woods was dark. A soil of black loam was under us, a thick soft
underbrush reached our knees, and lacy, flexible leaves and branches
were about shoulder height. We pushed them aside, forcing our way softly
forward. It was not far. The little murmuring voices of the crowd grew
louder.

Presently we were crouching at the other edge of the woods. I softly
shoved the tree branches aside until we could all three get a clear view
of the strange scene now directly before us.

And I saw a toy dock, at which a twenty-foot, bargelike open sailboat
was landing; a narrow starlit roadway, crowded with a milling throng of
people all no more than a foot and a half in height. The crowd milled
almost to where we were crouching, unseen in the shrubbery.

Across the road by the dock, Polter stood with the crowd down around his
knees. In height he seemed the old familiar Polter. Bareheaded, with his
shaggy black hair shot with white. He was dressed in Earth fashion:
narrow black evening trousers and a white shirt and collar with flowing
black tie. I saw at once what Alan had noticed--the change in him. An
abnormality of age. I would have called him now forty, or older. Beyond
even that there was an abnormality. A man old before his time; or
younger than he should have been for the years he had lived. An
indescribable mingling of something of the two worlds, perhaps. It
marked him with a look at once unnatural and sinister.

These were instant impressions. Glora was plucking at me. "On the white
chest of his shirt, something is there."

Polter was coatless, with snowy white shirt and cuffs to his thick
wrists. He was no more than fifty feet from us. On his shirt bosom
something golden in color was hanging like a large bauble, an ornament,
an insignia. It was strapped tightly there with a band about his chest,
a cord, like a necklace chain, up to his thick hunched neck, and other
chains down to his belt.

I stared at it. An ornament, like a cube held flat against his shirt
front--a little golden cube, ornate with tiny bars.

I heard Alan murmuring, "A cage! Why George, it's--"

And then, simultaneously, realization struck me. It was a golden cage
strapped there. And I seemed to see that there was something in it. A
tiny figure? Babs!

"I think he has her there," Glora murmured. "You see the little box with
bars? The girl, Babs, is a prisoner in there." She spoke swiftly,
vehemently. "He will take the boat to the island."

She gripped us. "You think it really best to go? I do what you say. I
had the wish to get to my father with these drugs."

"No!" exclaimed Alan. "We must keep close to Polter!"

We were ready with our pellets. But a sudden activity in the road made
us pause. The crowd of little people were hostile to Polter. A sullen
hostility. They milled about him as he stood there, gazing down at them
sardonically.

And abruptly he shouted at them in English. "You speak my language, some
of you. Then listen!"

The crowd fell silent.

"Listen. This iss your future Queen. Can you see her? She iss small now.
But she has the magic power. Soon she will be large, like me."

The crowd was shouting again. It surged forward, but it lacked a leader,
and those in advance shoved backward in fear.

Polter spoke again. "This girl from my world, you will like her. She iss
kind and very beautiful. When she iss large, you will see how
beautiful."

A small stone suddenly came up from the throng of little people and
struck Polter on the shoulder. Then another. The crowd, emboldened, made
a rush: surged against his legs.

He shouted, "You do that? Why, how dare you? I show you what giants do
when you make dem angry!"

From down by his knees he plucked the small figure of a man. The crowd
scattered with shouts of terror. Polter had the struggling eighteen-inch
figure by the wrist. He whirled it around his head like a ninepin and
flung it over the canopy of the dock far out into the shimmering lake!




CHAPTER VII


The trees around us expanded to towering forest giants. The underbrush
rose up over our heads. We had taken a taste of the diminishing drug.
Glora showed us how to touch it to our tongue several times, to adjust
our size as we became smaller. It took us no more than a minute to
diminish. We could hear the roar of the crowd, and Polter's voice
shouting. We ran forward through the great forest. It was a fair
distance out to the starlit road. We saw it as a wide shining esplanade.
The people now were giants twice our height! Polter, himself towering
with a seeming fifty-foot stature, was standing by the gigantic canopy
of the dock. He had dispersed the crowd. There was an open space on the
esplanade--a run for us of about a hundred feet.

"We've got to chance it," I murmured. "Make a run for it--now."

We darted across. In the confusion, with all eyes centered on Polter, we
escaped discovery. It was dim under the dock canopy. Polter had backed
from the road and was walking to the barge. It lay like the length of an
ocean liner, its sail looming an enormous spread above it. The gunwale
was level with the dock. A dozen or more fifty-foot men were greeting
Polter. They were amidships.

I realize now that in those moments as we scurried aboard like wharf
rats, we took wild chances. We made for the stern which momentarily was
unoccupied. To Polter and his men we were eight or nine inches tall. We
dropped over the gunwale, slid down the thirty or forty-foot incline of
the interior and landed on the bottom of the boat.

There were many places where we could safely hide. A litter of gigantic
rope-strands was around us. We could see the bottom of a crossbench
looming over head, and the great curving sides of the vessel with the
gunwales outlined against the starlight.

The boat left the dock in a moment; the sail bellied out, enormous over
us. Ten feet forward from us the towering figure of a man sat on a bench
with the steering mechanism before him. Further on, the other men were
dispersed, with one or two in the distant bow. Polter reclined on a
cushioned couch amidships. Looking along the dark widely level bottom
of the boat there were only the feet and legs of men visible.

Alan whispered, "Let's get closer."

We were insects soundlessly scuttling unnoticed in the dimness. It was
noisy down here--the clank of the steering mechanism; the swish and
surge of the water against the hull; the voices of the men.

We passed the boots of the seated helmsmen, and found another hiding
place nearer Polter. We could see his giant length plainly. None of the
other men were near him. He was reclining on an elbow, stretched at ease
on a cushion. And at the moment, he was fumbling with the chains that
fastened the little golden cage to his chest. The cage was double its
former size to us now. A shaft of pale light came down, reflected from
the great sail surface overhead. It struck the bars of the cage. We
could see a small figure in there.

Then we heard Polter's voice. "I will let you out, Babs. You come out,
sit on my hand and talk with me. That will be nice? We haf a little
time."

He unfastened the cage and put it on the cushion beside him. He was
still propped up on one elbow.

"I let you out, now. Be careful, Babs."

My heart was almost smothering me. "Alan! We've got to get still closer!
Try something! Get large, shall we?"

Alan whispered tensely, "I don't know! I don't know what to do."

"We can get closer," Glora whispered. "But never larger--not here. They
would discover us too soon."

We crept forward. We reached the edge of the cushion. Its top surface
was a trifle lower than our heads--a billowing, wrinkled mass of fabric.
But I saw that the folds of it were rough enough to afford a footing. I
thought that I could climb it. We stood erect. There was a deep shadow
along here, but it was brighter on the cushion top. We could see over
its edge; an undulating spread of surface with the giant length of
Polter stretched over it. The cage was near us. Polter's great fingers
fumbled with it; a door in the lattice bars flipped open.

"Careful, my Babs!" His voice was a throaty, rumbling roar above us.
"Careful! I do not want you to be hurt."

From the little doorway came the figure of Babs! The starlight glowed on
her blue dress; her black hair was tumbling over her shoulders; her face
was pale but she was unharmed.

I think that I had never loved her so much as at that moment. Nor ever
seen her so beautiful as in miniature, standing at the door of her
golden cage, bravely facing the monstrous misshapen figure of her
captor.

We heard her small voice.

"What do you want me to do?"

"Stand quiet. Now I put my hand for you."

His monstrous hand bristled with a thatch of heavy black hair. He slid
it carefully along the cushion. Babs was barely the length of one of its
finger joints. She climbed upon its palm.

"That iss right, Babs. Now I bring you--hold tight to my finger. Here, I
crook the little one. Fling your arms around it."

With a swoop his hand took her aloft and away. Then we saw her, twenty
feet or so in the air, still on his hand as he held it near his face.

"Now we haf a little talk, Babs. When we get to the island, I put you
back in your cage."

I had a sudden flash of realization. There was something I could do. I
know now my judgment was bad. I recall it struck me that Alan would want
to do it also. And, perhaps, even Glora. But that wouldn't work. My
chances, however desperate, were better alone. Glora and Alan--in our
present size--could doubtless disembark safely. Glora knew the layout
of the island. And she could follow Polter.

Alan and Glora were standing beside me peering over that billowing
cushion spread toward the distant giant palm with Babs standing upon it.
I gripped Alan's shoulder.

"See here, Alan," I whispered vehemently: "What ever happens, we must
follow Polter. Glora knows the way. Some opportunity will come to get
large without being discovered. Then we'll rush Polter!"

Alan's white face turned to me. "Yes, that's what we're planning. But
George, here on this boat--"

"Of course not. Can't do it here. Tell Glora, to be sure to follow
Polter. Whatever happens, you'll think of nothing else: you won't will
you?"

"George, what--"

"We've got to make some opportunity." I was trembling inside, fearful
that Alan would be suspicious of me. Yet I had to make sure that he and
Glora would stay as close to Polter as possible.

"All right," Alan agreed. "Listen to them."

Polter was talking to Babs. But I didn't hear the words I moved a trifle
away. Rash decision! I hardly decided anything. There was only the
vision of Babs before me and my love for her. My desperate need of doing
something; getting to her, seeing her, being with her. I wanted her near
my own size again as though the blessed normality of that would
rationalize and lessen her danger. If only I had been less rash! If only
back there in that tunnel I had stopped to see what it was my foot
kicked against!

I slid away. Alan and Glora did not notice it; they were whispering
together and gazing over the cushion at Babs. In the shadow of the
cushion I moved some ten feet. On the undulating top of the cushion the
little golden cage stood with its lattice door open. It was a few feet
from my face.

I fumbled at my belt for the diminishing vial. I found one pellet left.
Well, that would be enough. I was hurried. Alan might discover me.
Polter might put Babs back in the cage and close its door. We might be
near the island already, and the confusion, the activity of disembarking
would defeat me. A thousand things might happen.

I touched the pellet to my tongue. In a few seconds the drug action had
come and passed. The cushion top loomed well over my head. The side was
a ridged, indescribably unnatural vista of cliff wall. The fabric was
coarse with hairy strands, dented into little ravines and crevices. I
climbed and I came panting to the pillow surface. The golden cage was
six or eight feet away and was now two feet high.

Again I touched the drug to my tongue; held it an instant. The cage drew
away; grew to a normal six-foot height; then larger, until in a moment
it stopped. I stood peering at it, trying to gauge its size in relation
to me. I wanted so intensely now to appear normal in Babs' eyes. The
cage seemed about ten feet high. A little less, possibly. I barely
tasted the pellet, and replaced it carefully in the vial. I could only
hope its efficacy would be preserved.

I had to chance that I wouldn't be seen while crossing this billowy
expanse. I ran. The rope strands of the fabric now had spaces between
their curving surfaces. The cage was a shining golden house, set on this
wide rolling area. Far in the distance there was a blur--Polter's
reclining body.

I reached the cage. It was a room about ten feet square and equally as
high. Walled solid, top and bottom, and on three sides. The front was a
lattice of bars, with a narrow six-foot doorway, standing open now.

I dashed in. The interior was not wholly bare. There was a metal-wrought
couch fastened to the wall, with a railing around it and handles. It
suggested a ship's bunk. There was a railing at convenient height all
around the wall.

I sought a hiding place. I saw just one--under the couch. It was
secluded enough. There was a grillelike lattice extending down from the
seat to the floor. I squeezed under one end, and lay wedged behind the
grille.

How much time passed I don't know. My thoughts were racing. Babs would
be coming.

I heard the distant approaching rumble of Polter's voice. Through the
grille I could see across the floor of the ten foot cage to the front
lattice bars. Outside, there appeared a huge, pink-white, mottled
blob--Polter's hand, a ridged and pitted surface with great, bristling
black stalks of hair.

The figure of Babs came through the cage doorway. Blessed normality! The
same slim little Babs who always stood, since we were both matured, with
her head about level with my shoulders.

The latticed door swung shut with a reverberating metallic clank. Babs
stood tense, clinging to the wall railing. I heard the blurred rumble of
Polter's voice.

"Hold tightly, my little Babs!"

The room lurched; went upward and sidewise with a wild dizzying swoop.
Babs clung to the rail and I was wedged prone under the couch. Then the
movement stopped; there was a jolting, rocking, and outside I heard the
clank of metal. Polter was fastening the chains of the cage to his
chest.

A white glow now came through the bars. It was starlight reflecting from
Polter's shirt bosom. An abyss of distance was outside. I could see
nothing but the white glow.

Momentarily there was very little movement in the room. Only the
rhythmic sway of Polter's breathing and an occasional jolt as he shifted
his position. The floor was tilted at a sharp angle. Babs came toward
the couch, pulling herself along the wall railing.

I called softly, "Babs!"

She stopped. I called again, "Babs! Don't cry out! It's George!
Here--stand still!"

She gave a little cry. "George--where are you? I don't--"

I slid out from my concealment and stood up, holding to the railing.

Blessed normality of size! She cried again, "George! You! How did you
get here?"

She edged along the railing, a step or two down the tilting floor, then
released her hold and flung herself into my waiting arms.

"I think we are landing. Hold on to the railing, George. When the room
moves it goes with a rush."

Babs laughed softly. It must have seemed to her, after being alone in
here, that now our plight was far less desperate. She had told me how
she was captured. A man accosted her on the Terrace, saying he wanted to
speak to her about Alan. Then a weapon threatened her. Amid all those
people she was held up in old-fashioned style, hurried to a taxicar and
whirled away.

She was saying now, "When Polter moves, it is dizzying. You'll see."

"I have already, Babs. Heavens, what a swoop!"

The room was more level now. We carefully drew ourselves to the front
lattice. Polter was standing, and we had the white sheen from his shirt
front. A sheer drop was outside the bars, but looking down I could see
the outlines of his body with the huge spread of the boat's cockpit
underneath us.

A confusion of rumbling voices sounded. Blurred giant shapes were
outside. The room jolted and swayed as the boat landed and Polter
disembarked.

Babs stood clinging to me. We, at least, were normal in this metal
barred room, Babs and I. But outside was the abnormality of largeness. I
think that in relation to us, the men were of over two hundred-foot
stature, and the hunched Polter a trifle less. It seemed as he walked
that we were lurching at least a hundred and fifty feet above ground.

"You had better hide," Babs urged. "He might stop and speak to someone.
If anyone looked in here you would be seen; no chance then, even to get
across the room."

It was true. But for a few moments I lingered. I could distinguish
vegetation on their flat roof-tops, as though flower gardens were laid
there.

We passed a house with its hundred-foot oval windows all aglow with
light. Music floated out--a distant blare of sounds, and the ribald
laughter of giant voices. I had seen no women among these giants of the
island. But now a huge face was at one of the ovals. A dissolute,
painted woman of Earth, staring out at Polter as he passed. It was like
the enormous close-up image on a large motion picture screen. She
shouted ribald jest as he went by.

"George, please go back. Suppose she had seen you?"

We were ascending a hill. A distance ahead a great oblong building
loomed like a giant's palace, which indeed it was. We headed for it,
passed through a vast arching doorway into the greater dimness of an
echoing interior. I scurried back across the lurching room and again
wedged myself under the couch. Babs stood at the lattice ten feet away.
We dared to talk in low tones; the rumbling voices and footsteps outside
would make our tiny voices inaudible to Polter.

I was tense with my plans. I had told them to Babs. With the one
remaining partially used pellet of the diminishing drug we could make
ourselves small enough to walk out through the bars. Then my black vial
of the enlarging drug, as yet unused, would take us up, out to our own
world. We could not use the drugs now. But the chance might come when
Polter would set the cage on the ground, or somewhere so that we might
climb down from it, with a chance to hide and get large before we were
discovered. I would fight our way upward; all I needed was a fair start
in size.

But I lay now with doubts assailing me. This was the first moment I had
had for calm thoughts, though in truth they were far from calm! Were
Alan and Glora following us now? I could only hope so. Once out of this,
Babs and I would have to rejoin them. But how? Panic swept me. I
shouldn't have left them. Or at least I should have told them what I was
trying to do, and given Alan a chance to plan.

The panic grew, the premonition of disaster. From my belt I took the
opalescent vial with its one partially used pellet. I dumped the pellet
out. It was spoiling! The exposure to the air and the moisture of my
tongue, had ruined it! I realized the catastrophe, as I held its
crumbling, deliquescing fragments on my palm it melted into vapor and
was gone!

We couldn't make ourselves smaller! Now we'd have to wait until Polter
opened the cage. But once outside, the enlarging drug would give us our
chance to fight our way upward. My trembling fingers sought the black
vial in my belt. It wasn't there! My mind flung back: in that tunnel,
something had dropped and I had kicked it! Accursed chance! My accursed,
heedless stupidity!

I had lost the black vial! We were helpless! Caged! Marooned here in a
size microscopic!




CHAPTER VIII


I lay concealed and Babs stood at the lattice of our cage room. I was
aware that Polter had entered some vast apartment of this giant palace.
The light outside was brighter; I heard voices--Polter's and another
man's. I could see the distant monster shape of one. He was at first so
far away that all his outline was visible. A seated man in a huge white
room. I thought there were great shelves with enormous bottles. The
spread of table tops passed under our cage as Polter walked by them.
They held a litter of apparatus, and there was the smell of chemicals in
the air. This seemed to be a laboratory.

The man stood up to greet Polter. I had a glimpse of his head and
shoulders. He wore a white linen coat, open, soft collar and black tie.
He seemed an old man, queerly old, with snow-white hair.

I had an instant of whirling impressions. Something was familiar about
his face. It was wrinkled and seamed with lines of age and care. There
were gentle blue eyes.

Then all I could see was the vast spread of his white shirt and coat, a
black splotch of his tie outside our bars as Polter faced him.

Babs gave a low cry. "Why--why--dear God--"

And then I knew! And Polter's words were not needed, though I heard
their rumble.

"I am back again, Kent. Are you still rebellious? You haf still
determined to compound no more of our drugs? You would rather I killed
you? Then see what I haf here. This little cage, someone--"

It was Dr. Kent whom he addressed. He must have been here all these
years!

Babs turned her white face toward me. "George, it's father! He's alive!"

"Quiet, Babs! Don't let him know I'm here. Remember!"

The old man recognized her. "Babs!" It was an agonized cry. The blur of
him was gone as he sank down into his chair.

Polter continued standing, I could envisage his sardonic grin.

From over us came Polter's rumble. "She iss glad to see you, Kent. I haf
her here, safe. You always knew I would nefer be satisfied until I had
my little Babs? Well, now I haf her. Can you hear me?"

A sudden desperate calmness fell on Babs. She called evenly. "Yes, I
hear you. Father, don't anger him. Do what he says. Dr. Polter, will you
let me be with my father? After all these years, let me be with him,
just for a little while. In his size--normal."

"Hah! My Babs iss scheming."

"No, I want to talk to him, after all these years when I thought he was
dead."

"Scheming? You think, my little Babs, that he has the drugs? I am not so
much a fool. He makes them. He can do that. And that last secret
reaction, only he can perform. He iss stubborn. Never would he tell me
that one reaction. But he makes no drugs complete, only when I am here."

"No, Dr. Polter! I want only to be with him."

The old man's broken voice floated up to us. "You won't harm her,
Polter?"

"No. Fear nothing. But you no longer rebel?"

"I'll do what you tell me." The tones carried hopeless resignation,
years of being beaten down, rebelling--but now this last blow vanquished
him. Then he spoke again, with a sudden strange fire.

"Even for the life of my daughter, I will not make your drugs, Polter,
if you mean to harm our Earth."

The golden cage room swooped as Polter sat down. "Hah! Now we bargain.
What do you care what I do to your world? You never will see it again. I
can lie to you. My plans--"

"I _do_ care."

"Well, I will tell you, Kent. I am good-natured now. Why should I not
be with my dear little Babs? I tell you, I am done with the Earth world.
It iss much nicer here. My friends, they haf a good time always. We like
this little atom realm. I am going out once more. I must hide the little
piece of golden quartz so no harm will come to it."

Polter was evidently in a high good humor. His voice fell to an intimate
tone of comradeship; but still I could not mistake the irony in it.

"You listen to me, Kent. There was a time, years ago, when we were good
friends. You liked your young assistant, the hunchback Polter. Iss it
not so? Then why should we quarrel now? I am gifing up the Earth world.
I wanted of it only the little Babs.... You look at me so strange! You
do not speak."

"There is nothing to say," retorted Dr. Kent wearily.

"Then you listen. I haf much gold above in Quebec. You know that. So
very simple to take it out of our atom, grow large with it to what we
call up there the size of a hundred feet. I haf a place, a room,
secluded from prying eyes under a dome roof. I become very tall, holding
a piece of gold. It is large when I am a hundred feet tall. So I haf
collected much gold. They think I own a mine. I haf a smelter and my
gold quartz I make into ingots, refined to the standard purity. So
simple, and I am a rich man.

"But gold does not bring happiness, my friend Kent." He chuckled
ironically at his use of the platitude. "There iss more in life than the
ownership of gold. You ask my plans. I haf Babs, now. I am gifing up the
Earth world. The mysterious man they know as Frank Rascor will vanish. I
will hide our little fragment of quartz. No one up there will even try
to find it. Then I come down here, with Babs, and we will haf so nice a
little government and rule this world. No more of the drugs then will be
needed, Kent. When you die, let the secret die with you."

Again Polter's voice became ingratiating, even more so than before. "We
will be friends, Kent. Our little Babs will lof me; why should she not?
You will tell her--advise her--and we will all three be very happy."

Dr. Kent said abruptly, "Then leave her with me now. That was her
request, a moment ago. If you expect to treat her kindly, then why
not--"

"I do! I do! But not now. I cannot spare her now. I am very busy, but I
must take her with me."

Babs had been silent, clinging to the bars of our cage. She called;
"Why? I ask you to put this cage down."

"Not now, little bird."

"Let me be with my father."

It struck a pang through me. Babs was scheming but not the way Polter
thought. She wanted the cage put on the floor, herself out, and a chance
for me to escape. I had not yet told her of my miserable stupidity in
losing the vial.

Polter was repeating, "No, little bird. Presently; not now. I will take
you with me on my last trip out. I want to talk with you in normal size
when I haf time."

Our room swooped as he stood up. "You think over what I haf said, Kent.
You get ready now to make the fresh drugs I will need to bring down all
my men from the outer world. They will all be glad to come, or, if
not--well, we can easily kill those who refuse. You make the drugs. I
need plenty. Will you?"

"Yes."

"That iss good. I come back soon and gif you the catalyst for that last
reaction. Will you be ready?"

"Yes."

The blur outside our bars swung with a dizzying whirl as Polter turned
and left the room, locking its door after him with a reverberating
clank.

       *       *       *       *       *

Left alone in his laboratory, Dr. Kent began his preparations for
making a fresh supply of the drugs. This room, with two smaller ones
adjoining, was at once his workshop and his prison. He stood at his
shelves, selecting the basic chemicals. He could not complete the final
compounds. The catalyst which was necessary for the final reaction would
be brought to him by Polter.

How long he worked there with his thoughts in a whirl at seeing Babs, he
did not know. His movements were automatic; he had done all this so many
times before. His mind was confused, and he was trembling from head to
foot--an old, queerly, unnaturally old man now--unnerved. His fingers
could hardly hold the test tubes.

His thoughts were flying. Babs was here, come down from the world above.
It was disaster--the thing he had feared all these years.

He suddenly heard a voice.

"Father!"

And again: "Father!" A tiny voice, down by his shoe tops. Two small
figures were there on the floor beside him. They were both panting,
winded by running. They were enlarging.

It was Alan and Glora, who had followed Polter from the boat, then
diminished again and had come running through the tiny crack under the
metal door of the laboratory.

They grew to a foot in size, down by Dr. Kent's legs. He was too
unnerved to stand; he sat in a chair while Alan swiftly told him what
had happened. Babs was in the golden cage. Dr. Kent knew that; but none
of them knew what had happened to me.

"We must make you small, Father. We have the drugs, here with us."

"Yes! How much have you? Show me. Oh, my boy, that you are here--and
Babs--"

"Don't you worry. We'll get away from him."

Glora and Alan had almost reached Dr. Kent's size before their excited
fingers could get out the vials. They took some of the diminishing drug
to check their growth. Alan handed his father a black vial.

"Yes, lad--"

"No! Wait, that's the wrong drug. This other--"

Dr. Kent had opened the vial. His trembling hand spilled some of the
pellets, but none of them noticed it.

"Father, this one." Alan held an opalescent vial. "Take this one."

Glora said abruptly, "Listen! Is that someone coming?"

They thought they heard approaching footsteps. A moment passed but no
one came into the room.

"Hurry," urged Glora. "That was nothing. We're waiting too long."

"My boy--Alan, after all these years--"

As they were about to take the diminishing drug a very queer sound came
from across the room. A scuttling, scratching, and the drone of wings.

"God, Father--look!"

Over by the wall, a giant fly was running across the floor. The fly had
eaten some of the sweetish powder.

The enlarging drug was loose!

A few drops of water lay mingled with the drug on the floor. And from
the water nameless hideous things were rising!




CHAPTER IX


To Alan the first moments that followed the escape of the drug were the
most horrible of his life. The discovery struck old Dr. Kent, Glora and
Alan into a numb, blank confusion. They stood transfixed, staring with
cold terror at the fly which was scurrying along the floor close to the
wall. It was already as large as Alan's hand. It ran into the corner,
hit the wall in its confused alarm, and turned back. Its wings were
droning with an audible hum. It reared itself on its hairy legs, lifted
and sailed across the room.

As though drawn by a magnet, Alan turned to watch it. It landed on the
wall. Alan was aware of Dr. Kent rushing with trembling steps to a shelf
where bottles stood. Glora was stricken into immobility, the blood
draining from her face.

The fly flew again. It passed directly over Alan. Its body, with a
membrane sac of eggs, was now as large as his head; its widespread
transparent wings were beating with a reverberating drone.

Alan flung a bottle which was on the table beside him. It missed the
fly, crashed against the ceiling, came down with splintering glass and
spilling liquid. Fumes spread chokingly over the room.

The fly landed again on the floor. Larger now! Expanding with a horribly
rapid growth. Glora flung something--a little wooden rack with a few
empty test tubes in it. The rack struck the monstrous fly, but did not
hurt it. The fly stood with hairy legs braced under its bulging body.
Its multiple eyes were staring at the humans. And with its size must
have come a sense of power, for it seemed to Alan that the monstrous
insect was abnormally alert as it stood measuring its adversaries,
gathering itself to attack them.

Only a few seconds had passed. Confused thoughts swept Alan. This fly
with its growth would soon fill this room. Burst it; burst upward
through a wrecked palace; soar out, and by the power of its size alone
devastate this world.

He heard himself shouting, "Father, get back! It's too large! I've _got_
to kill it!"

Could he wrestle with it and hope to win? Alan edged around the center
table. He was bathed in cold sweat. This thing was horrifying! The fly
was already half the length of his own body. In a moment it might be
twice that! He was aware of Glora pulling at him, and his father rushing
past him with a bottle of liquid, shouting:

"Alan! Run! You and the girl, get out of here! Into the other room--"

Then Alan saw the things on the floor! His foot crushed one with a
slippery squash! Nameless, hideous, noisome things grown monstrous,
risen from their lurking invisibility in the drops of water! Sodden,
gray-black and green-slimed monsters of the deep; palpitating masses of
pulp! One lay rocking, already as large as a football with streamers of
ooze hanging from it, and squirting a black inky fluid. Others were rods
of red jelly-pulp, already as large as lead pencils, quivering,
twitching. Disease germs, these ghastly things, enlarging from the
invisibility of a drop of water!

The fly landed with a thud on the center table. The fumes of the
shattered bottle of chemicals were choking Alan. He flung himself toward
the monster fly, but Glora held him.

"No! Escape to the other room!"

Dr. Kent was stamping the things upon the floor; pouring acids upon
them. Some eluded him. The air in the room was unbreathable....

Alan and Glora reached the bedroom. The laboratory was a hideous chaos.
They were aware of its outer door opening, disclosing the figure of
Polter who, undoubtedly, had been attracted by the noise. He shouted a
startled oath. Alan heard it above the beating wings of the monstrous
fly. Things lurched at the opened door; Polter banged it upon them and
rushed away, shouting the alarm through the palace.

Dr. Kent was stammering, "Not the enlarging drug, Glora, child, the
other! Hurry!"

Alan helped Glora with the opalescent vial. Things were lurching toward
this room, from the laboratory. Alan, with averted face, choked by the
incoming fumes, slammed the door upon the gruesome turmoil.

They took the diminishing drug. The bedroom expanded. The hideous sounds
from the laboratory, and the whole palace now ringing with a wild alarm,
soon faded into blessed remoteness of distance....

"I think this is the way, Alan. Off there--a doorway from my bedroom.
Polter always kept it locked, but it leads into a corridor. We must get
out of here. A crack under the door--is that it, off there?" Dr. Kent
pointed into the gloomy blur of distance. "We're horribly small--it's so
far to run--and I've lost my sense of direction."

The drug had ceased its action. The wooden floor of the room had
expanded to a spread of cellular surface, ridged with broken, tubelike
tunnels; pits and jagged cave-mouths. A knothole yawned like a crater a
hundred feet away.

"We are too small," Glora protested hurriedly. "The door is where you
say, Dr. Kent, but miles away."

With the other drug, the room contracted. The floor surface shrank and
smoothed a little. The door was distinguishable--a square panel several
hundred feet in width and towering into the upper haze. The black line
of the crack was visible along its bottom.

They ran to it. The top of the crack was ten feet above their heads.
They ran under, across the wide intervening darkness toward a glow of
light. Then they came from under the door into a corridor--and shrank
against a cliff wall as with a rush of wind and pounding tread the
blurred shapes of a man's huge feet and legs rushed past. The upper air
was filled with rumbling shouts.

"We must chance it!" exclaimed Dr. Kent. "It's too far in this size. We
must get larger--and if they see us, we'll fight our way out!"

In the turmoil of the doomed palace no one noticed them. They cast aside
all restraint. It was too dangerous to wait. The excessive dose they
took of the drug made the corridor shrink with dizzying speed. They
rushed along its length. Alan hurled a little man aside who was in their
path. They were already larger than Polter's people.

They squeezed out of a shrinking doorway. The dwindling island was a
turmoil. Little figures were pouring from the palace. At the edge of the
water. Alan, Glora and Dr. Kent stood for an instant looking behind
them. The palace was rocking. Its roof heaved upward and then smashed
and fell aside with the clatter of tumbling masonry. The monstrous fly,
its hideous face mashed and oozing, reared itself up and, with broken
torn wings, tried to soar away. But it could not. It slipped back. The
drone and buzz of its fright sounded over the chaos of noise. Other
things came lurching and twisting upward, slithering out....

The expanding body of the fly was pushing the palace walls outward. In a
moment it collapsed and the fly emerged.

To Alan and his companions the scene was all shrinking into a miniature
chaos of horror at their shoe tops. A diminuendo of screams mingled down
there. Overhead were the stars, shining peacefully remote. Nearby lay a
rapidly narrowing channel of shining water. A tiny city was across it.
Lights were moving. The panic had spread from the island to Orena.
Beyond the tiny city, was a range of mountains, a cliff, gleaming in the
starlight, and tunnel-mouths.

Suddenly against the stars off there, Alan saw the enlarging figure of
Polter, his hunched shape unmistakable. He was facing the other way. He
lunged and scrambled into a yawning black hole in the mountains. Polter
was escaping! None of these people except himself had the drugs. He was
escaping with the golden cage, out of this doomed atomic world to the
Earth above.

Glora murmured, "There is our way out. Your way. And that is Polter
going. I do not think he saw us. So much is growing gigantic here."

Dr. Kent muttered, "We will wait a moment--wade across--or leap over,
and follow him out. Babs is with him--dear God I hope so! This is a
doomed realm!"

Alan held Glora close. And suddenly he was laughing--a madness, half
hysterical. "Why, this, all this--why look, Glora, it's funny! This
little world all excited, an ant-hill, outraged! Look! There's our giant
sailboat!"

Down near their feet the inch-long sailboat stood at its dock. Tiny
human figures were rushing for it; others, floundering in the water,
were trying to climb upon it. Dr. Kent had stepped a foot or two from
the shore, and tiny, lashing white rollers rocked the boat, almost
engulfing it.

Alan's laugh rang out. "God! It's funny, isn't it? All those little
creatures so excited!"

"Steady, lad!" Dr. Kent touched him. "Don't let yourself laugh! A moment
now, then we'll wade across. Polter won't have much start on us. We
mustn't get too close to him in size, but try and attack him unawares.
We've got to get Babs away from him."

The narrowing passage rose hardly to their knees. They stepped ashore,
well to one side of the toy city. Their growth had almost stopped. But
suddenly Alan realized that Glora was diminishing! She had taken the
other drug.

"Glora! What are you doing?"

"I must go back, Alan. This is my world, doomed perhaps, but I cannot
forsake it now. I must give the enlarging drug to my father. And others
who can rise and fight these monsters."

"Glora!"

Dr. Kent said hurriedly, "She's right, Alan. There is a chance they can
save their city. For her to leave them would be dastardly."

She cried, "You go on up, Alan. You have enough of the drugs. I am going
back!"

"No," he protested. "You can't! If you do, I'm coming with you!"

She clung to him. He felt her body diminishing within his encircling
arms. His love for her swept him--this girl who had cajoled Polter, or
tricked him and stolen several of the vials from him, heavens knows how,
and followed him up to the other world. This girl whom Alan had come to
love, was leaving him, perhaps forever.

As he stood there, with the miniature landscape at his feet in the wan
starlight--the panic-stricken tiny city, the island with its monsters
rising to overwhelm this tiny world--it seemed to Alan that if he let
her go it was the end for him of all life's promised happiness.

"Alan, lad, come." His father was pulling him along. So horrible a
choice! Alan thought that I was back on that island. But Babs, a
prisoner in the golden cage, was with Polter, plunging upward in size.
And his father was beside him, pleading.

"Alan--come--I can't get out alone, or save Babs. And Polter, with the
power of this drug, can conquer and enslave our Earth as he has enslaved
Orena--just one little city of one tiny golden atom! Believe me, lad,
your duty lies above."

Glora's head was now down at Alan's waist. He stooped and kissed her
white forehead; his fingers, just for an instant, smoothed her glossy
hair.

"Good-bye, Glora."

She plunged away, and her tread as she dwindled mashed the forest behind
the city. Alan and his father ran for the cliff. They were too large to
squeeze into the little hole. But in a moment they made themselves
smaller. They climbed as they dwindled; checked the drug action and
rushed into the tunnel-mouth.

Alan stopped just for an instant to gaze out over the starlit scene. It
was almost the same viewpoint from which he had his first sight of
Glora's world only an hour or two before. The distant island beyond the
city showed plainly with the shining water around it. The vegetation
there was growing! And there were dark, horribly formless blobs lurching
outward and rising with monstrous bulk against the background of the
stars!

"Alan! Come, lad!"

With a prayer for Glora trembling on his lips, Alan plunged into the dim
phosphorescent gloom of the tunnel.




CHAPTER X


To Babs and me the ride in the golden cage strapped to Polter's chest as
he made his escape outward into largeness was an experience awesome and
frightening almost beyond description. We heard the alarm in the palace
on the island. Polter rushed to Dr. Kent's laboratory door, looked in,
and in a moment banged it shut. Babs and I saw very little. We knew only
that something terrible had happened; we could see only a blur with
formless things in the void beneath our bars; and there were the
choking fumes of chemicals surging at us.

Polter rushed through the castle corridor. We heard rumbling distant
shouts.

"The drug is loose! The drug is loose! Monsters! Death for everyone!"

The room swayed with horrible dizzying lurches as Polter ran. We clung
to the lattice bars, our legs and arms entwined. There were moments when
Polter leaped, or suddenly stooped, and our reeling senses all but
faded.

"Babs! Don't let go! Don't lose consciousness!"

If she should be limp, here in this lurching room, her body to be flung
back and forth across its confines--that would be death in a moment. I
didn't think I could hold her, but I managed to get an arm about her
waist.

"Babs, are you all right?"

"I'm--all right, George. I can stand it. We're--he is enlarging."

"Yes."

I saw water far beneath us, lashed into a turmoil of foam with Polter's
wading steps. There was a brief swaying vista of a toy city; starlight
overhead; a lurching swaying miniature of landscape as Polter ran for
the towering cliffs. Then he climbed and scrambled into the
tunnel-mouth. Had he turned at that instant doubtless he would have seen
the rising distant figures of Glora, Alan and Dr. Kent. But evidently he
didn't see them. Nor did we.

Polter spoke only very occasionally to Babs. "Hold tightly!" It was a
rumbling voice from above us. He made no move to touch the cage, except
that a few times the great blur of his hand came up to adjust its angle.

The lurching and jolting was less violent in the tunnel. Polter's frenzy
to escape was subsiding into calmness. He traversed the tunnel with a
methodical stride. We were aware of him climbing over the noisome
litter of the dead giant's body which blocked the tunnel's further end.
We heard his astonished exclamations. But evidently he did not suspect
what had happened, thinking only that the stupid messenger had
miscalculated his growth and had been crushed.

We emerged into a less dim area. Polter did not stop at the fallen
giant. Nothing mattered now to him, quite evidently, save his own exit
with Babs from this atomic realm. His movements seemed calm, yet
hurried.

We realized now how different an outward journey was from the trip
coming in. This was all only an inch of golden quartz! The stages upward
were frequently only a matter of growth in size; the distances in this
vast desert realm of golden rock always were shrinking. Polter many
times stood almost motionless until the closing, dwindling walls made
him scramble upward into the greater space above.

It may have been an hour, or less. Babs and I, from our smaller
viewpoint, with the landscape so frequently blurred by distance and
Polter's movements, seldom recognized where we were. But I realized
going out was far easier in every way than coming in. Easier to
determine the route, since usually the diminishing caverns and gullies
made the upward step obvious.... We knew when Polter scrambled up the
incline ramp.

It seemed impossible for us to plan anything. Would Polter make the
entire trip without a stop? It seemed so. We had no drugs, and our cage
was barred beyond possibility of our getting out. But even if we had had
the drugs, or had our door been open, there was no escape. An abyss of
distance was always yawning beyond our lattice--the sheer precipice of
Polter's body from his chest to the ground.

"Babs, we must make him stop. It he sits down to rest you might get him
to take you out. I must reach his drugs."

"Yes. I'll try it, George."

Polter was momentarily standing motionless as though gazing around him,
judging what to do next. His size seemed stationary. Beyond our bars we
could see the distant circular walls as though this were some giant
crater-pit in which Polter was standing. Then I thought I recognized
it--the round, nearly vertical pit into which Alan had plunged his hand
and arm. Above us then was a gully, blind at one end. And above that,
the outer surface, the summit of the fragment of golden quartz.

"Babs, I know where we are! If he takes you out, keep his attention.
I'll try and get one of his black vials. Make him hold you near the
ground. If I see you there, in position where you can jump, I'll startle
him. Babs it's desperately dangerous but I can't think of anything else.
Jump. Get away from him. I'll keep his attention on me. Then I'll join
you if I can--with the drug."

Polter was moving. We had no time to say more.

"I'll try it, George." For just an instant she clung to me with her soft
arms about my neck. Our love was sweeping us in this desperate moment,
and it seemed that above us was a remote Earth world holding the promise
of all our dreams. Or were we cross-starred, doomed like the realm of
the atom? Was this swift embrace now marking the end of everything for
us?

Babs called, "Dr. Polter?"

We could feel his movements stopping.

"Yes? You are all right, Babs?"

She laughed--a ripple of silvery laughter--but there was tragic fear in
her eyes as she gazed at me. "Yes, Dr. Polter, but breathless. Almost
dead, but not quite. What happened? I want to come out and talk to you."

"Not now, little bird."

"But I want to." To me it was a miracle that she could call so lightly
and hold that note of lugubrious laughter in her voice. "I'm hungry.
Didn't you think of that? And frightened. Take me out."

He was sitting down! "You remind me that I am tired, Babs. And hungry,
also. I haf a little food. You shall come out for just a short time."

"Thank you. Take me carefully."

Our tilted cage was near the ground as he seated himself. But it was
still too far for me to jump.

I murmured, "Babs it's not close enough to the ground."

"Wait, George, I'll fix that. You hide! If he looks in he'll see you."

I scrambled back to my hiding place. Polter's huge fingers were fumbling
at our bars. The little door sprang open.

"Come, Babs."

He held the cupped bowl of his hand to the doorway. "Come out."

"No!" she called. "It is too far down!"

"Come. That iss foolish."

"No! I'm afraid. Put the cage on the ground."

"Babs!" His finger and thumb came reaching in to seize her, but she
avoided them.

"Dr. Polter! Don't! You'll crush me!"

"Then come out on my hand."

He seemed annoyed. I had scrambled back to the doorway; I knew he
couldn't see me so long as the cage remained strapped to his shirt
front.

I whispered, "I can make it, Babs!"

Polter was apparently on one elbow now, half turned to one side. From
our cage, the sloping gleaming white surface of his stiff glossy shirt
bosom went down a steep incline. His belt was down there, and the
outward bulging curve of his lap--a spreading surface where I could land
like a scuttling insect, unobserved, if only Babs could hold his
attention.

I whispered vehemently, "Try it! Go out! Leave me--keep talking to him!"

She called instantly, "All right, then. Bring your hand! Closer!
Carefully! It seems so high up here!"

She swung herself into his palm, and flung her arms about the great
pillar of his crooked finger. The bowl of his hand moved slowly away. I
heard her faint voice, and his overhead rumble.

I chanced it! I didn't know his exact position or which way he was
looking.

Again I heard Bab's voice. "Careful, Dr. Polter. Don't let me fall!"

"Yes, little bird."

I let myself down from the tilted doorway, hung by my hand and dropped.
I struck the ramp-like yielding surface of his shirt bosom. I slid,
tumbling, scrambling, and landed softly in the huge folds of his trouser
fabric. I was unhurt. The width of his belt, high as my body, was near
me. I shrank against it. I found I could cling to its upper edge.

My hold came just in time. He shifted and sat up. I was lifted with a
swoop of movement. When it steadied I saw above me the top of his knee.
His left leg was crooked, the foot drawn close to him. Babs was perched
up there on the knee summit. His right leg was outstretched. I was at
the right side of his belt. I could dart off along that curving expanse
of his leg and leap to the ground. If he would hold this position! One
of the pouches of his belt was near me. The vial in it was black. The
enlarging drug! I moved toward it.

But Babs was too high to jump from that summit of his crooked knee! I
think she saw me at his belt. I heard her voice.

"I cannot eat up here. It is too high. Oh, please be careful how you
move! I am so dizzy, so frightened! You move with such great jerks!"

He had what seemed a huge surface of bread and meat. He was breaking off
crumbs to put before her. I reached the pouch of his belt. The vial was
as long as my body. I tugged to try and lift it out.

All the giant contours of Polter's body shifted as he cautiously moved.
I clung. I saw that Babs was being held gently between his thumb and
forefinger. He lowered her to the ground, and she stood beside the bread
and the meat he had placed there.

And she had the courage to laugh! "Why this--this is an enormous
sandwich! You will have to break it."

He was leaning over her, half turned on his side. The vial came free. I
shoved it; but I could not control its weight. I pushed desperately. It
slid over the round brink of his right hip, and fell behind him. I heard
the tinkling thud of it down on the rocks.

There was no alarm. I could not chance leaping from his hip. I scurried
along the convex top of his outstretched leg, and beyond his knee I
jumped.

I landed safely. I could see the black vial back across the broken rock
surface, with the bulge of Polter's hip above it. I ran back and reached
the vial, tugged at its huge stopper. The cork began to yield under my
panting, desperate efforts. In a moment I would have a pellet of the
enlarging drug; make away with it and startle Polter so that Babs might
dart off and escape.

The huge stopper of the vial was larger than my head. It came suddenly
out. I flung it away, plunged in my hand, and seized an enormous round
pellet.

Then abruptly the alarm came, and I had not caused it! Polter ripped out
a startled, rumbling curse and sat upright. Under the curve of his leg
I saw Babs had been momentarily neglected. She was running.

Across the boulder-strewn plain, two tiny men had appeared. Polter had
seen them.

They were the enlarging figures of Dr. Kent and Alan!




CHAPTER XI


The astounded Polter was taken wholly by surprise. He had no idea that
anyone was following him. He thought he was alone with tiny Babs in this
rock-strewn metal desert. What he saw as he scrambled to his feet were
four insect-size humans, two of them at a distance, and two within reach
of him, and all of them scampering in different directions. The ground
was littered with crags and boulders; it was ridged and pitted,
pock-marked, with tiny crater-holes and caves. The four scuttling
figures almost instantly had disappeared from his sight.

I did not see where Babs went. I turned from the black vial of Polter's
enlarging drug, and with the huge pellet under my arm I ran leaping over
the rough ground and flung myself into a gully. I lay prone, flattened
against a rock. In the murky distance of a pseudo-sky overhead, the
monstrous head and shoulders of Polter were visible. I could see down to
just below his waist. The empty cage with its door flapping open hung
against his shirt-front. He had stooped to try and recover Babs. And
instinctively his hands went to his belt to seize his enlarging drug.

They were fumbling there now. He hauled out an opalescent vial of the
diminishing element. But his black vial was gone. His annoyance turned
into fear as he searched for it in the other compartments of his belt. I
had thought that he had more than one black vial, but now it seemed not.
His huge face was swept with the panic of terror. He glanced wildly
around him.

Through the open end of my gully I saw in the distance, miles away, the
enlarging figure of Alan rising up. Then it ducked in back of a distant
rising peak. Polter undoubtedly saw it. He was fumbling with his
opalescent vial. In his confused panic he made the mistake of taking the
diminishing drug and instantly seemed to regret it. His curse rumbled
above me. His glance went down to the rocks at his feet, and there he
saw his black vial lying with its stopper out. His body already was
beginning to dwindle. He stooped, seized the vial, and took the
enlarging drug. The shock of it mode him stagger; momentarily he
disappeared from my line of vision but I could hear his panting breath
and the unsteady pound of his footsteps.

I still held that huge round ball of the drug. I seized a loose stone
and frantically knocked off a chunk-heaven knows how much. I shoved it
into my mouth, chewed and hastily swallowed it. And with the lurching,
swaying, shrinking gully closing in upon me, I ran to get out of its
distant end.

I was heading toward where Alan and his father were hiding. I came from
the gully into the open, just as the walls closed behind me. The whole
scene was a dizzying, blurred sway of contracting movement. I saw that I
was in a circular valley now some five miles in diameter, with its
jagged enclosing walls rising sheerly perpendicular out of sight in the
haze overhead.

Polter had staggered backward. I saw him a mile or so away. His back at
that instant was turned to me. He was now no more than three or four
times my own height. He scrambled against the valley cliff wall as
though trying to find a foothold to climb up it. He went a little way,
but fell back.

Near me, Alan and old Dr. Kent suddenly appeared. I was larger than
they. Alan gasped with surprise.

"You, George! You got Babs--"

"Yes--Babs is around somewhere! Stay down here! Don't lose her in size!
Stay small! Search and--"

"But, George--"

"I'll tackle Polter. I've taken--God, I don't know how much I've taken
of the drug!"

They were shrinking down by my boot tops. Alan shouted suddenly,
"There's Babs! Thank God, she's all right."

She was so small that I couldn't see her, or even hear her, though she
must have been calling to them. Alan again screamed up at me with his
little voice:

"She's here, George! You--go on and get Polter! I can't overtake
you--haven't enough of the drug!" His tiny voice was fading away. "Go
and get him, George! This time--get him--"

I swung with a staggering step around to face the open valley. It had by
now shrunk to nearly half a mile in width. Its smooth walls rose some
two or three thousand feet to an upper circular horizon with murky
distance overhead. Polter stood across from me. He had tried to climb
out but could not. He saw me and came lurching. We were a quarter of a
mile from each other. I ran forward through a shifting scene of
shrinking rock walls and crawling, contracting ground. Quarter of a
mile? It seemed hardly more than a score of running strides before
Polter loomed close ahead of me. He was still nearly twice my size. I
stooped, seized a loose boulder, and flung it. I missed his face, but,
as his hand went up carrying a bare knife, by fortunate chance, the
stone struck his wrist. The knife dropped to the rocks. He stooped to
recover it, but I was upon him. As I felt his huge arms go about me,
half lifting me, my foot struck the knife. But in an instant it was
swept down into smallness beneath us as we expanded above it.

Both of us now were unarmed in this combat of size. I was an immature
youth in Polter's first grip upon me. I heard his panting words, grimly
triumphant:

"This--George Randolph, I haf been--waiting for so many years! The
hunchback--takes his revenge--now--"

He lifted me. His great arms were unbelievably powerful, but I could
feel them dwindling. I was enlarging faster. Just a few moments--if I
could last a few moments.... My feet were off the ground, my chest
pressed close against the little cage between us. He had a hand shoving
back my head; his fingers sought my throat. I wound my legs around him,
and then he tried to throw me down and fall upon me. But he had twisted
and my back was against the cliff. The rocks were shoving at us,
insistently pushing with almost a living movement. Polter staggered with
me. His grip on my throat tightened, shutting off my breath. My senses
whirled. His grim sardonic face over me became blurred. I tore futilely
at my throat to break his choking grip. All the world was a roaring
chaos to my fading senses. Then in the blur I saw horror sweep his
expression. His fingers involuntarily loosened. I got a breath of
blessed air, gasping, and my sight cleared.

Walls were closing around us! We were in a pit barely ten feet wide,
with the top a few feet above Polter's head. The nearer wall shoved us
again. Our bodies almost filled the shrinking pit! Polter lurched and
cast me off. I half fell, striking my shoulder against the opposite
wall, and I saw Polter leap at the dwindling brink and scramble out.

I was nearly wedged. As I rose, the top of the pit only reached my
waist. Polter had fallen on the upper ground, and was on hands and
knees. Instead of standing up, he lurched at me trying to shove me back.
But I was out; I clutched at him. We were almost of a size now. We
rolled on the ground, locked together; rolled to the brink of the pit
and over it, as it shrank to a little round hole unnoticed beneath our
threshing bodies!

       *       *       *       *       *

At the side of the circular valley Alan and Dr. Kent crouched with the
smaller figure of Babs between them. They saw Polter and me as two
swaying gigantic forms locked in a death struggle, towering against the
sky. Tremendous expanded bodies! They saw us come to grips; saw the
great hunched Polter bend me backward, choking me.

Our bodies lurched. Our huge legs with a single step brought us to the
center of the valley. It was a shrinking valley to Alan, Babs and Dr.
Kent, for they too, were enlarging. But the fighting giant figures were
growing faster. In only a moment their shoulders were up there in the
sky, pressing against the narrowing cliff walls.

Alan gasped, "But George will be crushed! Look at him!"

Horror swept them as they crouched, watching. The enormous pillars of
Polter's legs towered straight up from near at hand. Alan was aware of
himself screaming:

"George, get out! You're too large! Too large for in here!"

As though his microscopic voice could reach me--my head a hundred feet
above him. But he screamed it again. This was all in a few horrible
moments, though it seemed to the three watchers an eternity. Alan was
helpless to aid me; they had taken all of the enlarging drug they had.

Then they saw Polter cast me off. I lurched and struck, with my
shoulders wedged against the cliff directly over where they crouched.
The overhead sky was darkened as Polter scrambled upward.

Alan was still screaming futilely.

Babs huddled with white horrified face, staring. Then I went out after
Polter. My disappearing legs were great dark blurs in the sky. Alan saw
the valley now contracted to a thousand feet of width, with its cliffs
equally as high. Then everything was smaller.... The sky overhead went
dark again from cliff to cliff as a segment of rolling bodies
momentarily spanned the opening.

Presently Alan realized that the valley had narrowed to a pit. He stood
up. "Hurry! Now we can go after them. Up there!"

The opening above was empty. Polter and I were fighting some distance
away....

Dr. Kent was soon large enough to scramble out of the pit. Alan handed
the little Babs up to him and followed. Alan saw that they were now in a
long gully, blind at one end with a five hundred foot perpendicular
cliff. Against the wall, the Titanic form of Polter stood at bay. And I
was confronting him. The summit of the cliff was lower than our waists.
Triumph swept Alan; he saw that I was the larger! As Polter bored into
me my backward step crossed the full width of the gully. Alan shouted:

"Down! Babs--Father!"

They had barely time to flatten themselves in a narrow crevice between
upstanding rocks before my foot crashed down. For an instant the sole of
my foot formed a flat black ceiling as it spanned the rocks. Then it
lifted and was gone with a blurred swoop. They saw the white blur of my
hand come down and snatch a tremendous boulder, raising it with a great
sweep of movement into the sky. They saw me crash it against Polter; but
it only struck his shoulder. He roared with anger. The whole sky was
roaring and rumbling with our shouts and our panting breathing, and the
ground was clattering, pounding with our giant tread. Huge loose
boulders were tumbled in an avalanche everywhere.

Again it seemed to Alan that our lurching, heedlessly surging bodies
must be crushed within these contracting walls. Only our locked,
intertwined legs were visible; our bodies were lost in the sky. Then it
seemed to Alan that I had heaved Polter upward. And followed him. We
disappeared. There was a distant overhead rumble, and the murky sky,
with vague patches of far-distant illumination in it, became empty of
movement....

The walls presently were again closing upon Alan and his companions.
They ran out of the open end of the shrinking little gully and came to a
new upward vista....

       *       *       *       *       *

I found myself a full head and shoulders taller than Polter. And he was
tiring, panting heavily. His face was cut and bleeding from the blows of
my fist. The rock I heaved struck his shoulder. He roared, head down,
and bored into me. He was heavier than I. His weight flung me back. My
foot slid on the loose stones of the gully floor. I did not know that
Babs, Alan and their father were huddled under those stones!

My back struck the opposite wall. Polter's upflung knee caught me in the
stomach, all but knocking the breath out of me. He was desperate,
oblivious to the closing walls. And as he flung his arms with a grip
about my neck, hanging, trying to bear down, I saw in his blazing dark
eyes what seemed the light of suicide. I think that then, with a sudden
frenzied madness he realized that he was beaten, and tried to pull us to
the ground and let the walls crush us.

I summoned all my remaining strength and heaved us forward. I broke his
hold. His body was jammed back against a lowering wall. Its top seemed
almost at our knees. I shoved frantically. He fell backward and I jumped
after him.

We were on a great rocky plateau. But it was shrinking, crawling into
itself. Spots of light were in the murk overhead: there seemed a
distant circular horizon of emptiness around us.

Polter was lying in a heap. But it was trickery, for as I incautiously
bent over him his hand crashed a rock against my head. I reeled, with
all the world turning black, but didn't fall. There was a terrible
instant when my senses were going, but I fought to hold them. Blood from
a wound on my forehead was streaming in my eyes. I was staggering. Then
I realized that I was grimly tossing my head, shaking the blood away;
and little by little my sight came back.

Polter was on his feet, rushing me. His fist came with an upward swing
at my chin, but I ducked.

And suddenly, fighting up there in the open, my mind envisioned how
gigantic we were! This was a great upland plateau, rounded with miles of
distance and shadowy dimly radiant abyss beyond its circular horizon.
And I was a thousand feet or more tall! A Titan, looming here in the
sky!

My fist quite unexpectedly caught Polter's jaw. His simultaneous swing
went wild, as I leapt backward from it. He staggered, and his arms
dropped to his sides. I was crouched forward, guarded, watching him
while I gasped for breath. There was the briefest of instant when an
expression of vague surprise swept his face. But I had not knocked him
out.

It was death overtaking him. His heart was yielding, overtaxed from the
strain; and I think that there, at the last, he realized it. The blood
drained suddenly from his face and lips, leaving them livid. I saw fear,
then a wild horror in his eyes. He stood swaying. Then his knees gave
way and he toppled. He fell from his height in the air where I stood
gazing at him--fell forward on his face, his Titanic length spread all
across the top of this rocky landscape!

For a moment I did not move. My head was reeling, my ears roaring.
Blood streamed into my eyes. I wiped it away with a torn sleeve and
stood panting, gazing at the glowing distance around me.

I was a Titan, standing there. The body of Polter was shrinking at my
feet. The circular abyss of emptiness came nearer as this rocky eminence
contracted.

Suddenly my attention went to the sky overhead. Vague distant lights
were there. Then a broad flat blur seemed spread over me. Light
everywhere was growing. Beyond the nearby brink of the abyss was a white
reflected radiance from beneath. Abruptly I realized there was a level,
flat white plain running far off there in the distance.

Overhead a radiance contracted into a spot of light. A shape in the sky
moved! I heard a faraway rumble--a human voice!

The body of Polter lay at my feet. It was hardly the length of my
forearm. I stood, a Titan.

And then, with a shock of realization, I saw how tiny I was! This was
the broken top of that fragment of golden quartz the size of a walnut! I
was standing there, under the lens of the giant microscope in Polter's
dome-room laboratory, with half a dozen astounded Quebec police
officials peering down at me!




CHAPTER XII


I need not detail the aftermath of our emergence from the atom. Dr. Kent
and Babs followed me out within a few moments. But Alan was not with
them! He had seen Polter fall. His father and Babs were safe. The
sacrifice he had made in leaving Glora was no longer needed.

Down there on the rocky plateau, Dr. Kent suddenly realized that Alan
was dwindling.

"Father, I have to! Don't you understand? Glora's world is menaced. I
can't leave her like this. My duty to you and Babs is ended. I did my
best. You two are safe now."

"Alan! You can't go!"

He was already down at Dr. Kent's waist, Babs' size. He held up his
hand. "Dad, don't try to stop me. Good-bye." His rugged youthful face
was flushed, his voice choked. "You--you've been a mighty good father to
me. Always."

Babs flung her arms about him. "Alan. Don't!"

"But I must." He smiled whimsically as he kissed her. "You wouldn't want
to leave George, would you? Never see him again? I'm not asking you to
do that, am I?"

"But, Alan--"

"You've been a great little pal, Babs. But I have to go."

"Alan! You talk as though you were never coming back!"

"Do I? But of course I'm coming back!" He cast her off. "Babs, listen.
Father's upset. That's natural. You tell him not to worry. I'll be
careful, and do what I can to save that little city. I must find Glora
and--"

Babs was suddenly trembling with eagerness for him. "Yes! Of course you
must, Alan!"

"I'll find her and bring her out here! I'll do it! Don't you worry." He
was dwindling fast. Dr. Kent had collapsed to a rock, staring down with
horror-stricken eyes. Alan called up to Babs:

"Listen! Have George watch the chunk of gold quartz. Have it guarded and
watched day and night. Handle it carefully, Babs!"

"Yes! Yes! How long will you be gone, Alan?"

"How do I know? But I'll come back--don't worry. Maybe in only a day or
two of your time."

"Right! Good-bye, Alan!"

"Good-bye," his tiny voice echoed up.

Babs could see his miniature face smiling up at her. She smiled back and
waved her arm as he vanished into the pebbles at her feet.

       *       *       *       *       *

It has broken Dr. Kent. A month now has passed. He seldom mentions Alan
to Babs and me. But when he does, he tries to smile and say that Alan
soon will return. He has been very ill this last week, though he is
better now. He did not tell us that he was working to compound another
supply of the drugs, but we knew it very well.

And his emotion, the strain of it, made him break. He was in bed a week.
We are living in New York, quite near the Museum of the American Society
for Scientific Research. In a room of the biological department there,
the precious fragment of golden quartz lies guarded. A microscope is
over it, and there is never a moment of the day or night without an
alert, keen-eyed watcher peering down.

But nothing has appeared. Neither friend or foe--nothing. I cannot say
so to Babs, but often I fear that Dr. Kent will suddenly die, and the
secret of his drugs die with him. I hinted that I would make a trip into
the atom if he would let me, but it excited him so greatly I had to
laugh it off with the assurance that of course Alan would soon return
safely to us. Dr. Kent is an old man now, unnaturally old, with, it
seems, the full weight of eighty years pressing upon him. He cannot
stand this emotion. I think he is despairingly summoning strength to
work upon his drugs, fearful that at any moment, he will not be equal to
it. Yet more fearful to disclose the secret and unloose such a diabolic
power.

There are nights when with Dr. Kent asleep, Babs and I slip away and go
to the Museum. We dismiss the guard for a time, and in that private room
we sit by the microscope to watch. The fragment of golden quartz lies on
its clean white slab with a brilliant light upon it.

Mysterious little golden rock! What secrets are there, down beyond the
vanishing point in the realm of the infinitely small? Our human longings
go to Alan and Glora.

But sometimes we are swept by the greater viewpoint. Awed by the
mysteries of nature, we realize how very small and unimportant we are in
the vast scheme of things. We envisage the infinite reaches of
astronomical space overhead. Realms of largeness unfathomable. And at
our feet, everywhere, a myriad entrances into the infinitely small. With
ourselves in between--with our fatuous human consciousness that we are
of some importance to it all!

Truly there are more things in Heaven and Earth than are dreamed of in
our philosophy!




Transcriber's Note:

This etext was first published in _Astounding Stories_ March 1931.
Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S. copyright
on this publication was renewed. Minor spelling and typographical errors
have been corrected without note.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Beyond the Vanishing Point, by 
Raymond King Cummings

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BEYOND THE VANISHING POINT ***

***** This file should be named 22527-8.txt or 22527-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/2/5/2/22527/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
