The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Vortex Blaster, by Edward Elmer Smith

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Vortex Blaster

Author: Edward Elmer Smith

Release Date: September 16, 2007 [EBook #22629]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE VORTEX BLASTER ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, V. L. Simpson and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net





    [Illustration: _The Lensman and the observer helped
    Storm into his heavily padded armor. Their movements
    were automatic--the ointment, the devices--_]


  _INTRODUCING "Storm" Cloud, who, through tragedy, is
    destined to become the most noted figure in the
                      galaxy--THE_


                     VORTEX BLASTER

              (_Complete in this issue!_)

                           by
                   E. E. SMITH, Ph.D.


_Author of "The Skylark," "Skylark Three," "The Skylark
        of Valeron," the Lensman stories, etc._




Safety devices that do not protect.

The "unsinkable" ships that, before the days of Bergenholm and of atomic
and cosmic energy, sank into the waters of the earth.

More particularly, safety devices which, while protecting against one
agent of destruction, attract magnet-like another and worse. Such as the
armored cable within the walls of a wooden house. It protects the
electrical conductors within against accidental external shorts; but,
inadequately grounded as it must of necessity be, it may attract and
upon occasion has attracted the stupendous force of lightning. Then,
fused, volatilized, flaming incandescent throughout the length, breadth,
and height of a dwelling, that dwelling's existence thereafter is to be
measured in minutes.

Specifically, four lightning rods. The lightning rods protecting the
chromium, glass, and plastic home of Neal Cloud. Those rods were
adequately grounded, grounded with copper-silver cables the bigness of a
strong man's arm; for Neal Cloud, atomic physicist, knew his lightning
and he was taking no chances whatever with the safety of his lovely wife
and their three wonderful kids.

He did not know, he did not even suspect, that under certain conditions
of atmospheric potential and of ground-magnetic stress his perfectly
designed lightning-rod system would become a super-powerful magnet for
flying vortices of atomic disintegration.

And now Neal Cloud, atomic physicist, sat at his desk in a strained,
dull apathy. His face was a yellowish-gray white, his tendoned hands
gripped rigidly the arms of his chair. His eyes, hard and lifeless,
stared unseeingly past the small, three-dimensional block portrait of
all that had made life worth living.

For his guardian against lightning had been a vortex-magnet at the
moment when a luckless wight had attempted to abate the nuisance of a
"loose" atomic vortex. That wight died, of course--they almost always
do--and the vortex, instead of being destroyed, was simply broken up
into an indefinite number of widely-scattered new vortices. And one of
these bits of furious, uncontrolled energy, resembling more nearly a
handful of material rived from a sun than anything else with which
ordinary man is familiar, darted toward and crashed downward to earth
through Neal Cloud's new house.

That home did not burn; it simply exploded. Nothing of it, in it, or
around it stood a chance, for in a fractional second of time the place
where it had been was a crater of seething, boiling lava--a crater which
filled the atmosphere to a height of miles with poisonous vapors; which
flooded all circumambient space with lethal radiations.

Cosmically, the whole thing was infinitesimal. Ever since man learned
how to liberate intra-atomic energy, the vortices of disintegration had
been breaking out of control. Such accidents had been happening, were
happening, and would continue indefinitely to happen. More than one
world, perhaps, had been or would be consumed to the last gram by such
loose atomic vortices. What of that? Of what real importance are a few
grains of sand to an ocean beach five thousand miles long, a hundred
miles wide, and ten miles deep?

And even to that individual grain of sand called "Earth"--or, in modern
parlance, "Sol Three," or "Tellus of Sol", or simply "Tellus"--the
affair was of negligible importance. One man had died; but, in dying, he
had added one more page to the thick bulk of negative results already on
file. That Mrs. Cloud and her children had perished was merely
unfortunate. The vortex itself was not yet a real threat to Tellus. It
was a "new" one, and thus it would be a long time before it would become
other than a local menace. And well before that could happen--before
even the oldest of Tellus' loose vortices had eaten away much of her
mass or poisoned much of her atmosphere, her scientists would have
solved the problem. It was unthinkable that Tellus, the point of origin
and the very center of Galactic Civilization, should cease to exist.

       *       *       *       *       *

But to Neal Cloud the accident was the ultimate catastrophe. His
personal universe had crashed in ruins; what was left was not worth
picking up. He and Jo had been married for almost twenty years and the
bonds between them had grown stronger, deeper, truer with every passing
day. And the kids.... It _couldn't_ have happened ... fate COULDN'T do
this to him ... but it had ... it could. Gone ... gone ... GONE....

And to Neal Cloud, atomic physicist, sitting there at his desk in torn,
despairing abstraction, with black maggots of thought gnawing holes in
his brain, the catastrophe was doubly galling because of its cruel
irony. For he was second from the top in the Atomic Research Laboratory;
his life's work had been a search for a means of extinguishment of
exactly such loose vortices as had destroyed his all.

His eyes focussed vaguely upon the portrait. Clear, honest gray eyes ...
lines of character and of humor ... sweetly curved lips, ready to smile
or to kiss....

He wrenched his eyes away and scribbled briefly upon a sheet of paper.
Then, getting up stiffly, he took the portrait and moved woodenly across
the room to a furnace. As though enshrining it he placed the plastic
block upon a refractory between the electrodes and threw a switch. After
the flaming arc had done its work he turned and handed the paper to a
tall man, dressed in plain gray leather, who had been watching him with
quiet, understanding eyes. Significant enough to the initiated of the
importance of this laboratory is the fact that it was headed by an
Unattached Lensman.

"As of now, Phil, if it's QX with you."

The Gray Lensman took the document, glanced at it, and slowly,
meticulously, tore it into sixteen equal pieces.

"Uh, uh, Storm," he denied, gently. "Not a resignation. Leave of
absence, yes--indefinite--but not a resignation."

"Why?" It was scarcely a question; Cloud's voice was level,
uninflected. "I won't be worth the paper I'd waste."

"Now, no," the Lensman conceded, "but the future's another matter. I
haven't said anything so far, because to anyone who knew you and Jo as I
knew you it was abundantly clear that nothing could be said." Two hands
gripped and held. "For the future, though, four words were uttered long
ago, that have never been improved upon. 'This, too, shall pass.'"

"You think so?"

"I don't think so, Storm--I know so. I've been around a long time. You
are too good a man, and the world has too much use for you, for you to
go down permanently out of control. You've got a place in the world, and
you'll be back--" A thought struck the Lensman, and he went on in an
altered tone. "You wouldn't--but of course you wouldn't--you couldn't."

"I don't think so. No, I won't--that never was any kind of a solution to
any problem."

Nor was it. Until that moment, suicide had not entered Cloud's mind, and
he rejected it instantly. His kind of man did not take the easy way out.

After a brief farewell Cloud made his way to an elevator and was whisked
down to the garage. Into his big blue DeKhotinsky Sixteen Special and
away.

Through traffic so heavy that front-, rear-, and side-bumpers almost
touched he drove with his wonted cool skill; even though, consciously,
he did not know that the other cars were there. He slowed, turned,
stopped, "gave her the oof," all in correct response to flashing signals
in all shapes and colors--purely automatically. Consciously, he did not
know where he was going, nor care. If he thought at all, his numbed
brain was simply trying to run away from its own bitter imaging--which,
if he had thought at all, he would have known to be a hopeless task. But
he did not think; he simply acted, dumbly, miserably. His eyes saw,
optically; his body reacted, mechanically; his thinking brain was
completely in abeyance.

Into a one-way skyway he rocketed, along it over the suburbs and into
the transcontinental super-highway. Edging inward, lane after lane, he
reached the "unlimited" way--unlimited, that is, except for being
limited to cars of not less than seven hundred horsepower, in perfect
mechanical condition, driven by registered, tested drivers at speeds not
less than one hundred and twenty-five miles an hour--flashed his
registry number at the control station, and shoved his right foot down
to the floor.

       *       *       *       *       *

Now everyone knows that an ordinary DeKhotinsky Sporter will do a
hundred and forty honestly-measured miles in one honestly measured hour;
but very few ordinary drivers have ever found out how fast one of those
brutal big souped-up Sixteens can wheel. They simply haven't got what it
takes to open one up.

"Storm" Cloud found out that day. He held that two-and-a-half-ton
Juggernaut on the road, wide open, for two solid hours. But it didn't
help. Drive as he would, he could not outrun that which rode with him.
Beside him and within him and behind him. For Jo was there. Jo and the
kids, but mostly Jo. It was Jo's car as much as it was his. "Babe, the
big blue ox," was Jo's pet name for it; because, like Paul Bunyan's
fabulous beast, it was pretty nearly six feet between the eyes.
Everything they had ever had was that way. She was in the seat beside
him. Every dear, every sweet, every luscious, lovely memory of her was
there ... and behind him, just out of eye-corner visibility, were the
three kids. And a whole lifetime of this loomed ahead--a vista of
emptiness more vacuous far than the emptiest reaches of intergalactic
space. Damnation! He couldn't stand much more of--

High over the roadway, far ahead, a brilliant octagon flared red. That
meant "STOP!" in any language. Cloud eased up his accelerator, eased
down his mighty brakes. He pulled up at the control station and a
trimly-uniformed officer made a gesture.

"Sorry, sir," the policeman said, "but you'll have to detour here.
There's a loose atomic vortex beside the road up ahead--

"Oh! It's Dr. Cloud!" Recognition flashed into the guard's eyes. "I
didn't recognize you at first. You can go ahead, of course. It'll be two
or three miles before you'll have to put on your armor; you'll know when
better than anyone can tell you. They didn't tell us they were going to
send for _you_. It's just a little new one, and the dope we got was that
they were going to shove it off into the canyon with pressure."

"They didn't send for me." Cloud tried to smile. "I'm just driving
around--haven't my armor along, even. So I guess I might as well go
back."

He turned the Special around. A loose vortex--new. There might be a
hundred of them, scattered over a radius of two hundred miles. Sisters
of the one that had murdered his family--the hellish spawn of that
accursed Number Eleven vortex that that damnably incompetent bungling
ass had tried to blow up.... Into his mind there leaped a picture,
wire-sharp, of Number Eleven as he had last seen it, and simultaneously
an idea hit him like a blow from a fist.

He thought. _Really_ thought, now; cogently, intensely, clearly. If he
could do it ... could actually blow out the atomic flame of an atomic
vortex ... not exactly revenge, but.... By Klono's brazen bowels, it
would work--it'd _have_ to work--he'd _make_ it work! And grimly,
quietly, but alive in every fiber now, he drove back toward the city
practically as fast as he had come away.

       *       *       *       *       *

If the Lensman was surprised at Cloud's sudden reappearance in the
laboratory he did not show it. Nor did he offer any comment as his
erstwhile first assistant went to various lockers and cupboards,
assembling meters, coils, tubes, armor, and other paraphernalia and
apparatus.

"Guess that's all I'll need, Chief," Cloud remarked, finally. "Here's a
blank check. If some of this stuff shouldn't happen to be in usable
condition when I get done with it, fill it out to suit, will you?"

"No," and the Lensman tore up the check just as he had torn up the
resignation. "If you want the stuff for legitimate purposes, you're on
Patrol business and it is the Patrol's risk. If, on the other hand, you
think that you're going to try to snuff a vortex, the stuff stays here.
That's final, Storm."

"You're right--and wrong, Phil," Cloud stated, not at all sheepishly.
"I'm going to blow out Number One vortex with duodec, yes--but I'm
_really_ going to blow it out, not merely make a stab at it as an excuse
for suicide, as you think."

"How?" The big Lensman's query was skepticism incarnate. "It can't be
done, except by an almost impossibly fortuitous accident. You yourself
have been the most bitterly opposed of us all to these suicidal
attempts."

"I know it--I didn't have the solution myself until a few hours ago--it
hit me all at once. Funny I never thought of it before; it's been right
in sight all the time."

"That's the way with most problems," the Chief admitted. "Plain enough
after you see the key equation. Well, I'm perfectly willing to be
convinced, but I warn you that I'll take a lot of convincing--and
someone else will do the work, not you."

"When I get done you'll see why I'll pretty nearly have to do it myself.
But to convince you, exactly what is the knot?"

"Variability," snapped the older man. "To be effective, the charge of
explosive at the moment of impact must match, within very close limits,
the activity of the vortex itself. Too small a charge scatters it
around, in vortices which, while much smaller than the original, are
still large enough to be self-sustaining. Too large a charge simply
rekindles the original vortex--still larger--in its original crater. And
the activity that must be matched varies so tremendously, in magnitude,
maxima, and minima, and the cycle is so erratic--ranging from seconds to
hours without discoverable rhyme or reason--that all attempts to do so
at any predetermined instant have failed completely. Why, even Kinnison
and Cardynge and the Conference of Scientists couldn't solve it, any
more than they could work out a tractor beam that could be used as a
tow-line on one."

"Not exactly," Cloud demurred. "They found that it could be forecast,
for a few seconds at least--length of time directly proportional to the
length of the cycle in question--by an extension of the calculus of
warped surfaces."

"Humph!" the Lensman snorted. "So what? What good is a ten-second
forecast when it takes a calculating machine an hour to solve the
equations.... Oh!" He broke off, staring.

"Oh," he repeated, slowly, "I forgot that you're a lightning
calculator--a mathematical prodigy from the day you were born--who never
has to use a calculating machine even to compute an orbit.... But there
are other things."

"I'll say there are; plenty of them. I'd thought of the calculator angle
before, of course, but there was a worse thing than variability to
contend with...."

"What?" the Lensman demanded.

"Fear," Cloud replied, crisply. "At the thought of a hand-to-hand battle
with a vortex my brain froze solid. Fear--the sheer, stark, natural
human fear of death, that robs a man of the fine edge of control and
brings on the very death that he is trying so hard to avoid. That's what
had me stopped."

"Right ... you may be right," the Lensman pondered, his fingers drumming
quietly upon his desk. "And you are not afraid of death--now--even
subconsciously. But tell me, Storm, please, that you won't invite it."

"I will not invite it, sir, now that I've got a job to do. But that's as
far as I'll go in promising. I won't make any superhuman effort to avoid
it. I'll take all due precautions, for the sake of the job, but if it
gets me, what the hell? The quicker it does, the better--the sooner I'll
be with Jo."

"You believe that?"

"Implicitly."

"The vortices are as good as gone, then. They haven't got any more
chance than Boskone has of licking the Patrol."

"I'm afraid so," almost glumly. "The only way for it to get me is for me
to make a mistake, and I don't feel any coming on."

"But what's your angle?" the Lensman asked, interest lighting his eyes.
"You can't use the customary attack; your time will be too short."

"Like this," and, taking down a sheet of drafting paper, Cloud sketched
rapidly. "This is the crater, here, with the vortex at the bottom,
there. From the observers' instruments or from a shielded set-up of my
own I get my data on mass, emission, maxima, minima, and so on. Then I
have them make me three duodec bombs--one on the mark of the activity
I'm figuring on shooting at, and one each five percent over and under
that figure--cased in neocarballoy of exactly the computed thickness to
last until it gets to the center of the vortex. Then I take off in a
flying suit, armored and shielded, say about here...."

"If you take off at all, you'll take off in a suit, inside a one-man
flitter," the Lensman interrupted. "Too many instruments for a suit, to
say nothing of bombs, and you'll need more screen than a suit can
deliver. We can adapt a flitter for bomb-throwing easily enough."

"QX; that would be better, of course. In that case, I set my flitter
into a projectile trajectory like this, whose objective is the center of
the vortex, there. See? Ten seconds or so away, at about this point, I
take my instantaneous readings, solve the equations at that particular
warped surface for some certain zero time...."

"But suppose that the cycle won't give you a ten-second solution?"

"Then I'll swing around and try again until a long cycle _does_ show
up."

"QX. It will, sometime."

"Sure. Then, having everything set for zero time, and assuming that the
activity is somewhere near my postulated value...."

"Assume that it isn't--it probably won't be," the Chief grunted.

"I accelerate or decelerate--"

"Solving new equations all the while?"

"Sure--don't interrupt so--until at zero time the activity, extrapolated
to zero time, matches one of my bombs. I cut that bomb loose, shoot
myself off in a sharp curve, and Z-W-E-E-E-T--POWIE! She's out!" With an
expressive, sweeping gesture.

"You hope," the Lensman was frankly dubious. "And there you are, right
in the middle of that explosion, with two duodec bombs outside your
armor--or just inside your flitter."

"Oh, no. I've shot them away several seconds ago, so that they explode
somewhere else, nowhere near me."

"_I_ hope. But do you realize just how busy a man you are going to be
during those ten or twelve seconds?"

"Fully." Cloud's face grew somber. "But I will be in full control. I
won't be afraid of anything that can happen--_anything_. And," he went
on, under his breath, "that's the hell of it."

"QX," the Lensman admitted finally, "you can go. There are a lot of
things you haven't mentioned, but you'll probably be able to work them
out as you go along. I think I'll go out and work with the boys in the
lookout station while you're doing your stuff. When are you figuring on
starting?"

"How long will it take to get the flitter ready?"

"A couple of days. Say we meet you there Saturday morning?"

"Saturday the tenth, at eight o'clock. I'll be there."

       *       *       *       *       *

And again Neal Cloud and Babe, the big blue ox, hit the road. And as he
rolled the physicist mulled over in his mind the assignment to which he
had set himself.

Like fire, only worse, intra-atomic energy was a good servant, but a
terrible master. Man had liberated it before he could really control it.
In fact, control was not yet, and perhaps never would be, perfect. Up to
a certain size and activity, yes. They, the millions upon millions of
self-limiting ones, were the servants. They could be handled, fenced in,
controlled; indeed, if they were not kept under an exciting bombardment
and very carefully fed, they would go out. But at long intervals, for
some one of a dozen reasons--science knew _so_ little, fundamentally, of
the true inwardness of the intra-atomic reactions--one of these small,
tame, self-limiting vortices flared, nova-like, into a large, wild,
self-sustaining one. It ceased being a servant then, and became a
master. Such flare-ups occurred, perhaps, only once or twice in a
century on Earth; the trouble was that they were so utterly, damnably
_permanent_. They never went out. And no data were ever secured: for
every living thing in the vicinity of a flare-up died; every instrument
and every other solid thing within a radius of a hundred feet melted
down into the reeking, boiling slag of its crater.

Fortunately, the rate of growth was slow--as slow, almost, as it was
persistent--otherwise Civilization would scarcely have had a planet
left. And unless something could be done about loose vortices before
too many years, the consequences would be really serious. That was why
his laboratory had been established in the first place.

Nothing much had been accomplished so far. The tractor beam that would
take hold of them had never been designed. Nothing material was of any
use; it melted. Pressors worked, after a fashion: it was by the use of
these beams that they shoved the vortices around, off into the waste
places--unless it proved cheaper to allow the places where they had come
into being to remain waste places. A few, through sheer luck, had been
blown into self-limiting bits by duodec. Duodecaplylatomate, the most
powerful, the most frightfully detonant explosive ever invented upon all
the known planets of the First Galaxy. But duodec had taken an awful
toll of life. Also, since it usually scattered a vortex instead of
extinguishing it, duodec had actually caused far more damage than it had
cured.

No end of fantastic schemes had been proposed, of course; of varying
degrees of fantasy. Some of them sounded almost practical. Some of them
had been tried; some of them were still being tried. Some, such as the
perennially-appearing one of building a huge hemispherical hull in the
ground under and around the vortex, installing an inertialess drive, and
shooting the whole neighborhood out into space, were perhaps feasible
from an engineering standpoint. They were, however, potentially so
capable of making things worse that they would not be tried save as
last-ditch measures. In short, the control of loose vortices was very
much an unsolved problem.

       *       *       *       *       *

Number One vortex, the oldest and worst upon Tellus, had been pushed out
into the Badlands; and there, at eight o'clock on the tenth, Cloud
started to work upon it.

The "lookout station," instead of being some such ramshackle structure
as might have been deduced from the Lensman's casual terminology, was in
fact a fully-equipped observatory. Its staff was not large--eight men
worked in three staggered eight-hour shifts of two men each--but the
instruments! To develop them had required hundreds of man-years of time
and near-miracles of research, not the least of the problems having been
that of developing shielded conductors capable of carrying truly through
five-ply screens of force the converted impulses of the very radiations
against which those screens were most effective. For the observatory,
and the one long approach to it as well, had to be screened heavily;
without such protection no life could exist there.

This problem and many others had been solved, however, and there the
instruments were. Every phase and factor of the vortex's existence and
activity were measured and recorded continuously, throughout every
minute of every day of every year. And all of these records were summed
up, integrated, into the "Sigma" curve. This curve, while only an
incredibly and senselessly tortuous line to the layman's eye, was a
veritable mine of information to the initiate.

Cloud glanced along the Sigma curve of the previous forty-eight hours
and scowled, for one jagged peak, scarcely an hour old, actually punched
through the top line of the chart.

"Bad, huh, Frank?" he grunted.

"Plenty bad, Storm, and getting worse," the observer assented. "I
wouldn't wonder if Carlowitz were right, after all--if she ain't getting
ready to blow her top I'm a Zabriskan fontema's maiden aunt."

"No periodicity--no equation, of course." It was a statement, not a
question. The Lensman ignored as completely as did the observer, if not
as flippantly, the distinct possibility that at any moment the
observatory and all that it contained might be resolved into their
component atoms.

"None whatever," came flatly from Cloud. He did not need to spend hours
at a calculating machine; at one glance he _knew_, without knowing how
he knew, that no equation could be made to fit even the weighted-average
locus of that wildly-shifting Sigma curve. "But most of the cycles cut
this ordinate here--seven fifty-one--so I'll take that for my value.
That means nine point nine oh six kilograms of duodec basic charge, with
one five percent over and one five percent under that for alternates.
Neocarballoy casing, fifty-three millimeters on the basic, others in
proportion. On the wire?"

"It went out as you said it," the observer reported. "They'll have 'em
here in fifteen minutes."

"QX--I'll get dressed, then."

The Lensman and the observer helped him into his cumbersome,
heavily-padded armor. They checked his instruments, making sure that the
protective devices of the suit were functioning at full efficiency. Then
all three went out to the flitter. A tiny speedster, really; a torpedo
bearing the stubby wings and the ludicrous tail-surfaces, the
multifarious driving-, braking-, side-, top-, and under-jets so
characteristic of the tricky, cranky, but ultra-maneuverable breed. But
this one had something that the ordinary speedster or flitter did not
carry; spaced around the needle beak there yawned the open muzzles of a
triplex bomb-thrower.

    [Illustration: _Ten seconds in which to solve the
    equation--to choose, fire, move clear--the flitter
    bucked._]

More checking. The Lensman and the armored Cloud both knew that every
one of the dozens of instruments upon the flitter's special board was
right to the hair; nevertheless each one was compared with the
master-instrument of the observatory.

       *       *       *       *       *

The bombs arrived and were loaded in; and Cloud, with a casually-waved
salute, stepped into the tiny operating compartment. The massive
door--flitters have no airlocks, as the whole midsection is scarcely
bigger than an airlock would have to be--rammed shut upon its fiber
gaskets, the heavy toggles drove home. A cushioned form closed in upon
the pilot, leaving only his arms and lower legs free.

Then, making sure that his two companions had ducked for cover, Cloud
shot his flitter into the air and toward the seething inferno which was
Loose Atomic Vortex Number One. For it was seething, no fooling; and it
was an inferno. The crater was a ragged, jagged hole a full mile from
lip to lip and perhaps a quarter of that in depth. It was not, however,
a perfect cone, for the floor, being largely incandescently molten, was
practically level except for a depression at the center, where the
actual vortex lay. The walls of the pit were steeply, unstably
irregular, varying in pitch and shape with the hardness and
refractoriness of the strata composing them. Now a section would glare
into an unbearably blinding white puffing away in sparkling vapor.
Again, cooled by an inrushing blast of air, it would subside into an
angry scarlet, its surface crawling in a sluggish flow of lava.
Occasionally a part of the wall might even go black, into pock-marked
scoriae or into brilliant planes of obsidian.

For always, somewhere, there was an enormous volume of air pouring into
that crater. It rushed in as ordinary air. It came out, however, in a
ragingly-uprushing pillar, as--as something else. No one knew--or knows
yet, for that matter--exactly what a loose vortex does to the molecules
and atoms of air. In fact, due to the extreme variability already
referred to, it probably does not do the same thing for more than an
instant at a time.

That there is little actual combustion is certain; that is, except for
the forced combination of nitrogen, argon, xenon, and krypton with
oxygen. There is, however, consumption: plenty of consumption. And what
that incredibly intense bombardment impinges up is ... is altered.
Profoundly and obscuredly altered, so that the atmosphere emitted from
the crater is quite definitely no longer air as we know it. It may be
corrosive, it may be poisonous in one or another of a hundred fashions,
it may be merely new and different; but it is no longer the air which we
human beings are used to breathing. And it is this fact, rather than the
destruction of the planet itself, which would end the possibility of
life upon Earth's surface.

       *       *       *       *       *

It is difficult indeed to describe the appearance of a loose atomic
vortex to those who have never seen one; and, fortunately, most people
never have. And practically all of its frightful radiation lies in those
octaves of the spectrum which are invisible to the human eye. Suffice it
to say, then, that it had an average effective surface temperature of
about fifteen thousand degrees absolute--two and one-half times as hot
as the sun of Tellus--and that it was radiating every frequency possible
to that incomprehensible temperature, and let it go at that.

And Neal Cloud, scurrying in his flitter through that murky,
radiation-riddled atmosphere, setting up equations from the readings of
his various meters and gauges and solving those equations almost
instantaneously in his mathematical-prodigy's mind, sat appalled. For
the activity level was, and even in its lowest dips remained, far above
the level he had selected. His skin began to prickle and to burn. His
eyes began to smart and to ache. He knew what those symptoms meant; even
the flitter's powerful screens were not stopping all the radiation; even
his suit-screens and his special goggles were not stopping what leaked
through. But he wouldn't quit yet; the activity might--probably
would--take a nose-dive any instant. If it did, he'd have to be ready.
On the other hand, it might blow up at any instant, too.

There were two schools of mathematical thought upon that point. One held
that the vortex, without any essential change in its physical condition
or nature, would keep on growing bigger. Indefinitely, until, uniting
with the other vortices of the planet, it had converted the entire mass
of the world into energy.

The second school, of which the forementioned Carlowitz was the loudest
voice, taught that at a certain stage of development the internal energy
of the vortex would become so great that generation-radiation
equilibrium could not be maintained. This would, of course, result in an
explosion; the nature and consequences of which this Carlowitz was wont
to dwell upon in ghoulishly mathematical glee. Neither school, however,
could prove its point--or, rather, each school proved its point, by
means of unimpeachable mathematics--and each hated and derided the
other, loudly and heatedly.

And now Cloud, as he studied through his almost opaque defenses that
indescribably ravening fireball, that esuriently rapacious monstrosity
which might very well have come from the deepest pit of the hottest hell
of mythology, felt strongly inclined to agree with Carlowitz. It didn't
seem possible that anything _could_ get any worse than that without
exploding. And such an explosion, he felt sure, would certainly blow
everything for miles around into the smitheriest kind of smithereens.

The activity of the vortex stayed high, 'way too high. The tiny control
room of the flitter grew hotter and hotter. His skin burned and his eyes
ached worse. He touched a communicator stud and spoke.

"Phil? Better get me three more bombs. Like these, except up around...."

"I don't check you. If you do that, it's apt to drop to a minimum and
stay there," the Lensman reminded him. "It's completely unpredictable,
you know."

"It may, at that ... so I'll have to forget the five percent margin and
hit it on the nose or not at all. Order me up two more, then--one at
half of what I've got here, the other double it," and he reeled off the
figures for the charge and the casing of the explosive. "You might break
out a jar of burn-dressing, too. Some fairly hot stuff is leaking
through."

"We'll do that. Come down, fast!"

Cloud landed. He stripped to the skin and the observer smeared his every
square inch of epidermis with the thick, gooey stuff that was not only a
highly efficient screen against radiation, but also a sovereign remedy
for new radiation burns. He exchanged his goggles for a thicker, darker,
heavier pair. The two bombs arrived and were substituted for two of the
original load.

"I thought of something while I was up there," Cloud informed the
observers then. "Twenty kilograms of duodec is nobody's firecracker, but
it may be the least of what's going to go off. Have you got any idea of
what's going to become of the energy inside that vortex when I blow it
out?"

"Can't say that I have." The Lensman frowned in thought. "No data."

"Neither have I. But I'd say that you better go back to the new
station--the one you were going to move to if it kept on getting worse."

"But the instruments...." the Lensman was thinking, not of the
instruments themselves, which were valueless in comparison with life,
but of the records those instruments would make. Those records were
priceless.

"I'll have everything on the tapes in the flitter," Cloud reminded.

"But suppose...."

"That the flitter stops one, too--or doesn't stop it, rather? In that
case, your back station won't be there, either, so it won't make any
difference." How mistaken Cloud was!

"QX," the Chief decided. "We'll leave when you do--just in case."

       *       *       *       *       *

Again in air, Cloud found that the activity, while still high, was not
too high, but that it was fluctuating too rapidly. He could not get even
five seconds of trustworthy prediction, to say nothing of ten. So he
waited, as close as he dared remain to that horrible center of
disintegration.

The flitter hung poised in air, motionless, upon softly hissing
under-jets. Cloud knew to a fraction his height above the ground. He
knew to a fraction his distance from the vortex. He knew with equal
certainty the density of the atmosphere and the exact velocity and
direction of the wind. Hence, since he could also read closely enough
the momentary variations in the cyclonic storms within the crater, he
could compute very easily the course and velocity necessary to land the
bomb in the exact center of the vortex at any given instant of time. The
hard part--the thing that no one had as yet succeeded in doing--was to
predict, for a time far enough ahead to be of any use, a usably close
approximation to the vortex's quantitative activity. For, as has been
said, he had to over-blast, rather than under-, if he could not hit it
"on the nose:" to under-blast would scatter it all over the state.

Therefore Cloud concentrated upon the dials and gauges before him;
concentrated with every fiber of his being and every cell of his brain.

Suddenly, almost imperceptibly, the Sigma curve gave signs of flattening
out. In that instant Cloud's mind pounced. Simultaneous equations: nine
of them, involving nine unknowns. An integration in four dimensions. No
matter--Cloud did not solve them laboriously, one factor at a time.
Without knowing how he had arrived at it, he knew the answer; just as
the Posenian or the Rigellian is able to perceive every separate
component particle of an opaque, three-dimensional solid, but without
being able to explain to anyone how his sense of perception works. It
just _is_, that's all.

Anyway, by virtue of whatever sense or ability it is which makes a
mathematical prodigy what he is, Cloud knew that in exactly eight and
three-tenths seconds from that observed instant the activity of the
vortex would be slightly--but not too far--under the coefficient of his
heaviest bomb. Another flick of his mental trigger and he knew the exact
velocity he would require. His hand swept over the studs, his right foot
tramped down, hard, upon the firing lever; and, even as the quivering
flitter shot forward under eight Tellurian gravities of acceleration, he
knew to the thousandth of a second how long he would have to hold that
acceleration to attain that velocity. While not really long--in
seconds--it was much too long for comfort. It took him much closer to
the vortex than he wanted to be; in fact, it took him right out over the
crater itself.

But he stuck to the calculated course, and at the precisely correct
instant he cut his drive and released his largest bomb. Then, so rapidly
that it was one blur of speed, he again kicked on his eight G's of drive
and started to whirl around as only a speedster or a flitter can whirl.
Practically unconscious from the terrific resultant of the linear and
angular accelerations, he ejected the two smaller bombs. He did not care
particularly where they lit, just so they didn't light in the crater or
near the observatory, and he had already made certain of that. Then,
without waiting even to finish the whirl or to straighten her out in
level flight, Cloud's still-flying hand darted toward the switch whose
closing would energize the Bergenholm and make the flitter inertialess.

Too late. Hell was out for noon, with the little speedster still inert.
Cloud had moved fast, too; trained mind and trained body had been
working at top speed and in perfect coordination. There just simply
hadn't been enough time. If he could have got what he wanted, ten full
seconds, or even nine, he could have made it, but....

       *       *       *       *       *

In spite of what happened, Cloud defended his action, then and
thereafter. Damnitall, he _had_ to take the eight-point-three second
reading! Another tenth of a second and his bomb wouldn't have fitted--he
didn't have the five percent leeway he wanted, remember. And no, he
couldn't wait for another match, either. His screens were leaking like
sieves, and if he had waited for another chance they would have picked
him up fried to a greasy cinder in his own lard!

The bomb sped truly and struck the target in direct central impact,
exactly as scheduled. It penetrated perfectly. The neocarballoy casing
lasted just long enough--that frightful charge of duodec exploded, if
not exactly at the center of the vortex, at least near enough to the
center to do the work. In other words, Cloud's figuring had been
close--very close. But the time had been altogether too short.

The flitter was not even out of the crater when the bomb went off. And
not only the bomb. For Cloud's vague forebodings were materialized, and
more; the staggeringly immense energy of the vortex merged with that of
the detonating duodec to form an utterly incomprehensible whole.

In part the hellish flood of boiling lava in that devil's cauldron was
beaten downward into a bowl by the sheer, stupendous force of the blow;
in part it was hurled abroad in masses, in gouts and streamers. And the
raging wind of the explosion's front seized the fragments and tore and
worried them to bits, hurling them still faster along their paths of
violence. And air, so densely compressed as to be to all intents and
purposes a solid, smote the walls of the crater. Smote them so that they
crumbled, crushed outward through the hard-packed ground, broke up into
jaggedly irregular blocks which hurtled, screamingly, away through the
atmosphere.

Also the concussion wave, or the explosion front, or flying fragments,
or something, struck the two loose bombs, so that they too exploded and
added their contribution to the already stupendous concentration of
force. They were not close enough to the flitter to wreck it of
themselves, but they were close enough so that they didn't do her--or
her pilot--a bit of good.

The first terrific wave buffeted the flyer while Cloud's right hand was
in the air, shooting across the panel to turn on the Berg. The impact
jerked the arm downward and sidewise, both bones of the forearm snapping
as it struck the ledge. The second one, an instant later, broke his left
leg. Then the debris began to arrive.

Chunks of solid or semi-molten rock slammed against the hull, knocking
off wings and control-surfaces. Gobs of viscous slag slapped it
liquidly, freezing into and clogging up jets and orifices. The little
ship was hurled hither and yon, in the grip of forces she could no more
resist than can the floating leaf resist the waters of a cataract. And
Cloud's brain was as addled as an egg by the vicious concussions which
were hitting him from so many different directions and so nearly all at
once. Nevertheless, with his one arm and his one leg and the few cells
of his brain that were still at work, the physicist was still in the
fight.

By sheer force of will and nerve he forced his left hand across the
gyrating key-bank to the Bergenholm switch. He snapped it, and in the
instant of its closing a vast, calm peace descended, blanket-like. For,
fortunately, the Berg still worked; the flitter and all her contents and
appurtenances were inertialess. Nothing material could buffet her or
hurt her now; she would waft effortlessly away from a feather's lightest
possible touch.

Cloud wanted to faint then, but he didn't--quite. Instead, foggily, he
tried to look back at the crater. Nine-tenths of his visiplates were out
of commission, but he finally got a view. Good--it was out. He wasn't
surprised; he had been quite confident that it would be. It wasn't
scattered around, either. It _couldn't_ be, for his only possibility of
smearing the shot was on the upper side, not the lower.

       *       *       *       *       *

His next effort was to locate the secondary observatory, where he had to
land, and in that too he was successful. He had enough intelligence left
to realize that, with practically all of his jets clogged and his wings
and tail shot off, he couldn't land his little vessel inert. Therefore
he would have to land her free.

And by dint of light and extremely unorthodox use of what jets he had
left in usable shape he did land her free, almost within the limits of
the observatory's field; and having landed, he inerted her.

But, as has been intimated, his brain was not working so well; he had
held his ship inertialess quite a few seconds longer than he thought,
and he did not even think of the buffetings she had taken. As a result
of these things, however, her intrinsic velocity did not match, anywhere
near exactly, that of the ground upon which she lay. Thus, when Cloud
cut his Bergenholm, restoring thereby to the flitter the absolute
velocity and inertia she had had before going free, there resulted a
distinctly anti-climactic crash.

There was a last terrific bump as the motionless vessel collided with
the equally motionless ground; and "Storm" Cloud, vortex blaster, went
out like the proverbial light.

Help came, of course; and on the double. The pilot was unconscious and
the flitter's door could not be opened from the outside, but those were
not insuperable obstacles. A plate, already loose, was sheared away; the
pilot was carefully lifted out of his prison and rushed to Base Hospital
in the "meat-can" already in attendance.

And later, in a private office of that hospital, the gray-clad Chief of
the Atomic Research Laboratory sat and waited--but not patiently.

"How is he, Lacy?" he demanded, as the Surgeon-General entered the room.
"He's going to live, isn't he?"

"Oh, yes, Phil--definitely yes," Lacy replied, briskly. "He has a good
skeleton, very good indeed. The burns are superficial and will yield
quite readily to treatment. The deeper, delayed effects of the radiation
to which he was exposed can be neutralized entirely effectively. Thus he
will not need even a Phillips's treatment for the replacement of damaged
parts, except possibly for a few torn muscles and so on."

"But he was smashed up pretty badly, wasn't he? I know that he had a
broken arm and a broken leg, at least."

"Simple fractures only--entirely negligible." Lacy waved aside with an
airy gesture such small ills as broken bones. "He'll be out in a few
weeks."

"How soon can I see him?" the Lensman-physicist asked. "There are some
important things to take up with him, and I've got a personal message
for him that I must give him as soon as possible."

Lacy pursued his lips. Then:

"You may see him now," he decided. "He is conscious, and strong enough.
Not too long, though, Phil--fifteen minutes at most."

"QX, and thanks," and a nurse led the visiting Lensman to Cloud's
bedside.

"Hi, Stupe!" he boomed, cheerfully. "'Stupe' being short for stupendous,
not 'stupid'."

"Hi, Chief. Glad to see somebody. Sit down."

"You're the most-wanted man in the Galaxy," the visitor informed the
invalid, "not excepting even Kimball Kinnison. Look at this spool of
tape, and it's only the first one. I brought it along for you to read at
your leisure. As soon as any planet finds out that we've got a
sure-enough vortex-blower-outer, an expert who can really call his
shots--and the news travels mighty fast--that planet sends in a
double-urgent, Class A-Prime demand for first call upon your services.

"Sirius IV got in first by a whisker, it seems, but Aldebaran II was so
close a second that it was a photo finish, and all the channels have
been jammed ever since. Canopus, Vega, Rigel, Spica. They all want you.
Everybody, from Alsakan to Vandemar and back. We told them right off
that we would not receive personal delegations--we had to almost throw a
couple of pink-haired Chickladorians out bodily to make them believe
that we meant it--and that the age and condition of the vortex
involved, not priority of requisition, would govern, QX?"

"Absolutely," Cloud agreed. "That's the only way it could be, I should
think."

"So forget about this psychic trauma.... No, I don't mean that," the
Lensman corrected himself hastily. "You know what I mean. The will to
live is the most important factor in any man's recovery, and too many
worlds need you too badly to have you quit now. Not?"

"I suppose so," Cloud acquiesced, but somberly. "I'll get out of here in
short order. And I'll keep on pecking away until one of those vortices
finishes what this one started."

"You'll die of old age then, son," the Lensman assured him. "We got full
data--all the information we need. We know exactly what to do to your
screens. Next time nothing will come through except light, and only as
much of that as you feel like admitting. You can wait as close to a
vortex as you please, for as long as you please; until you get exactly
the activity and time-interval that you want. You will be just as
comfortable and just as safe as though you were home in bed."

"Sure of that?"

"Absolutely--or at least, as sure as we can be of anything that hasn't
happened yet. But I see that your guardian angel here is eyeing her
clock somewhat pointedly, so I'd better be doing a flit before they toss
me down a shaft. Clear ether, Storm!"

"Clear ether, Chief!"

And that is how "Storm" Cloud, atomic physicist, became the most
narrowly-specialized specialist in all the annals of science: how he
became "Storm" Cloud, Vortex Blaster--the Galaxy's only vortex blaster.



    [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from
     _Comet_, July 1941. Extensive research did not uncover
     any evidence that the U.S. copyright on this
     publication was renewed.

     Obvious typographic errors and misspellings have been
     corrected.]





End of Project Gutenberg's The Vortex Blaster, by Edward Elmer Smith

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE VORTEX BLASTER ***

***** This file should be named 22629.txt or 22629.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/2/6/2/22629/

Produced by Greg Weeks, V. L. Simpson and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
