The Project Gutenberg EBook of My Friend Bobby, by Alan Edward Nourse

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: My Friend Bobby

Author: Alan Edward Nourse

Release Date: October 3, 2007 [EBook #22881]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MY FRIEND BOBBY ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from _The Counterfeit Man More Science
    Fiction Stories by Alan E. Nourse_ published in 1963. Extensive
    research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S. copyright on
    this publication was renewed. Minor spelling and typographical
    errors have been corrected without note.




 My
 Friend
 Bobby




My name is Jimmy and I am five years old, and my friend Bobby is five
years old too but he says he thinks he's really more than five years old
because he's already grown up and I'm just a little boy. We live out in
the country because that's where mommy and daddy live, and every morning
daddy takes the car out of the barn and rides into the city to work, and
every night he comes back to eat supper and to see mommy and Bobby and
me. One time I asked daddy why we don't live in the city like some
people do and he laughed and said you wouldn't really want to live in
the city would you? After all he said you couldn't have Bobby in the
city, so I guess it's better to live in the country after all.

Anyway daddy says that the city is no place to raise kids these days. I
asked Bobby if I am a kid and he said he guessed so but I don't think he
really knows because Bobby isn't very smart. But Bobby is my friend even
if he doesn't know much and I like him more than anybody else.

Mommy doesn't like Bobby very much and when I am bad she makes Bobby go
outdoors even when it's cold outside. Mommy says I shouldn't play with
Bobby so much because after all Bobby is only a dog but I like Bobby.
Everyone else is so big, and when mommy and daddy are home all I can see
is their legs unless I look way up high, and when I do something bad I'm
scared because they're so big and strong. Bobby is strong too but he
isn't any bigger than I am, and he is always nice to me. He has a long
shaggy brown coat and a long pointed nose, and a nice collar of white
fur and people sometimes say to daddy what a nice collie that is and
daddy says yes isn't he and he takes to the boy so. I don't know what a
collie is but I have fun with Bobby all the time. Sometimes he lets me
ride on his back and we talk to each other and have secrets even though
I don't think he is very smart. I don't know why mommy and daddy don't
understand me when I talk to them the way I talk to Bobby but maybe they
just pretend they can't hear me talk that way.

I am always sorry when daddy goes to work in the morning. Daddy is nice
to me most times and takes me and Bobby for walks. But mommy never takes
me for walks and when we are alone she is busy and she isn't nice to me.
Sometimes she says I am a bad boy and makes me stay in my room even when
I haven't done anything bad and sometimes she thinks things in her head
that she doesn't say to me. I don't know why mommy doesn't like me and
Bobby doesn't know either, but we like it best when mommy lets us go
outdoors to play in the barn or down by the creek. If I get my feet wet
mommy says I am very bad so I stay on the bank and let Bobby go in, but
one day when Bobby went into the water just before we went home for
supper mommy scolded me and told me I was bad for letting Bobby go into
the water and when I told her she hadn't told me not to let Bobby go in
she was angry and I could tell that she didn't like me at all that day.

Almost every day I do something that mommy says is bad even when I try
specially to be good. Sometimes right after daddy goes away in the
morning I know that mommy is angry and is going to spank me sooner or
later that day because she is already thinking how she will spank me,
but she never says so out loud. Sometimes she pretends that she's not
angry and takes me up on her lap and says I'm her nice little boy but
all the time I can hear her thinking that she doesn't really like me
even when she tries and she doesn't even want to touch me if she can
help it. I can hear her wondering why my hair doesn't grow nice like the
Bennet twins that live up the road. I don't see how mommy can be saying
one thing out loud and something else inside her head at the same time
but when I look at her she puts me down and says she's busy and will I
get out from underfoot, and then pretty soon I do something that makes
her angry and she makes me go to my room or she spanks me. Bobby doesn't
like this. Once when she spanked me he growled at mommy, and mommy
chased him outdoors with a broom before she sent me to bed. I cried all
day that day because it was cold outdoors and I wanted to have Bobby
with me.

I wonder why mommy doesn't like me?

       *       *       *       *       *

One day I was a bad boy and let Bobby come into the house before mommy
told me I could. Bobby hadn't done anything bad but mommy hit him on the
back with the broom and hurt him and chased him back outdoors and then
she told me I was a very bad boy. I could tell that she was going to
spank me and I knew she would hurt me because she was so big, and I ran
upstairs and hid in my room. Then mommy stamped her foot hard and said
Jimmy you come down here this minute. I didn't answer and then she said
if I have to come upstairs and get you I'll whip you until you can't sit
down, and I still didn't answer because mommy hurts me when she gets
angry like that. Then I heard her coming up the stairs and into my room
and she opened the closet door and found me. I said please don't hurt me
mommy but she reached down and caught my ear and dragged me out of the
closet. I was so scared I bit her hand and she screamed and let go and
I ran and locked myself in the bathroom because I knew she would hurt me
bad if I didn't. I stayed there all day long and I could hear mommy
running the sweeper downstairs and I couldn't see why she wanted to hurt
me so much just because I let Bobby come in before she told me I could.
But somehow it seemed that mommy was afraid of me even though she was so
big and strong. I don't see why anybody as big as mommy should be afraid
of me but she was.

When daddy came home that night I heard him talking to mommy, and then
he came up to the bathroom and said open the door Jimmy I want to talk
to you. I said I want Bobby first so he went down and called Bobby and
then I opened the door and came out of the bathroom. Daddy reached down
and lifted me high up on his shoulder and took me into my bedroom and
just sat there for a long time patting Bobby's head and I couldn't hear
what he was thinking very well. Finally he said out loud Jimmy you've
got to be good to your mommy and do what she says and not lock yourself
up in rooms any more. I said but mommy was going to hurt me and daddy
said when you're a bad boy your mommy has to punish you so you'll
remember to be good, but she doesn't like to spank you. She only does it
because she loves you.

I knew that wasn't true because mommy likes to punish me but I didn't
dare say that to daddy. Daddy isn't afraid of me the way mommy is and he
is nice to me most times, so I said all right if you say so. Daddy said
fine, will you promise to be nice to mommy from now on? I said yes if
mommy won't hit Bobby any more with the broom. And daddy said well after
all Bobby can be a bad dog just the way you can be a bad boy, can't he?
I knew Bobby was never a bad dog on purpose but I said yes I guessed so.
Then I wanted to ask daddy why mommy was afraid of me but I didn't dare
because I knew daddy liked mommy more than anybody and maybe he would be
angry at me for saying things like that about her.

That night I heard mommy and daddy talking down in the living room and I
sat on the top step so I could hear them. Bobby sat there too, but I
knew he didn't know what they were saying because Bobby isn't very smart
and can't understand word-talk like I can. He can only understand
think-talk, and he doesn't understand that very well. But now even I
couldn't understand what mommy was saying. She was crying and saying Ben
I tell you there's something wrong with the child, he knows what I'm
_thinking_, I can tell it by the way he looks at me. And daddy said
darling, that's ridiculous, how could he possibly know what you're
thinking? Mommy said I don't know but he does! Ever since he was a
little boy he's known--oh, Ben, it's horrible, I can't do anything with
him because he _knows_ what I'm going to do before I do it. Then daddy
said Carol, you're upset about today and you're making things up. The
child is just a little smarter than most kids, there's nothing wrong
with that. And mommy said no, there's more to it than that and I can't
stand it any longer. We've got to take him to a doctor, I don't even
like to look at him. Daddy said you're tired, you're just letting little
things get on your nerves. So maybe the boy does look a little strange,
you know the doctor said it was just that the fontanelles hadn't closed
as soon as they should have and lots of children don't have a good
growth of hair before they're six or seven. After all he said he isn't a
_bad_ looking boy.

Then mommy said that isn't true, he's horrible! I can't bear it, Ben,
_please_ do something, and daddy said what can I do? I talked to the boy
and he was sorry and promised he'd behave himself. And mommy said then
there's that dog--it follows him around wherever he goes, and he's
simply wicked if the dog isn't around, and daddy said isn't it perfectly
normal for a boy to love his dog? Mommy said no, not like this, talking
to him all the time, and the dog acting exactly as if he
understands--there's something wrong with the child, something horribly
wrong.

Then daddy was quiet for a while, and then he said all right, if it will
make you feel any better we can have Doctor Grant take another look at
him. Maybe he can convince you that there's nothing wrong with the boy,
and mommy said please, Ben, anything, I can't stand much more of this.

When I went back to bed and Bobby curled up on the floor, I asked him
what were fontanelles, and Bobby just yawned and said he didn't know but
he thought I was nice, and he would always take care of me, so I didn't
worry any more and went to sleep.

       *       *       *       *       *

I have a panda out in the barn and the panda's name is Bobby too and at
first Bobby the dog was jealous of Bobby the panda until I told him that
the panda was only a make-believe Bobby and he was a real Bobby. Then
Bobby liked the panda, and the three of us played out in the barn all
day. We decided not to tell mommy and daddy about the panda, and kept it
for our own secret. It was a big panda, as big as mommy and daddy, and
sometimes I thought maybe I would make the panda hurt mommy but then I
knew daddy would be sorry so I didn't.

Bobby and I were playing with Bobby the panda the day the doctor came
and mommy called me in and made Bobby stay outside. I didn't like the
doctor because he smelled like a dirty old cigar and he had a big red
nose with three black hairs coming out of it and he wheezed when he bent
down to look at me. Daddy and mommy sat on the couch and the doctor said
let me have a look at you young fellow and I said but I'm not sick and
the doctor said ha ha, of course you aren't, you're a fine looking boy
but just let me listen to your chest for a minute. So he put a cold
thing on my chest and stuck some tubes in his ears and listened, and
then he looked in my eyes with a bright light and looked into my ears,
and then he felt my head all over. He had big hairy hands and I didn't
like him touching me but I knew mommy would be angry if I didn't hold
still so I let him finish. Then he told daddy some big words that I
couldn't understand, but in think-talk he was saying that my head still
hadn't closed up right and I didn't have as much hair as you'd expect
but otherwise I seemed to be all right. He said I was a good stout
looking boy but if they wanted a specialist in to look at me he would
arrange it. Daddy asked if that would cost very much and the doctor said
yes it probably would and he didn't see any real need for it because my
bones were just a little slow in developing, and mommy said have you
seen other children like that? The doctor said no but if the boy seems
to be normal and intelligent why should she be worrying so? Then mommy
told me to go upstairs, and I went but I stopped on the top stair and
listened.

When I was gone the doctor said now Carol what is it that's really
bothering you? Then mommy told him what she had told daddy, how she
thought I knew what she was thinking, and the doctor said to daddy, Ben,
have you ever felt any such thing about the boy? Daddy said of course
not, sometimes he gives you the feeling that he's smarter than you think
he is but all parents have that feeling about their children sometimes.
And then mother broke down and her voice got loud and she said he's a
monster, I know it, there's something wrong and he's different from us,
him and that horrible dog. The doctor said but it's a beautiful collie,
and mommy said but he _talks_ to it and it _understands_ him, and the
doctor said now, Carol, let's be reasonable. Mommy said I've been
reasonable too long, you men just can't see it at all, don't you think
I'd know a normal child if I saw one? And then she cried and cried, and
finally she said all right, I know I'm making a fool of myself, maybe
I'm just overtired, and the doctor said I'm sure that's the trouble, try
to get some rest, and sleep longer at night, and mommy said I can't
sleep at night, I just lie there and think.

The doctor said well we'll fix that, enough of this nonsense now, you
need your sleep and if you're not sleeping well it's _you_ that should
be seeing the doctor. He gave her some pills from his bag and then he
went away, and pretty soon daddy let Bobby in, and Bobby came upstairs
and jumped up and licked my face as if he'd been away for a hundred
million years. Later mommy called me down for supper, and she wasn't
crying any more, and she and daddy didn't say anything about what they
had said to the doctor. Mommy made me a special surprise for dessert,
some ice cream with chocolate syrup on top, and after supper we all went
for a walk, even though it was cold outside and snowing again. Then
daddy said well, I think things will be all right, and mommy said I hope
so, but I could tell that she didn't really think so, and she was more
afraid of me than ever.

       *       *       *       *       *

For a while I thought mommy was really going to be nice to me and Bobby
then. She was especially nice when daddy was home but when daddy was
away at work sometimes mommy jumped when she saw me looking at her and
then sent me outdoors to play and told me not to come in until lunch. I
liked that because I knew if I weren't near mommy everything would be
all right. When I was with mommy I tried hard not to look at her and I
tried not to hear what she was thinking, but lots of times I would see
her looking first at me and then at Bobby, and those times I couldn't
help hearing what she was thinking because it seemed so loud inside my
head that it made my eyes hurt. But I knew mommy would be angry so I
pretended I couldn't hear what she was thinking at all.

One day when we were out in the barn playing with Bobby the panda we saw
mommy coming down through the snow from the kitchen and Bobby said look
out Jimmy mommy is coming and I quick told Bobby the panda to go hide
under the hay so mommy couldn't see him. But the panda was so big his
whole top and his little pink nose stuck out of the hay. Mommy came in
and looked around the barn and said you've been out here for a long
time, what have you been doing? I said nothing, and Bobby said nothing
too, only in think-talk. And mommy said you are too, you've been doing
something naughty, and I said no mommy we haven't done _anything_, and
then the panda sneezed and I looked at him and he looked so funny with
his nose sticking out of the hay that I laughed out loud.

Mommy looked angry and said well what's so funny, what are you laughing
at? I said nothing, because I knew mommy couldn't see the panda, but I
couldn't stop laughing because he looked so funny sticking out of the
hay. Then mommy got mad and grabbed my ear and shook me until it hurt
and said you naughty boy, _don't you lie to me_, what have you been
doing out here? She hurt me so much I started to cry and then Bobby
snarled at mommy loud and low and curled his lips back over his teeth
and snarled some more. And mommy got real white in the face and let go
of me and she said get out of here you nasty dog and Bobby snarled
louder and then snapped at her. She screamed and she said Jimmy you come
in the house this minute and leave that nasty dog outdoors and I said I
won't come, I hate you.

Then mommy said Jimmy! You wicked, ugly little monster, and I said I
don't care, when I get big I'm going to hurt you and throw you in the
wood shed and lock you in until you die and make you eat coconut pudding
and Bobby hates you too. And mommy looked terrible and I could feel how
much she was afraid of me and I said you just wait, I'll hurt you bad
when I get big, and then she turned and ran back to the house. And Bobby
wagged his tail and said don't worry, I won't let her hurt you any more
and I said Bobby you shouldn't have snapped at her because daddy won't
like me when he comes home but Bobby said _I_ like you and I won't let
anything ever hurt you. I'll always take care of you no matter what. And
I said promise? No matter what? And Bobby said I promise. And then we
told Bobby the panda to come out but it wasn't much fun playing any
more.

After a little while mommy called me and said lunch was ready. She was
still white and I said can Bobby come too and she said of course Bobby
can come, Bobby's a nice dog, so we went in to eat lunch. Mommy was
talking real fast about what fun it was to play in the barn and was I
sure I wasn't too cold because it was below zero outside and the radio
said a snowstorm was coming, but she didn't say anything about Bobby and
me being out in the barn. She was talking so fast I couldn't hear what
she was thinking except for little bits while she set my lunch on the
table and then she set a bowl of food on the floor for Bobby even though
it wasn't Bobby's time to eat and said nice Bobby here's your dinner.
Bobby came over and sniffed the bowl and then he looked up at me and
said it smells funny and mommy said nice Bobby, it's good hamburger just
the way you like it--

And then for just a second I saw what she was thinking and it was
terrible because she was thinking that Bobby would soon be dead, and I
remembered daddy saying a long time ago that somebody fed bad things to
the Bennet's dog and the dog died and I said don't eat it, Bobby, and
Bobby snarled at the dish. And then mommy said you tell the dog to eat
it and I said no you're bad and you want to hurt Bobby, and then I
picked up the dish and threw it at mommy. It missed and smashed on the
wall and she screamed and turned and ran out into the other room. She
was screaming for daddy and saying I can't stand it, he's a monster, a
murderous little monster and we've got to get out of here before he
kills us all, he knows what we're thinking, he's horrible, and then she
was on the telephone, and she couldn't make the words come out right
when she tried to talk.

I was scared and I said come on Bobby let's lock ourselves up in my room
and we ran upstairs and locked the door. Mommy was banging things and
laughing and crying downstairs and screaming we've got to get out,
he'll kill us if we don't, and a while later I heard the car coming up
the road fast, and saw daddy run into the house just as it started to
snow. Then mommy was screaming please, Ben, we've got to get out of
here, he tried to kill me, and the dog is vicious, he bit me when I
tried to make him stop.

The next minute daddy was running up the stairs two at a time and I
could feel him inside my head for the first time and I knew he was
angry. He'd never been this angry before and he rattled the knob and
said open this door Jimmy in a loud voice. I said no I won't and he said
open the door or I'll break your neck when I get in there and then he
kicked the door and kicked it again. The third time the lock broke and
the door flew open and daddy stood there panting. His eyes looked
terrible and he had a leather belt doubled up in his hand and he said
now come out here and his voice was so loud it hurt my ears.

Down below mommy was crying please Ben, take me away, he'll kill us
both, he's a monster! I said don't hurt me daddy it was mommy, she was
bad to me, and he said I said _come out here_ even louder. I was scared
then and I said please daddy I'll be good I promise. Then he started for
me with the belt and I screamed out Bobby! Don't let him hurt me, Bobby,
and Bobby snarled like a wild animal and jumped at daddy and bit his
wrist so bad the blood spurted out. Daddy shouted and dropped the belt
and kicked at Bobby but Bobby was too quick. He jumped for daddy again
and I saw his white teeth flash and heard him snap close to daddy's
throat and then Bobby was snarling and snapping and I was excited and I
shouted hurt him, Bobby, he's been bad to me too and he wants to hurt me
and you've got to stop him.

Then I saw daddy's eyes open wide, and felt something jump in his mind,
something that I'd never felt there before and I knew he was
understanding my think-talk. I said I want Bobby to hurt you and mommy
because you're not nice to me, only Bobby and my panda are nice to me.
Go ahead, Bobby, hurt him, bite him again and make him bleed. And then
daddy caught Bobby by the neck and threw him across the room and slammed
the door shut and dragged something heavy up to block it. In a minute he
was running downstairs shouting Carol, _I heard it!_ you were right all
along--_I felt him, I felt what he was thinking!_ And mommy cried
please, Ben, take me away, let's leave them and never come back, never,
and daddy said it's horrible, he told that dog to kill me and it went
right for my throat, the boy is evil and monstrous. Even from downstairs
I could feel daddy's fear pounding into my head and then I heard the
door banging and looked out the window and saw daddy carrying suitcases
out through the snow to the car and then mommy came out running and the
car started down the hill and they were gone. Everything downstairs was
very quiet. I looked out the window and I couldn't see anything but the
big falling snowflakes and the sun going down over the hill.

Now Bobby and I and the panda are all together and I'm glad mommy and
daddy are gone. I went to sleep for a little while because my head hurt
so but now I'm awake and Bobby is lying across the room licking his feet
and I hope mommy and daddy never come back because Bobby will take care
of me. Bobby is my friend and he said he'd always take care of me no
matter what and he understands my think-talk even if he isn't very
smart.

It's beginning to get cold in the house now because nobody has gone down
to fix the fire but I don't care about that. Pretty soon I will tell
Bobby to push open the door and go down and fix the fire and then I will
tell him to get supper for me and then I will stay up all night because
mommy and daddy aren't here to make me go to bed. There's just me and
Bobby and the panda, and Bobby promised he'd take care of me because
he's my friend.

It's getting very cold now, and I'm getting hungry.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of My Friend Bobby, by Alan Edward Nourse

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MY FRIEND BOBBY ***

***** This file should be named 22881.txt or 22881.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/2/8/8/22881/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
