The Project Gutenberg eBook, Second Sight, by Alan Edward Nourse


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: Second Sight


Author: Alan Edward Nourse



Release Date: October 16, 2007  [eBook #22997]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SECOND SIGHT***


E-text prepared by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan, and the Project Gutenberg
Online Distributed Proofreading Team (http://www.pgdp.net)



Transcriber's Note:

   This etext was produced from "The Counterfeit Man; More Science
   Fiction Stories by Alan E. Nourse" published in 1963. Extensive
   research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S. copyright
   on this publication was renewed.





SECOND SIGHT


(Note: The following excerpts from Amy Ballantine's journal have never
actually been written down at any time before. Her account of
impressions and events has been kept in organized fashion in her mind
for at least nine years (even she is not certain when she started), but
it must be understood that certain inaccuracies in transcription could
not possibly have been avoided in the excerpting attempted here. _The
Editor_.)

       *       *       *       *       *

_Tuesday, 16 May._ Lambertson got back from Boston about two this
afternoon. He was tired; I don't think I've ever seen Lambertson so
tired. It was more than just exhaustion, too. Maybe anger? Frustration?
I couldn't be sure. It seemed more like _defeat_ than anything else, and
he went straight from the 'copter to his office without even stopping
off at the lab at all.

It's good to have him back, though! Not that I haven't had a nice enough
rest. With Lambertson gone, Dakin took over the reins for the week, but
Dakin doesn't really count, poor man. It's such a temptation to twist
him up and get him all confused that I didn't do any real _work_ all
week. With Lambertson back I'll have to get down to the grind again, but
I'm still glad he's here. I never thought I'd miss him so, for such a
short time away.

But I wish he'd gotten a rest, if he ever rests! And I wish I knew why
he went to Boston in the first place. Certainly he didn't _want_ to go.
I wanted to read him and find out, but I don't think I'm supposed to
know yet. Lambertson didn't want to talk. He didn't even tell me he was
back, even though he knew I'd catch him five miles down the road. (I can
do that now, with Lambertson. Distance doesn't seem to make so much
difference any more if I just ignore it.)

So all I got was bits and snatches on the surface of his mind. Something
about me, and Dr. Custer; and a nasty little man called Aarons or
Barrons or something. I've heard of him somewhere, but I can't pin it
down right now. I'll have to dig that out later, I guess.

But if he saw Dr. Custer, _why doesn't he tell me about it_?

       *       *       *       *       *

_Wednesday, 17 May._ It was _Aarons_ that he saw in Boston, and now I'm
sure that something's going wrong. I know that man. I remember him from
a long time ago, back when I was still at Bairdsley, long before I came
here to the Study Center. He was the consulting psychiatrist, and I
don't think I could ever forget him, even if I tried!

That's why I'm sure something very unpleasant is going on.

Lambertson saw Dr. Custer, too, but the directors sent him to Boston
because Aarons wanted to talk to him. I wasn't supposed to know anything
about it, but Lambertson came down to dinner last night. He wouldn't
even look at me, the skunk. I fixed _him_. I told him I was going to
peek, and then I read him in a flash, before he could shift his mind to
Boston traffic or something. (He knows I can't stand traffic.)

I only picked up a little, but it was enough. There was something very
unpleasant that Aarons had said that I couldn't quite get. They were in
his office. Lambertson had said, "I don't think she's ready for it, and
I'd never try to talk her into it, at this point. Why can't you people
get it through your heads that she's a _child_, and a human being, not
some kind of laboratory animal? That's been the trouble all along.
Everybody has been so eager to _grab_, and nobody has given her a
wretched thing in return."

Aarons was smooth. Very sad and reproachful. I got a clear picture of
him--short, balding, mean little eyes in a smug, self-righteous little
face. "Michael, after all she's twenty-three years old. She's certainly
out of diapers by now."

"But she's only had two years of training aimed at teaching _her_
anything."

"Well, there's no reason that _that_ should stop, is there? Be
reasonable, Michael. We certainly agree that you've done a wonderful job
with the girl, and naturally you're sensitive about others working with
her. But when you consider that public taxes are footing the bill--"

"I'm sensitive about others exploiting her, that's all. I tell you, I
won't push her. And I wouldn't let her come up here, even if she agreed
to do it. She shouldn't be tampered with for another year or two at
least." Lambertson was angry and bitter. Now, three days later, he was
still angry.

"And you're certain that your concern is entirely--professional?"
(Whatever Aarons meant, it wasn't nice. Lambertson caught it, and oh,
my! Chart slapping down on the table, door slamming, swearing--from
mild, patient Lambertson, can you imagine? And then later, no more
anger, just disgust and defeat. That was what hit me when he came back
yesterday. He couldn't hide it, no matter how he tried.)

Well, no wonder he was tired. I remember Aarons all right. He wasn't so
interested in me, back in those days. _Wild one_, he called me. _We
haven't the time or the people to handle anything like this in a public
institution. We have to handle her the way we'd handle any other
defective. She may be a_ plus_-defective instead of a_ minus_-defective,
but she's as crippled as if she were deaf and blind._

Good old Aarons. That was years ago, when I was barely thirteen. Before
Dr. Custer got interested and started ophthalmoscoping me and testing
me, before I'd ever heard of Lambertson or the Study Center. For that
matter, before anybody had done anything but feed me and treat me like
some kind of peculiar animal or something.

Well, I'm glad it was Lambertson that went to Boston and not me, for
Aarons' sake. And if Aarons tries to come down here to work with me,
he's going to be wasting his time, because I'll lead him all around
Robin Hood's Barn and get him so confused he'll wish he'd stayed home.
But I can't help but wonder, just the same. _Am_ I a cripple like Aarons
said? Does being psi-high mean that? _I_ don't think so, but what does
Lambertson think? Sometimes when I try to read Lambertson I'm the one
that gets confused. I wish I could tell what he _really_ thinks.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Wednesday night._ I asked Lambertson tonight what Dr. Custer had said.
"He wants to see you next week," he told me. "But Amy, he didn't make
any promises. He wasn't even hopeful."

"But his letter! He said the studies showed that there wasn't any
anatomical defect."

Lambertson leaned back and lit his pipe, shaking his head at me. He's
aged ten years this past week. Everybody thinks so. He's lost weight,
and he looks as if he hasn't slept at all. "Custer's afraid that it
isn't a question of anatomy, Amy."

"But what is it, then, for heaven's sake?"

"He doesn't know. He says it's not very scientific, but it may just be
that what you don't use, you lose."

"Oh, but that's silly." I chewed my lip.

"Granted."

"But he thinks that there's a chance?"

"Of course there's a chance. And you know he'll do everything he can.
It's just that neither of us wants you to get your hopes up."

It wasn't much, but it was something. Lambertson looked so beat. I
didn't have the heart to ask him what Aarons wanted, even though I know
he'd like to get it off his chest. Maybe tomorrow will be better.

I spent the day with Charlie Dakin in the lab, and did a little work for
a change. I've been disgustingly lazy, and poor Charlie thinks it's all
his fault. Charlie reads like twenty-point type ninety per cent of the
time, and I'm afraid he knows it. I can tell just exactly when he stops
paying attention to business and starts paying attention to _me_, and
then all of a sudden he realizes I'm reading him, and it flusters him
for the rest of the day. I wonder why? Does he really think I'm shocked?
Or surprised? Or _insulted_? Poor Charlie!

I guess I must be good enough looking. I can read it from almost every
fellow that comes near me. I wonder why? I mean, why me and not Marjorie
over in the Main Office? She's a sweet girl, but she never gets a second
look from the guys. There must be some fine differential point I'm
missing somewhere, but I don't think I'll ever understand it.

I'm not going to press Lambertson, but I _hope_ he opens up tomorrow.
He's got me scared silly by now. He has a lot of authority around here,
but other people are paying the bills, and when he's frightened about
something, it can't help but frighten me.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Thursday, 18 May._ We went back to reaction testing in the lab with
Lambertson today. That study is almost finished, as much as anything I
work on is ever finished, which isn't very much. This test had two
goals: to clock my stimulus-response pattern in comparison to normals,
and to find out just exactly _when_ I pick up any given thought-signal
from the person I'm reading. It isn't a matter of developing speed. I'm
already so fast to respond that it doesn't mean too much from anybody
else's standpoint, and I certainly don't need any training there. But
where along the line do I pick up a thought impulse? Do I catch it at
its inception? Do I pick up the thought formulation, or just the final
crystalized pattern? Lambertson thinks I'm with it right from the start,
and that some training in those lines would be worth my time.

Of course, we didn't find out, not even with the ingenious little
random-firing device that Dakin designed for the study. With this
gadget, neither Lambertson nor I know what impulse the box is going to
throw at him. He just throws a switch and it starts coming. He catches
it, reacts, I catch it from him and react, and we compare reaction
times. This afternoon it had us driving up a hill, and sent a ten-ton
truck rolling down on us out of control. I had my flasher on two seconds
before Lambertson did, of course, but our reaction times are
standardized, so when we corrected for my extra speed, we knew that I
must have caught the impulse about 0.07 seconds after he did.

Crude, of course, not nearly fast enough, and we can't reproduce on a
stable basis. Lambertson says that's as close as we can get without
cortical probes. And that's where I put my foot down. I may have a gold
mine in this head of mine, but nobody is going to put burr-holes through
my skull in order to tap it. Not for a while yet.

That's unfair, of course, because it sounds as if Lambertson were trying
to force me into something, and he isn't. I've read him about that, and
I know he wouldn't allow it. _Let's learn everything else we can learn
without it first_, he says. _Later, if you want to go along with it,
maybe. But right now you're not competent to decide for yourself._

He may be right, but why not? Why does he keep acting as if I'm a child?
_Am_ I, really? With everything (and I mean _everything_) coming into my
mind for the past twenty-three years, haven't I learned enough to make
decisions for myself? Lambertson says of course everything has been
coming in, it's just that I don't know what to do with it all. But
somewhere along the line I have to reach a maturation point of some
kind.

It scares me, sometimes, because I can't find an answer to it and the
answer might be perfectly horrible. I don't know where it may end.
What's worse, I don't know what point it has reached _right now_. How
much difference is there between my mind and Lambertson's? I'm psi-high,
and he isn't--granted. But is there more to it than that? People like
Aarons think so. They think it's a difference between _human_ function
and something else.

And that scares me because it _just isn't true_. I'm as human as anybody
else. But somehow it seems that I'm the one who has to prove it. I
wonder if I ever will. That's why Dr. Custer has to help me. Everything
hangs on that. I'm to go up to Boston next week, for final studies and
testing.

If Dr. Custer can do something, what a difference that will make! Maybe
then I could get out of this whole frightening mess, put it behind me
and forget about it. With just the psi alone, I don't think I ever can.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Friday, 19 May._ Today Lambertson broke down and told me what it was
that Aarons had been proposing. It was worse than I thought it would be.
The man had hit on the one thing I'd been afraid of for so long.

"He wants you to work against normals," Lambertson said. "He's swallowed
the latency hypothesis whole. He thinks that everybody must have a
latent psi potential, and that all that is needed to drag it into the
open is a powerful stimulus from someone with full-blown psi powers."

"Well?" I said. "Do you think so?"

"Who knows?" Lambertson slammed his pencil down on the desk angrily.
"No, I don't think so, but what does that mean? Not a thing. It
certainly doesn't mean I'm right. Nobody knows the answer, not me, nor
Aarons, nor anybody. And Aarons wants to use you to find out."

I nodded slowly. "I see. So I'm to be used as a sort of refined
electrical stimulator," I said. "Well, I guess you know what you can
tell Aarons."

He was silent, and I couldn't read him. Then he looked up. "Amy, I'm not
sure we can tell him that."

I stared at him. "You mean you think he could _force_ me?"

"He says you're a public charge, that as long as you have to be
supported and cared for, they have the right to use your faculties. He's
right on the first point. You _are_ a public charge. You have to be
sheltered and protected. If you wandered so much as a mile outside these
walls you'd never survive, and you know it."

I sat stunned. "But Dr. Custer--"

"Dr. Custer is trying to help. But he hasn't succeeded so far. If he
can, then it will be a different story. But I can't stall much longer,
Amy. Aarons has a powerful argument. You're psi-high. You're the first
full-fledged, wide-open, free-wheeling psi-high that's ever appeared in
human history. The _first_. Others in the past have shown potential,
maybe, but nothing they could ever learn to control. You've got control,
you're fully developed. You're _here_, and you're _the only one there
is_."

"So I happened to be unlucky," I snapped. "My genes got mixed up."

"That's not true, and you know it," Lambertson said. "We know your
chromosomes better than your face. They're the same as anyone else's.
There's no gene difference, none at all. When you're gone, you'll be
_gone_, and there's no reason to think that your children will have any
more psi potential than Charlie Dakin has."

Something was building up in me then that I couldn't control any longer.
"You think I should go along with Aarons," I said dully.

He hesitated. "I'm afraid you're going to have to, sooner or later.
Aarons has some latents up in Boston. He's certain that they're latents.
He's talked to the directors down here. He's convinced them that you
could work with his people, draw them out. You could open the door to a
whole new world for human beings."

I lost my temper then. It wasn't just Aarons, or Lambertson, or Dakin,
or any of the others. It was _all_ of them, dozens of them, compounded
year upon year upon year. "Now listen to me for a minute," I said. "Have
any of you ever considered what _I_ wanted in this thing? _Ever?_ Have
any of you given that one single thought, just once, one time when you
were so sick of thinking great thoughts for humanity that you let
another thought leak through? Have you ever thought about what kind of a
shuffle I've had since all this started? Well, you'd better think about
it. _Right now._"

"Amy, you know I don't want to push you."

"Listen to me, Lambertson. My folks got rid of me fast when they found
out about me. Did you know that? They hated me because I _scared_ them!
It didn't hurt me too much, because I thought I knew _why_ they hated
me, I could understand it, and I went off to Bairdsley without even
crying. They were going to come see me every week, but do you know how
often they managed to make it? _Not once_ after I was off their hands.
And then at Bairdsley Aarons examined me and decided that I was a
cripple. He didn't know anything about me then, but he thought psi was a
_defect_. And that was as far as it went. I did what Aarons wanted me to
do at Bairdsley. Never what _I_ wanted, just what _they_ wanted, years
and years of what _they_ wanted. And then you came along, and I came to
the Study Center and did what _you_ wanted."

It hurt him, and I knew it. I guess that was what I wanted, to hurt him
and to hurt everybody. He was shaking his head, staring at me. "Amy, be
fair. I've tried, you know how hard I've tried."

"Tried what? To train me? Yes, but why? To give me better use of my psi
faculties? Yes, but why? Did you do it for _me_? Is that really why you
did it? Or was that just another phoney front, like all the rest of
them, in order to use me, to make me a little more valuable to have
around?"

He slapped my face so hard it jolted me. I could feel the awful pain and
hurt in his mind as he stared at me, and I sensed the stinging in his
palm that matched the burning in my cheek. And then something fell away
in his mind, and I saw something I had never seen before.

He loved me, that man. Incredible, isn't it? He _loved_ me. Me, who
couldn't call him anything but Lambertson, who couldn't imagine calling
him Michael, to say nothing of Mike--just Lambertson, who did this, or
Lambertson who thought that.

But he could never tell me. He had decided that. I was too helpless. I
needed him too much. I needed love, but not the kind of love Lambertson
wanted to give, so that kind of love had to be hidden, concealed,
_suppressed_. I needed the deepest imaginable understanding, but it had
to be utterly unselfish understanding, anything else would be taking
advantage of me, so a barrier had to be built--a barrier that I should
never penetrate and that he should never be tempted to break down.

Lambertson had done that. For me. It was all there, suddenly, so
overwhelming it made me gasp from the impact. I wanted to throw my arms
around him; instead I sat down in the chair, shaking my head helplessly.
I hated myself then. I had hated myself before, but never like this.

"If I could only go somewhere," I said. "Someplace where nobody knew me,
where I could just live by myself for a while, and shut the doors, and
shut out the thoughts, and _pretend_ for a while, just pretend that I'm
perfectly normal."

"I wish you could," Lambertson said. "But you can't. You know that. Not
unless Custer can really help."

We sat there for a while. Then I said, "Let Aarons come down. Let him
bring anybody he wants with him. I'll do what he wants. Until I see
Custer."

That hurt, too, but it was different. It hurt both of us together, not
separately any more. And somehow it didn't hurt so much that way.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Monday, 22 May._ Aarons drove down from Boston this morning with a girl
named Mary Bolton, and we went to work.

I think I'm beginning to understand how a dog can tell when someone
wants to kick him and doesn't quite dare. I could feel the back of my
neck prickle when that man walked into the conference room. I was hoping
he might have changed since the last time I saw him. He hadn't, but I
had. I wasn't afraid of him any more, just awfully tired of him after
he'd been here about ten minutes.

But that girl! I wonder what sort of story he'd told her? She couldn't
have been more than sixteen, and she was terrorized. At first I thought
it was _Aarons_ she was afraid of, but that wasn't so. It was _me_.

It took us all morning just to get around that. The poor girl could
hardly make herself talk. She was shaking all over when they arrived. We
took a walk around the grounds, alone, and I read her bit by bit--a
feeler here, a planted suggestion there, just getting her used to the
idea and trying to reassure her. After a while she was smiling. She
thought the lagoon was lovely, and by the time we got back to the main
building she was laughing, talking about herself, beginning to relax.

Then I gave her a full blast, quickly, only a moment or two. _Don't be
afraid--I hate him, yes, but I won't hurt you for anything. Let me come
in, don't fight me. We've got to work as a team._

It shook her. She turned white and almost passed out for a moment. Then
she nodded, slowly. "I see," she said. "It feels as if it's way inside,
_deep_ inside."

"That's right. It won't hurt. I promise."

She nodded again. "Let's go back, now. I think I'm ready to try."

We went to work.

I was as blind as she was, at first. There was nothing there, at first,
not even a flicker of brightness. Then, probing deeper, something
responded, only a hint, a suggestion of something powerful, deep and
hidden--but where? What was her strength? Where was she weak? I couldn't
tell.

We started on dice, crude, of course, but as good a tool as any. Dice
are no good for measuring anything, but that was why I was there. I was
the measuring instrument. The dice were only reactors. Sensitive enough,
two balsam cubes, tossed from a box with only gravity to work against. I
showed her first, picked up her mind as the dice popped out, led her
through it. _Take one at a time, the red one first. Work on it, see? Now
we try both. Once more--watch it! All right, now._

She sat frozen in the chair. She was trying; the sweat stood out on her
forehead. Aarons sat tense, smoking, his fingers twitching as he watched
the red and green cubes bounce on the white backdrop. Lambertson watched
too, but his eyes were on the girl, not on the cubes.

It was hard work. Bit by bit she began to grab; whatever I had felt in
her mind seemed to leap up. I probed her, amplifying it, trying to draw
it out. It was like wading through knee-deep mud--sticky, sluggish,
resisting. I could feel her excitement growing, and bit by bit I
released my grip, easing her out, baiting her.

"All right," I said. "That's enough."

She turned to me, wide-eyed. "I--I did it."

Aarons was on his feet, breathing heavily. "It worked?"

"It worked. Not very well, but it's there. All she needs is time, and
help, and patience."

"But it worked! Lambertson! Do you know what that means? It means I was
right! It means others can have it, just like she has it!" He rubbed his
hands together. "We can arrange a full-time lab for it, and work on
three or four latents simultaneously. It's a wide-open door, Michael!
Can't you see what it means?"

Lambertson nodded, and gave me a long look. "Yes, I think I do."

"I'll start arrangements tomorrow."

"Not tomorrow. You'll have to wait until next week."

"Why?"

"Because Amy would prefer to wait, that's why."

Aarons looked at him, and then at me, peevishly. Finally he shrugged.
"If you insist."

"We'll talk about it next week," I said. I was so tired I could hardly
look up at him. I stood up, and smiled at my girl. Poor kid, I thought.
So excited and eager about it now. And not one idea in the world of what
she was walking into.

Certainly Aarons would never be able to tell her.

       *       *       *       *       *

Later, when they were gone, Lambertson and I walked down toward the
lagoon. It was a lovely cool evening; the ducks were down at the water's
edge. Every year there was a mother duck herding a line of ducklings
down the shore and into the water. They never seemed to go where she
wanted them to, and she would fuss and chatter, waddling back time and
again to prod the reluctant ones out into the pool.

We stood by the water's edge in silence for a long time. Then Lambertson
kissed me. It was the first time he had ever done that.

"We could go away," I whispered in his ear. "We could run out on Aarons
and the Study Center and everyone, just go away somewhere."

He shook his head slowly. "Amy, don't."

"We could! I'll see Dr. Custer, and he'll tell me he can help, I _know_
he will. I won't _need_ the Study Center any more, or any other place,
or anybody but you."

He didn't answer, and I knew there wasn't anything he could answer. Not
then.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Friday, 26 May._ Yesterday we went to Boston to see Dr. Custer, and now
it looks as if it's all over. Now even I can't pretend that there's
anything more to be done.

Next week Aarons will come down, and I'll go to work with him just the
way he has it planned. He thinks we have three years of work ahead of us
before anything can be published, before he can really be sure we have
brought a latent into full use of his psi potential. Maybe so, I don't
know. Maybe in three years I'll find some way to make myself care one
way or the other. But I'll do it, anyway, because there's nothing else
to do.

There was no anatomical defect--Dr. Custer was right about that. The
eyes are perfect, beautiful gray eyes, he says, and the optic nerves and
auditory nerves are perfectly functional. The defect isn't there. It's
deeper. Too deep ever to change it.

_What you no longer use, you lose_, was what he said, apologizing
because he couldn't explain it any better. It's like a price tag,
perhaps. Long ago, before I knew anything at all, the psi was so strong
it started compensating, bringing in more and more from _other_
minds--such a wealth of rich, clear, interpreted visual and auditory
impressions that there was never any need for my own. And because of
that, certain hookups never got hooked up. That's only a theory, of
course, but there isn't any other way to explain it.

But am I wrong to hate it? More than anything else in the world I want
to _see_ Lambertson, _see_ him smile and light his pipe, _hear_ him
laugh. I want to know what color _really_ is, what music _really_ sounds
like unfiltered through somebody else's ears.

I want to see a sunset, just once. Just once I want to see that mother
duck take her ducklings down to the water. But I never will. Instead, I
see and hear things nobody else can, and the fact that I am stone blind
and stone deaf shouldn't make any difference. After all, I've always
been that way.

Maybe next week I'll ask Aarons what he thinks about it. It should be
interesting to hear what he says.



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SECOND SIGHT***


******* This file should be named 22997.txt or 22997.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/2/2/9/9/22997



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
