The Project Gutenberg eBook, The Big Bounce, by Walter S. Tevis,
Illustrated by  Johnson


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: The Big Bounce


Author: Walter S. Tevis



Release Date: October 23, 2007  [eBook #23153]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BIG BOUNCE***


E-text prepared by Greg Weeks, Jacqueline Jeremy, and the Project
Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading Team (http://www.pgdp.net)



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustration.
      See 23153-h.htm or 23153-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/2/3/1/5/23153/23153-h/23153-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/2/3/1/5/23153/23153-h.zip)





THE BIG BOUNCE

by

WALTER S. TEVIS

_Seeing it in action, anybody would quaver in
alarm: What hath Farnsworth overwrought?_

Illustrated by Johnson







"Let me show you something," Farnsworth said. He set his near-empty
drink--a Bacardi martini--on the mantel and waddled out of the room
toward the basement.

I sat in my big leather chair, feeling very peaceful with the world,
watching the fire. Whatever Farnsworth would have to show to-night
would be far more entertaining than watching T.V.--my custom on other
evenings. Farnsworth, with his four labs in the house and his very
tricky mind, never failed to provide my best night of the week.

When he returned, after a moment, he had with him a small box, about
three inches square. He held this carefully in one hand and stood by
the fireplace dramatically--or as dramatically as a very small, very
fat man with pink cheeks can stand by a fireplace of the sort that
seems to demand a big man with tweeds, pipe and, perhaps, a saber
wound.

Anyway, he held the box dramatically and he said, "Last week, I was
playing around in the chem lab, trying to make a new kind of rubber
eraser. Did quite well with the other drafting equipment, you know,
especially the dimensional curve and the photosensitive ink. Well, I
approached the job by trying for a material that would absorb graphite
without abrading paper."

I was a little disappointed with this; it sounded pretty tame. But I
said, "How did it come out?"

       *       *       *       *       *

He screwed his pudgy face up thoughtfully. "Synthesized the material,
all right, and it seems to work, but the interesting thing is that it
has a certain--ah--secondary property that would make it quite awkward
to use. Interesting property, though. Unique, I am inclined to
believe."

This began to sound more like it. "And what property is that?" I
poured myself a shot of straight rum from the bottle sitting on the
table beside me. I did not like straight rum, but I preferred it to
Farnsworth's rather imaginative cocktails.

"I'll show you, John," he said. He opened the box and I could see that
it was packed with some kind of batting. He fished in this and
withdrew a gray ball about the size of a golfball and set the box on
the mantel.

"And that's the--eraser?" I asked.

"Yes," he said. Then he squatted down, held the ball about a half-inch
from the floor, dropped it.

It bounced, naturally enough. Then it bounced again. And again. Only
this was not natural, for on the second bounce the ball went higher in
the air than on the first, and on the third bounce higher still. After
a half minute, my eyes were bugging out and the little ball was
bouncing four feet in the air and going higher each time.

I grabbed my glass. "What the hell!" I said.

Farnsworth caught the ball in a pudgy hand and held it. He was smiling
a little sheepishly. "Interesting effect, isn't it?"

"Now wait a minute," I said, beginning to think about it. "What's the
gimmick? What kind of motor do you have in that thing?"

His eyes were wide and a little hurt. "No gimmick, John. None at all.
Just a very peculiar molecular structure."

"Structure!" I said. "Bouncing balls just don't pick up energy out of
nowhere, I don't care how their molecules are put together. And you
don't get energy out without putting energy in."

"Oh," he said, "that's the really interesting thing. Of course you're
right; energy _does_ go into the ball. Here, I'll show you."

He let the ball drop again and it began bouncing, higher and higher,
until it was hitting the ceiling. Farnsworth reached out to catch it,
but he fumbled and the thing glanced off his hand, hit the mantelpiece
and zipped across the room. It banged into the far wall, richocheted,
banked off three other walls, picking up speed all the time.

When it whizzed by me like a rifle bullet, I began to get worried, but
it hit against one of the heavy draperies by the window and this
damped its motion enough so that it fell to the floor.

       *       *       *       *       *

It started bouncing again immediately, but Farnsworth scrambled across
the room and grabbed it. He was perspiring a little and he began
instantly to transfer the ball from one hand to another and back again
as if it were hot.

"Here," he said, and handed it to me.

I almost dropped it.

"It's like a ball of ice!" I said. "Have you been keeping it in the
refrigerator?"

"No. As a matter of fact, it was at room temperature a few minutes
ago."

"Now wait a minute," I said. "I only teach physics in high school, but
I know better than that. Moving around in warm air doesn't make
anything cold except by evaporation."

"Well, there's your input and output, John," he said. "The ball lost
heat and took on motion. Simple conversion."

My jaw must have dropped to my waist. "Do you mean that that little
thing is converting heat to kinetic energy?"

"Apparently."

"But that's impossible!"

He was beginning to smile thoughtfully. The ball was not as cold now
as it had been and I was holding it in my lap.

"A steam engine does it," he said, "and a steam turbine. Of course,
they're not very efficient."

"They work mechanically, too, and only because water expands when it
turns to steam."

"This seems to do it differently," he said, sipping thoughtfully at
his dark-brown martini. "I don't know exactly how--maybe something
piezo-electric about the way its molecules slide about. I ran some
tests--measured its impact energy in foot pounds and compared that
with the heat loss in BTUs. Seemed to be about 98 per cent efficient,
as close as I could tell. Apparently it converts heat into bounce very
well. Interesting, isn't it?"

"_Interesting?_" I almost came flying out of my chair. My mind was
beginning to spin like crazy. "If you're not pulling my leg with this
thing, Farnsworth, you've got something by the tail there that's just
a little bit bigger than the discovery of fire."

He blushed modestly. "I'd rather thought that myself," he admitted.

"Good Lord, look at the heat that's available!" I said, getting really
excited now.

       *       *       *       *       *

Farnsworth was still smiling, very pleased with himself. "I suppose
you could put this thing in a box, with convection fins, and let it
bounce around inside--"

"I'm way ahead of you," I said. "But that wouldn't work. All your
kinetic energy would go right back to heat, on impact--and eventually
that little ball would build up enough speed to blast its way through
any box you could build."

"Then how would you work it?"

"Well," I said, choking down the rest of my rum, "you'd seal the ball
in a big steel cylinder, attach the cylinder to a crankshaft and
flywheel, give the thing a shake to start the ball bouncing back and
forth, and let it run like a gasoline engine or something. It would
get all the heat it needed from the air in a normal room. Mount the
apparatus in your house and it would pump your water, operate a
generator and keep you cool at the same time!"

I sat down again, shakily, and began pouring myself another drink.

Farnsworth had taken the ball from me and was carefully putting it
back in its padded box. He was visibly showing excitement, too; I
could see that his cheeks were ruddier and his eyes even brighter than
normal. "But what if you want the cooling and don't have any work to
be done?"

"Simple," I said. "You just let the machine turn a flywheel or lift
weights and drop them, or something like that, outside your house. You
have an air intake inside. And if, in the winter, you don't want to
lose heat, you just mount the thing in an outside building, attach it
to your generator and use the power to do whatever you want--heat your
house, say. There's plenty of heat in the outside air even in
December."

"John," said Farnsworth, "you are very ingenious. It might work."

"Of course it'll work." Pictures were beginning to light up in my
head. "And don't you realize that this is the answer to the solar
power problem? Why, mirrors and selenium are, at best, ten per cent
efficient! Think of big pumping stations on the Sahara! All that heat,
all that need for power, for irrigation!" I paused a moment for
effect. "Farnsworth, this can change the very shape of the Earth!"

Farnsworth seemed to be lost in thought. Finally he looked at me
strangely and said, "Perhaps we had better try to build a model."

       *       *       *       *       *

I was so excited by the thing that I couldn't sleep that night. I kept
dreaming of power stations, ocean liners, even automobiles, being
operated by balls bouncing back and forth in cylinders.

I even worked out a spaceship in my mind, a bullet-shaped affair with
a huge rubber ball on its end, gyroscopes to keep it oriented
properly, the ball serving as solution to that biggest of
missile-engineering problems, excess heat. You'd build a huge concrete
launching field, supported all the way down to bedrock, hop in the
ship and start bouncing. Of course it would be kind of a rough
ride....

In the morning, I called my superintendent and told him to get a
substitute for the rest of the week; I was going to be busy.

Then I started working in the machine shop in Farnsworth's basement,
trying to turn out a working model of a device that, by means of a
crankshaft, oleo dampers and a reciprocating cylinder, would pick up
some of that random kinetic energy from the bouncing ball and do
something useful with it, like turning a drive shaft. I was just
working out a convection-and-air pump system for circulating hot air
around the ball when Farnsworth came in.

He had tucked carefully under his arm a sphere of about the size of a
basketball and, if he had made it to my specifications, weighing
thirty-five pounds. He had a worried frown on his forehead.

"It looks good," I said. "What's the trouble?"

"There seems to be a slight hitch," he said. "I've been testing for
conductivity. It seems to be quite low."

"That's what I'm working on now. It's just a mechanical problem of
pumping enough warm air back to the ball. We can do it with no more
than a twenty per cent efficiency loss. In an engine, that's nothing."

"Maybe you're right. But this material conducts heat even less than
rubber does."

"The little ball yesterday didn't seem to have any trouble," I said.

"Naturally not. It had had plenty of time to warm up before I started
it. And its mass-surface area relationship was pretty low--the larger
you make a sphere, of course, the more mass inside in proportion to
the outside area."

"You're right, but I think we can whip it. We may have to honeycomb
the ball and have part of the work the machine does operate a big hot
air pump; but we can work it out."

       *       *       *       *       *

All that day, I worked with lathe, milling machine and hacksaw. After
clamping the new big ball securely to a workbench, Farnsworth pitched
in to help me. But we weren't able to finish by nightfall and
Farnsworth turned his spare bedroom over to me for the night. I was
too tired to go home.

And too tired to sleep soundly, too. Farnsworth lived on the edge of
San Francisco, by a big truck by-pass, and almost all night I wrestled
with the pillow and sheets, listening half-consciously to those heavy
trucks rumbling by, and in my mind, always, that little gray ball,
bouncing and bouncing and bouncing....

At daybreak, I came abruptly fully awake with the sound of crashing
echoing in my ears, a battering sound that seemed to come from the
basement. I grabbed my coat and pants, rushed out of the room, almost
knocked over Farnsworth, who was struggling to get his shoes on out in
the hall, and we scrambled down the two flights of stairs together.

The place was a chaos, battered and bashed equipment everywhere, and
on the floor, overturned against the far wall, the table that the ball
had been clamped to. The ball itself was gone.

I had not been fully asleep all night, and the sight of that mess, and
what it meant, jolted me immediately awake. Something, probably a
heavy truck, had started a tiny oscillation in that ball. And the ball
had been heavy enough to start the table bouncing with it until, by
dancing that table around the room, it had literally torn the clamp
off and shaken itself free. What had happened afterward was obvious,
with the ball building up velocity with every successive bounce.

But where was the ball now?

Suddenly Farnsworth cried out hoarsely, "Look!" and I followed his
outstretched, pudgy finger to where, at one side of the basement, a
window had been broken open--a small window, but plenty big enough for
something the size of a basketball to crash through it.

There was a little weak light coming from outdoors. And then I saw the
ball. It was in Farnsworth's back yard, bouncing a little sluggishly
on the grass. The grass would damp it, hold it back, until we could
get to it. Unless....

I took off up the basement steps like a streak. Just beyond the back
yard, I had caught a glimpse of something that frightened me. A few
yards from where I had seen the ball was the edge of the big six-lane
highway, a broad ribbon of smooth, hard concrete.

[Illustration]

I got through the house to the back porch, rushed out and was in the
back yard just in time to see the ball take its first bounce onto
the concrete. I watched it, fascinated, when it hit--after the soft,
energy absorbing turf, the concrete was like a springboard.
Immediately the ball flew high in the air. I was running across the
yard toward it, praying under my breath, _Fall on that grass next
time_.

It hit before I got to it, and right on the concrete again, and this
time I saw it go straight up at least fifty feet.

       *       *       *       *       *

My mind was suddenly full of thoughts of dragging mattresses from the
house, or making a net or something to stop that hurtling thirty-five
pounds; but I stood where I was, unable to move, and saw it come down
again on the highway. It went up a hundred feet. And down again on the
concrete, about fifteen feet further down the road. In the direction
of the city.

That time it was two hundred feet, and when it hit again, it made a
thud that you could have heard for a quarter of a mile. I could
practically see it flatten out on the road before it took off upward
again, at twice the speed it had hit at.

Suddenly generating an idea, I whirled and ran back to Farnsworth's
house. He was standing in the yard now, shivering from the morning
air, looking at me like a little lost and badly scared child.

"Where are your car keys?" I almost shouted at him.

"In my pocket."

"Come on!"

I took him by the arm and half dragged him to the carport. I got the
keys from him, started the car, and by mangling about seven traffic
laws and three prize rosebushes, managed to get on the highway, facing
in the direction that the ball was heading.

"Look," I said, trying to drive down the road and search for the ball
at the same time. "It's risky, but if I can get the car under it and
we can hop out in time, it should crash through the roof. That ought
to slow it down enough for us to nab it."

"But--what about my car?" Farnsworth bleated.

"What about that first building--or first person--it hits in San
Francisco?"

"Oh," he said. "Hadn't thought of that."

I slowed the car and stuck my head out the window. It was lighter now,
but no sign of the ball. "If it happens to get to town--any town, for
that matter--it'll be falling from about ten or twenty miles. Or
forty."

"Maybe it'll go high enough first so that it'll burn. Like a meteor."

"No chance," I said. "Built-in cooling system, remember?"

Farnsworth formed his mouth into an "Oh" and exactly at that moment
there was a resounding _thump_ and I saw the ball hit in a field,
maybe twenty yards from the edge of the road, and take off again. This
time it didn't seem to double its velocity, and I figured the ground
was soft enough to hold it back--but it wasn't slowing down either,
not with a bounce factor of better than two to one.

       *       *       *       *       *

Without watching for it to go up, I drove as quickly as I could off
the road and over--carrying part of a wire fence with me--to where it
had hit. There was no mistaking it; there was a depression about three
feet deep, like a small crater.

I jumped out of the car and stared up. It took me a few seconds to
spot it, over my head. One side caught by the pale and slanting
morning sunlight, it was only a bright diminishing speck.

The car motor was running and I waited until the ball disappeared for
a moment and then reappeared. I watched for another couple of seconds
until I felt I could make a decent guess on its direction, hollered at
Farnsworth to get out of the car--it had just occurred to me that
there was no use risking his life, too--dove in and drove a hundred
yards or so to the spot I had anticipated.

I stuck my head out the window and up. The ball was the size of an egg
now. I adjusted the car's position, jumped out and ran for my life.

It hit instantly after--about sixty feet from the car. And at the same
time, it occurred to me that what I was trying to do was completely
impossible. Better to hope that the ball hit a pond, or bounced out to
sea, or landed in a sand dune. All we could do would be to follow, and
if it ever was damped down enough, grab it.

It had hit soft ground and didn't double its height that time, but it
had still gone higher. It was out of sight for almost a lifelong
minute.

And then--incredibly rotten luck--it came down, with an ear-shattering
thwack, on the concrete highway again. I had seen it hit, and
instantly afterward I saw a crack as wide as a finger open along the
entire width of the road. And the ball had flown back up like a
rocket.

_My God_, I was thinking, _now it means business. And on the next
bounce...._

It seemed like an incredibly long time that we craned our necks,
Farnsworth and I, watching for it to reappear in the sky. And when it
finally did, we could hardly follow it. It whistled like a bomb and we
saw the gray streak come plummeting to Earth almost a quarter of a
mile away from where we were standing.

But we didn't see it go back up again.

For a moment, we stared at each other silently. Then Farnsworth almost
whispered, "Perhaps it's landed in a pond."

"Or in the world's biggest cow-pile," I said. "Come on!"

We could have met our deaths by rock salt and buckshot that night, if
the farmer who owned that field had been home. We tore up everything
we came to getting across it--including cabbages and rhubarb. But we
had to search for ten minutes, and even then we didn't find the ball.

What we found was a hole in the ground that could have been a
small-scale meteor crater. It was a good twenty feet deep. But at the
bottom, no ball.

       *       *       *       *       *

I stared wildly at it for a full minute before I focused my eyes
enough to see, at the bottom, a thousand little gray fragments.

And immediately it came to both of us at the same time. A poor
conductor, the ball had used up all its available heat on that final
impact. Like a golfball that has been dipped in liquid air and
dropped, it had smashed into thin splinters.

The hole had sloping sides and I scrambled down in it and picked up
one of the pieces, using my handkerchief, folded--there was no telling
just how cold it would be.

It was the stuff, all right. And colder than an icicle.

I climbed out. "Let's go home," I said.

Farnsworth looked at me thoughtfully. Then he sort of cocked his head
to one side and asked, "What do you suppose will happen when those
pieces thaw?"

I stared at him. I began to think of a thousand tiny slivers whizzing
around erratically, richocheting off buildings, in downtown San
Francisco and in twenty counties, and no matter what they hit, moving
and accelerating as long as there was any heat in the air to give them
energy.

And then I saw a tool shed, on the other side of the pasture from us.

But Farnsworth was ahead of me, waddling along, puffing. He got the
shovels out and handed one to me.

We didn't say a word, neither of us, for hours. It takes a long time
to fill a hole twenty feet deep--especially when you're shoveling
very, very carefully and packing down the dirt very, very hard.

    --WALTER S. TEVIS


    +----------------------------------------------------+
    |Transcriber's Note:                                 |
    |                                                    |
    |The spelling of "richochet" has been retained as in |
    |the original.                                       |
    |                                                    |
    |This etext was produced from Galaxy February 1958.  |
    |Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that|
    |the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed. |
    +----------------------------------------------------+



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BIG BOUNCE***


******* This file should be named 23153.txt or 23153.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/2/3/1/5/23153



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
