The Project Gutenberg EBook of Unspecialist, by Murray F. Yaco

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Unspecialist

Author: Murray F. Yaco

Release Date: November 11, 2007 [EBook #23443]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK UNSPECIALIST ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Bruce Albrecht and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net






Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from Astounding Science
Fiction, October, 1959. Extensive research did not reveal any evidence
that the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.

Minor typographical errors have been corrected without note. Dialect
spellings, contractions and discrepancies have been retained.




UNSPECIALIST

[Illustration]


_A machine can be built to do any accurately described job better
than any man. The superiority of a man is that he can do an unexpected,
undescribed, and emergency job ... provided he hasn't been especially
trained to be a machine._


BY MURRAY F. YACO




Banner ripped open his orders, read them, stared in disbelief for a
quick moment, then cursed wildly while reaching for the telephone.

"Hello, Gastonia? Yes, I got 'em. What kinda way to waste our time you
lunkheads think ... oh, it's you, colonel!"

Banner dropped the receiver and let it dangle. He sank into the only
soft chair in the apartment and watched hypnotically as the phone's
receiver limply coiled and uncoiled at the end of the wire.

Somebody knocked on, then opened the door. "Hi, pretty boy, you got our
orders?"

"Come on in and hear about it," Banner said. He got up from the chair,
ran his hands compulsively through his recently short-cropped red hair,
hung up the phone and shoved the orders into his co-pilot's hands.

Harcraft read them over three times, then sank into the chair just
vacated by Banner. Finally--while Banner poured them both a drink--he
managed to blurt, "Potato fertilizer and tractor fuel--Oh, no. Oh, no,
no, no!"

"Oh, yes, yes, yes," Banner said bitterly. "We are heroes of the
spaceways; yes, indeed. We train for ten years. Acquire great skill in
the art of the patrol. We dedicate ourselves to the protection of the
Federation. We ready ourselves for war. We gird our young, strong
loins, we--"

"You're getting hysterical," said Warcraft, who poured himself another
drink, began pacing the floor and took up where Banner had left off.
"We've never even been lost on patrol. And now they do this. It's
unbelievable! Potato fertilizer and tractor fuel. We're supposed to
travel thirty-six light-years, pick up one thousand sleds of the stuff,
deliver it to some God-forsaken farm planet another thirty years out,
and return to base. You know what they'll do then?" He turned to
Banner, pointed his finger accusingly and repeated, "You know what
they'll do then?"

"How would I know," said Banner, glumly staring into his drink.

"Well, I can tell you what they'll do. Yes, sir, I can tell you."
Warcraft's pudgy face and oversize brown eyes seemed to melt into each
other, giving him the appearance of an angry, if not very bright,
chimpanzee.

"O.K., what'll they do?" Banner said.

"They'll give us medals. That's what they'll do. For safe delivery of
one million tons of tractor fuel, you two fine specimens of manhood are
hereby presented with the Order of the Oil. And for your courageous
service in delivering two million tons of potato fertilizer, you are
also awarded the shield of--"

"Never mind," Banner said. "It could be worse. They could've saddled us
with a Bean Brain. Come on. Let's go to some bar and get sober. We're
leaving for freight duty at 1700."

                     *      *      *      *      *

The Bean Brain met them at the air lock. "Name is Arnold. Here's my
orders." Banner stared at Warcraft, Warcraft stared at Arnold.

"Get inside," said Banner.

The Bean Brain smiled, "Er ... could you sort of lead the way? I've
never been inside a ship before. If you got some kind of can, it would
save a mess. I'll probably vomit a while."

They stopped calling him Bean Brain three days later. He was still
sick, miserably spacesick, and neither Banner nor Warcraft had the
heart to keep needling him. On the fourth day he managed to get up and
around. They ate their first meal together that day. "Let's get
something straight right off the bat," Banner said. "Neither Warcraft
nor I got anything against you 'cept prejudice. That right, Warcraft?"

"Right," Warcraft said.

"In short," continued Banner, between puffs on a cigarette, "all we
know is what we've heard."

"And that's not good," said Warcraft.

"Item one," said Banner, blowing smoke at the ceiling ventilator.
"Patrol Command came up with the Bean Brain idea about six months ago.
Patrol Command, in its infinite wisdom, has never seen fit to explain
_why_ Bean Brains are sometimes assigned, evidently at random, to
small patrol vessels such as this. The orders always state that the
'passenger' will accompany pilot and co-pilot throughout the entire
trip, will obey orders, yet is equal in rank to the ship's commanding
officer. The Bean Brain has no duties aboard. This seems to make sense,
at least, since Bean Brains aren't trained for anything and can't do
anything."

"Item two," said Banner, taking his eyes off the ceiling and pointing a
finger at Arnold. "I have, or had, two good friends--both patrol
captains--who had the honor of taxiing Bean Brains around the universe.
One never came back. The other, Captain Slatkin, came back and got a
big medal for reasons he'll never talk about."

"And Slatkin liked to brag," said Warcraft, knowingly.

Arnold stood up slowly. He was a small man, but as he looked up at the
ship's pilot and co-pilot, he gave both the impression of height and
strength. "I'll tell you something, too," he said, speaking slowly as
if in pain. "I don't know why Bean Brains are assigned to ships like
this either. I've never been told. I took the job because I didn't like
what I was doing before. I've never had any real training, and this
seemed like a chance to do something that sounded like fun.

"Like I said, I've never been told anything. They tested me for a lot
of things, then gave me my orders and told me to come along. And if
you're wondering, I flunked the ESP tests, so there's nothing there.
You want to consider me dead weight? O.K., your privilege. Leave me
alone if you want to, I'll do the same. Be friendly, I'll be friendly.
Ask me to help. I'll do my best."

Then he got up and went back to his bunk.

                     *      *      *      *      *

During the next six weeks, Arnold spent most of the time in his bunk,
scanning tapes from the ship's micro-library on an overhead viewer. At
meal times he was polite, offering no further information about
himself, yet entering into any conversation that centered around such
trivia as terrestrial sports, taxes, money, liquor, food, government
agencies. By mutual, if silent, agreement, neither women nor work were
discussed.

Working in the ship's control room, sometimes together, sometimes
spelling each other, Banner and Warcraft speculated bitterly and
endlessly about their passenger. Theories to explain his presence--most
of them propounded by Warcraft--were created, torn apart, modified,
exploded, in giant sequences of effort which left both men finally
exhausted and tired of the whole business.

On the second day of the seventh week out, their ennui vanished. A ship
was picked up by the spec-spanner, and at their delight at the break in
routine, they summoned Arnold up to the cabin.

"Take a good look," said Banner, "it's an Ankorbadian ship. Probably
the first and last you'll ever see." Arnold watched as Banner's finger
tracked a slowly moving point of light across a recessed ceiling
screen.

"Yes, sir," said Warcraft, "you are looking at the representatives of
mankind's only sibling. The noble Ankorbades." Then he recited in a
singsong voice:

    "A simple race the Ankorbades
    They wear no clothes and live in caves
    But out in space they do in minutes
    What our ships do at speeds infinite."

"Cultural paranoia," added Warcraft.

"Huh?"

"I mean just what I said. You and a million others recite that ditty,
or variations of it every day of the week. It all adds up to the fact
that the world is full of small-egged animals who for ten years have
done nothing but just scream that we're about to be attacked by the
savage Ankorbades."

"_Tch, tch_," said Banner, "treason, my lieutenant, treason. Of you I
had expected at least a show of chauvinism."

"Stop _tch-tch_ing me," Warcraft said irritably. "You've known how I
felt about this mess for a long time."

"Yes, indeed," said Banner, yawning, "ever since you took that
micro-course in culturology you have insights into the situation denied
to the rest of the race."

"Anyway," Warcraft said, making a small adjustment on the screen, "you
and countless other atavisms are reacting in a very predictable way.
Since you can't reconcile the naked Ankorbades and their superior
technology, and since they are alien to point of showing no interest
whatsoever in our elaborate art, institutions, rituals--"

"And since," piped up Arnold, startling both men, "the human
unconscious can't help but equate nakedness with savagery, we have
armed our mighty planet to the teeth, convinced that Armageddon is
around the corner."

"Well," said the surprised Warcraft.

"Where'd you pick that up," asked Banner.

"From Captain Slatkin," said Arnold, smiling. "I met him when I was
indoctrinated. He took the same micro-course in culturology. 'Course,
he only believed that stuff when he was scared."

"Oh, you don't say," said Banner. "Tell us, my little friend, are you
too, convinced that Armageddon is around the corner? Not that I really
think you're capable of having an opinion."

"I got plenty of opinions, all right," said Arnold quietly, staring at
his shoes. "Opinion number one is this: We're not really at war yet,
but within the past two years, fifty-six patrol ships have disappeared
in the vicinity of our friendly neighbor."

"That's not an opinion," Banner said. "And disappeared can mean a lot
of things."

"Opinion number two," continued Arnold, scratching himself under an
arm. "About the only diplomatic relations we got with them animals is
when they write a note complaining about some Patrol ship getting too
close to some piece of dirt in their system."

"Speaking of that, you'll have to excuse me for a moment," Warcraft
said.

"Stop clowning," snapped Banner. "Listen to him. Here's your chance to
get some insight into the nature of the thorn in your side. Go on, Bean
Brain. Any more opinions?"

"Yeah. If you're such a wise guy, tell me why you're here right now.
Why?" Arnold's mouth screwed itself into a knowing, bitter smile. "When
both of you were children you heard the story about the Big Fleet. So
you made it into the Patrol, spent the rest of your life training,
looking, thinking that some day--"

Warcraft broke in, "That tale about an Ankorbadian fleet build-up has
been discredited a full thousand times. When they pried that crazy
scout out of his ship, he was an hour away from the crematorium. You
try spending forty-six days in space without food or water sometime!
You'll see hidden arsenals of alien ships till hell won't have it."

"And," added Banner, "where is this fleet build-up supposed to take
place? The patrol has had every planet in reachable space under
scheduled surveillance for the past twenty years. You don't hide a
thousand S-type cruisers in somebody's pocket."

"So nobody's scared, huh?" said Arnold. "So the entire space command
has been playing footsie all over the galaxy for twenty years looking
for a thousand ships that aren't there in the first place, huh?"

"Routine surveillance," said Warcraft.

"A thousand ships," said Arnold, slapping his sweating forehead.
"They'll burn through our defense system like--"

"You're a paranoid rabble rouser," said Banner lightly. "We've got work
to do up here. How about getting back to your bunk?"

                     *      *      *      *      *

Two days later they made scheduled contact with the caravan of potato
fertilizer and tractor fuel. One thousand sleds, in tandem, were in
proper orbit two hundred miles above Sedor II. Their orders provided
for a landing on the planet and a short ship-leave, at the discretion
of the ship's pilot to refresh personnel.

Banner and Harcraft decided against landing. All necessary contact, now
that they were out of hyperdrive, could be accomplished with the ship's
radio. Short planetfalls were, psychologically, more trouble than they
were worth, often destroying the hard-earned, delicate space
orientation which was their only defense against the abysmal boredom.

"It's a dull place anyway," explained Harcraft to Arnold, who had come
up to the control room. "It's a mining and processing settlement. Maybe
five hundred families altogether. Got a funny religion, too."

"Huh, what kind?"

"Well," began Harcraft breezily, "sort of sacrificial you might say.
They believe in killing strangers who annoy their women."

"A dull place," agreed Arnold, wiping his nose with his sleeve.

"Speaking of religion," said Banner, "I just talked to their monitor on
the radio. They've picked up twelve big ships on their scanner during
the past two days."

"Ankorbades?" asked Arnold quickly.

"Uh-huh. But not what you think. It's Easter time or some such thing at
home. They all return to the home planet and stay there for about
thirty days in the spring. Religious festival."

"Oh, yeah. They paint themselves blue and howl at both of their moons
for a month. I read about it once."

"We'll be home, too, pretty soon," ventured Harcraft, for whom the
return journey was subjectively always short.

"Let's hitch up to those sleds," Banner said. "It's time to get going."

Four weeks later two of the fertilizer sleds went out of phase and
automatically cut the ship out of hyperdrive.

"A welcome diversion," said Banner to Harcraft, "you are now about to
meet your mortal enemy face to face."

"Manual labor? Never," said Harcraft, assuming the pose of a man
bravely facing the firing squad. "Patrol duty is my lifeblood. Even
freight duty such as this I can stomach. But manual labor! Please
captain, let the air out of the ship, if you will, but never shall
these hands--"

"Somebody call me?" asked Arnold, appearing silently.

"Yeah," said Banner, "how'd you like to help?"

"Sure, what you got."

"Couple sleds are out of phase. You and Harcraft are going to slip into
suits and go out and find the trouble."

Arnold shrugged, "O.K. with me, when do we start?"

"Pretty quick," said Banner, who had turned to look at the ship's
spec-scanner. "Looks like we're in a belt of meteorites. We'll be able
to match velocities, but we could still be creamed if the path gets too
eccentric. Show him the way, Harcraft. I don't want to take any longer
than necessary, either. Understand?"

Fifteen minutes later, both Arnold and Harcraft were out of the air
lock, each clutching a new phase unit. Harcraft called instructions to
Arnold over his suit's inter-com, but within minutes the smaller man
was, if anything, more adept at the business of maneuvering himself
through the void than his teacher. They replaced the phase unit in the
first sled--the fiftieth from the ship--with Harcraft doing the work
and Arnold watching.

"Can you do the next one alone?" Harcraft asked.

"Easy as pie," Arnold said. "Where is it?"

"About two hundred sleds farther back. Numbers on the side. Number two
hundred sixty-three. Can you remember?"

"I ain't dumb. Where you gonna be?"

"Back in the ship. We'll be waiting for you."

                     *      *      *      *      *

Back again in the control cabin with Banner, Harcraft was about to
congratulate himself on inventing the apprentice system, when a
piercing scream brought both men to their feet. "It's Arnold," Banner
said. "Arnold, you all right?"

Harcraft pushed Banner away from the speaker. "Arnold, what's wrong,
you O.K.?" The speaker remained silent.

"You better suit up," Banner said quietly.

"Yeah," Harcraft said, staring dumbly at the speaker. "Yeah, I better
suit up."

"Wait. Better take a look on the viewscreen."

"Hey, he's coming this way! Quick, get ready at the air lock!"

It was fifteen minutes before they could get anything out of him, and
then he wasn't too coherent. They gave him an injection of herodine to
quiet him down, but his eyes still rolled wildly and all he could
manage was: "Big hunk of rock ... big hunk of rock ... rock, quick ...
monkey ships."

"Any idea what he's talking about?"

"No," Banner said thoughtfully. "There was a sizable meteorite that
came pretty close while you were on your way back to the ship, but I'd
already tracked it before either one of you went outside."

"How close?"

"Hm-m-m. Visually, a dozen kilometers, I'd guess. I could run the tape
if you--"

"Velocities almost the same?" asked Harcraft, who was now fiddling with
the viewscreen controls.

"Yeah. Shouldn't be too hard to find. How about lugging Bean Brain back
to his bunk. I'll run the tape, then you can plot it on the screen."

When Harcraft returned to the control cabin, Banner had already plotted
it on the screen.

"I'll say it's a big piece of rock! About four kilometers in diameter."

"Yeah, but nothing out of order."

"Uh-huh. Let me turn up the magnification a little and see if--" Banner
watched as Harcraft turned control buttons, skillfully increasing
magnification without losing the held of view. Suddenly, the object
exploded into iridescence. "What--"

"Watch," Harcraft said. He bumped the magnification as much as he
dared.

"The Ankorbadian fleet," said Banner between clenched teeth.

They spent the next hour scanning the ship's micro-library for anything
at all on Ankorbadian religious practices. There was nothing. Arnold
awoke in another hour and seemed remarkably free of hysteria.

"What do you know about our friends' religious holiday?" asked Banner.
"We checked the library without any luck."

Arnold scratched the side of his face. "Lemme think. Yeah, I remember.
They go home to celebrate spring, like you said."

"They all go home?"

"Uh-huh. They got to. Only time they can mate. Only place, too."

"How long they stay? I've heard it's about one of our months, but we
have to know exactly."

"That's all I know. Read it some place a long time ago. Can I go back
to sleep now?"

"Go back to sleep," said Banner.

They spent the next three hours maneuvering carefully around the
asteroid. They took six thousand feet of movies and stared at the
projections for another three hours. One thousand seven hundred and
thirty silvery needles flashed reflected starlight into astonished,
wild eyes.

"At least," whispered Banner, "there's nobody there."

"A lot of good that does us. They'll be back from their home planet in
a few weeks, just as soon as the breeding season is over. Why should
they leave anybody here? There's not a map in the galaxy that indicates
the position of this piece of rock. And we haven't any weapons."

"I don't suppose the computer--"

"You can't compute an orbit without at least one more reference point.
Besides, we're four weeks from any kind of fleet contact."

"Great. In other words, they'll be back here, ready to roll before we
can even tell anybody that we don't know how to find it again."

"Right. And since there's not any room left to park another ship of
that size, it's a pretty safe assumption that they are ready to roll."

"Armageddon," muttered Harcraft.

"You sure we don't have anything to--"

"Weapons? Yeah. We have a pistol and three small nitro paks in a locker
some place. You couldn't even blow your way inside one of those ships.
And if you could, you'd spend two weeks and then blow yourself to hell
before you'd know anything about the armament."

"O.K., let's land and look around. Go get Arnold."

                     *      *      *      *      *

They cut off the sleds and plunged down, landing between two of the
ships. Before putting on suits, Banner sent Arnold to the locker to get
the three nitro paks. He hoped it would help him overcome the terrible
feeling of nakedness and impotence.

They spent only a little time out of the ship. There was nothing to see
that hadn't been seen before, and the heavy artificial gravity
generated by the alien ships--coupled with a maze of deep
crevices--made walking difficult and dangerous.

Back in the control cabin, Banner turned to Harcraft, "Any ideas?"

"Ideas? You mean for saving Homo sapiens? I'm afraid not. I simply do
not feel up to saving six billion sentient organisms today. I feel--"

"You're getting hysterical," said Banner, whose own tight, small voice
was barely audible.

"I got an opinion," said Arnold. "You guys stop crying for a minute and
I'll tell you."

It took him five minutes to explain the whole thing. When he was
through, both Banner and Harcraft turned him down flat. "Not a chance,"
said Banner. It would take a week to set the thing up, and then it
wouldn't work. Our best chance is a long one, but maybe we'll make it.
We're four weeks away from any fleet contact, but it's the only
sensible course of action."

"That makes it a total of eight weeks, with four weeks to get back
here. That's two months," said Arnold. "You think they're gonna wait
two months before they shove out of here?"

"Maybe not," Banner said. "But that's the only thing to do. And the
sooner we get started the better the chances. Let's get going."

"You look here--" Arnold began.

"No more opinions, Bean Brain. You're not entitled to an opinion. You
think we should take your word for everything you told us? Tell me why.
You said yourself you never had any training. So you're guessing and
hoping. It would take a staff of two dozen highly specialized
technicians to even evaluate your idea, much less put it into action.
Hell, man, face it. What do you know about geology, chemistry, mining?
What do you know about anything?"

Arnold pointed a trembling finger at Banner. "Look, I told you that I
know rock. I know plenty of gardening, too. I gave you guys a chance to
say O.K. You still say no? Have it your way, but we'll do it my way."
Both Banner and Harcraft found themselves staring into the barrel of
the ship's only weapon.

Harcraft recovered from his astonishment quicker than Banner. "O.K.,
Bean Brain, have it your way." Quickly, casually he started for the
cabin door. Then, with such speed that Banner hardly saw the movement,
he chopped down viciously toward Arnold's wrist with the edge of his
hand.

Harcraft recovered consciousness a half hour later. "Don't try that
again, little boy," said Arnold with unconcealed hatred. "I'll give you
another thirty minutes to catch your breath. Then we all go to work."

It took ten days instead of seven. Under Arnold's close supervision,
they made the ship perform like a tractor, an air hammer, a foundation
borer and an angledozer.

Once, when they told him that some particular maneuver couldn't be
done, he took the controls himself, and came so close to killing them
all that Banner, out of sheer terror, took over and made it do the
things Arnold decreed necessary.

Finally it was finished. Two million tons of potato fertilizer, one
million tons of tractor fuel combined into a slimy pulp lay jammed into
the largest crevice on the asteroid. A few hours later they were a
thousand miles out in space.

"Now?" asked Banner.

"Now," said Arnold.

With the viewscreen at maximum magnification, they watched as the
asteroid blew itself into a thousand million pieces.

                     *      *      *      *      *

In the control cabin, a short week away from fleet contact, Banner was
still gloating over the movies. "Look at these. Before and After. How
many medals you think we can carry on our strong, manly chests?"

"I really couldn't care less," answered Harcraft. "While you've been
sitting there enriching your fantasy life, I've solved the mystery of
mysteries."

"Out with it."

"O.K. While our little friend has been lying on his bunk ruining his
beady eyes on the micro-viewer, I've been asking myself significant
questions. Question number one: What kind of person does it take to
survive the inactivity and boredom of three, four, maybe six months in
a space can like this? Answer: It takes a highly trained and
conditioned person such as yours truly or yourself. Arnold is obviously
not such a person."

"Obviously."

"Question number two: Under what circumstances can a person as
obviously intelligent as Arnold manage not to become a highly
specialized member of society? And last, what kind of person can be so
revoltingly unspecialized as to know, with fanatical certainty, that
the main ingredient of a good potato fertilizer is ammonium nitrate;
that such a substance is rather ineffective as an explosive unless you
mix it with a good oxidizable material, such as Diesel fuel; that a
four-square mile chunk of rock is 'brittle'--"

"And don't forget to add another nice facet--that he's a lot cleverer
in the manly art of self-defense than you'll ever be."

"I acknowledge my humiliation and at the same time repeat my question:
What kind of person can be so unspecialized and at the same time so
miserably competent?"

"I give up. Do you really know the answer?"

"I know this. I know that whoever he is, it makes good sense to send
somebody like him along with two overspecialized robots like us. Look
at us. You couldn't pull a cotter pin with a pair of pliers if you knew
what a cotter pin was. As for myself, if I'd of gotten that gun away
from Arnold, I'm not even sure I'd have known how to fire it."

"Which still doesn't answer any questions."

"There are still a hundred places on our primitive homeland that
provide the answer," said Harcraft thoughtfully. "Places where men
spend half the year working with vegetables and fertilizer--"

"And the other half breaking rock with a sledge hammer?"

"Yes. And there's probably no better place than a cell to train for the
isolation of space."

"Uh-huh. It also explains a certain familiarity with makeshift
explosives and weapons."

"And, brother Bean Brain," summed up Harcraft wistfully. "What better
place in the universe to find asylum from specialization."


THE END





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Unspecialist, by Murray F. Yaco

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK UNSPECIALIST ***

***** This file should be named 23443.txt or 23443.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/3/4/4/23443/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Bruce Albrecht and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
