Project Gutenberg's A Matter of Importance, by William Fitzgerald Jenkins

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: A Matter of Importance

Author: William Fitzgerald Jenkins

Release Date: November 26, 2007 [EBook #23636]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A MATTER OF IMPORTANCE ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Bruce Albrecht, Mary Meehan and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net









                     A MATTER OF IMPORTANCE

                       BY MURRAY LEINSTER

                    Illustrated by Bernklau

[Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from Astounding Science
Fiction September 1959. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence
that the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]




     _The importance of a matter is almost entirely a matter of your
     attitude. And whether you call something "a riot" or "a war" ...
     well, there is a difference, but what is it?_


Nobody ever saw the message-torp. It wasn't to be expected. It came in
on a course that extended backward to somewhere near the Rift--where
there used to be Huks--and for a very, very long way it had traveled as
only message-torps do travel. It hopped half a light-year in overdrive,
and came back to normality long enough for its photocells to inspect the
star-filled universe all about. Then it hopped another half light-year,
and so on. For a long, long time it traveled in this jerky fashion.

Eventually, moving as it did in the straightest of straight lines, its
photocells reported that it neared a star which had achieved
first-magnitude brightness. It paused a little longer than usual while
its action-circuits shifted. Then it swung to aim for the bright star,
which was the sol-type sun Varenga. The torp sped toward it on a new
schedule. Its overdrive hops dropped to light-month length. Its pauses
in normality were longer. They lasted almost the fiftieth of a second.

When Varenga had reached a suitably greater brightness in the
message-torp's estimation, it paused long enough to blast out its
recorded message. It had been designed for this purpose and no other.
Its overdrive hops shortened to one light-hour of distance covered.
Regularly, its transmitter flung out a repetition of what it had been
sent so far to say. In time it arrived within the limits of the Varenga
system. Its hops diminished to light-minutes of distance only. It ceased
to correct its course. It hurtled through the orbits of all the planets,
uttering silently screamed duplicates of the broadcasts now left behind,
to arrive later.

It did not fall into the sun, of course. The odds were infinitely
against such a happening. It pounded past the sun, shrieking its news,
and hurtled on out to the illimitable emptiness beyond. It was still
squealing when it went out of human knowledge forever.

       *       *       *       *       *

The state of things was routine. Sergeant Madden had the traffic desk
that morning. He would reach retirement age in two more years, and it
was a nagging reminder that he grew old. He didn't like it. There was
another matter. His son Timmy had a girl, and she was on the way to
Varenga IV on the _Cerberus_, and when she arrived Timmy would become a
married man. Sergeant Madden contemplated this prospect. By the time his
retirement came up, in the ordinary course of events he could very well
be a grandfather. He was unable to imagine it. He rumbled to himself.

The telefax hummed and ejected a sheet of paper on top of other sheets
in the desk's "In" cubicle. Sergeant Madden glanced absently at it. It
was an operations-report sheet, to be referred to if necessary, but
otherwise simply to be filed at the end of the day.

A voice crackled overhead.

"_Attention Traffic_," said the voice. "_The following report has been
received and verified as off-planet. Message follows._" That voice
ceased and was replaced by another, which wavered and wabbled from the
electron-spurts normal to solar systems and which make for auroras on
planets. "_Mayday mayday mayday_," said the second voice. "_Call for
help. Call for help. Ship_ Cerberus _major breakdown overdrive heading
Procyron III for refuge. Help urgently needed._" There was a pause.
"_Mayday mayday mayday. Call for help--_"

Sergeant Madden's face went blank. Timmy's girl was on the _Cerberus_.
Then he growled and riffled swiftly through the operations-report sheets
that had come in since his tour of duty began. He found the one he
looked for. Yes. Patrolman Timothy Madden was now in overdrive in squad
ship 740, delivering the monthly precinct report to Headquarters. He
would be back in eight days. Maybe a trifle less, with his girl due to
arrive on the _Cerberus_ in nine and him to be married in ten. But--

Sergeant Madden swore. As a prospective bridegroom, Timmy's place was on
this call for help to the _Cerberus_. But he wasn't available. It was in
his line, because it was specifically a traffic job. The cops handled
traffic, naturally, as they handled sanitary-code enforcement and
delinks and mercantile offenses and murderers and swindlers and missing
persons. Everything was dumped on the cops. They'd even handled the Huks
in time gone by--which in still earlier times would have been called a
space war and put down in all the history books. It was routine for the
cops to handle the disabled or partly disabled _Cerberus_.

       *       *       *       *       *

Sergeant Madden pushed a button marked "_Traffic Emergency_" and held it
down until it lighted.

"You got that _Cerberus_ report?" he demanded of the air about him.

"Just," said a voice overhead.

"What've you got on hand?" demanded Sergeant Madden.

"The _Aldeb_'s here," said the voice. "There's a minor overhaul going
on, but we can get her going in six hours. She's slow, but you know
her."

"Hm-m-m. Yeah," said Sergeant Madden. He added vexedly: "My son Timmy's
girl is on board the _Cerberus_. He'll be wild he wasn't here. I'm going
to take the ready squad ship and go on out. Passengers always fret when
there's trouble and no cop around. Too bad Timmy's off on assignment."

"Yeah," said the Traffic Emergency voice. "Too bad. But we'll get the
_Aldeb_ off in six hours."

Sergeant Madden pushed another button. It lighted.

"Madden," he rumbled. "Desk. The _Cerberus_' had a breakdown. She's
limpin' over to Procyron III for refuge to wait for help. The _Aldeb_'ll
do the job on her, but I'm going to ride the squad ship out and make up
the report. Who's next on call-duty?"

"Willis," said a crisp voice. "Squad ship 390. He's up for next call.
Playing squint-eye in the squad room now."

"Pull him loose," Sergeant Madden ordered, "and send somebody to take
the desk. Tell Willis I'll be on the tarmac in five minutes."

"Check," said the crisp voice.

Sergeant Madden lifted his thumb. All this was standard operational
procedure. A man had the desk. An emergency call came in. That man took
it and somebody else took the desk. Eminently fair. No favoritism; no
throwing weight around; no glory-grabbing. Not that there was much glory
in being a cop. But as long as a man was a cop, he was good. Sergeant
Madden reflected with satisfaction that even if he was getting on to
retirement age, he was still a cop.

He made two more calls. One was to Records for the customary full
information on the _Cerberus_ and on the Procyron system. The other was
to the flat where Timmy lived with him. It was going to be lonely when
Timmy got married and had a home of his own. Sergeant Madden dialed for
message-recording and gruffly left word for Timmy. He, Timmy's father,
was going on ahead to make the report on the _Cerberus_. Timmy wasn't to
worry. The ship might be a few days late, but Timmy'd better make the
most of them. He'd be married a long time!

Sergeant Madden got up, grunting, from his chair. Somebody came in to
take over the desk. Sergeant Madden nodded and waved his hand. He went
out and took the slide-stair down to the tarmac where squad ship 390
waited in standard police readiness. Patrolman Willis arrived at the
stubby little craft seconds after the sergeant.

"Procyron III," said Sergeant Madden, rumbling. "I figure three days.
You told your wife?"

"I called," said Patrolman Willis resignedly.

They climbed into the squad ship. Police ships, naturally, had their
special drive, which could lift them off without rocket aid and gave
them plenty of speed, but filled up the hull with so much machinery that
it was only practical for such ships. Commercial craft were satisfied
with low-power drives, which meant that spaceport facilities lifted them
to space and pulled them down again. They carried rockets for emergency
landing, but the main thing was that they had a profitable pay load.
Squad ships didn't carry anything but two men and their equipment.

Sergeant Madden dogged the door shut. The ship fell up toward the sky.
The heavens became that blackness-studded-with-jewels which is space. A
great yellow sun flared astern. A half-bright, half-dark globe lay
below-the planet Varenga IV, on which the precinct police station for
this part of the galaxy had its location.

Patrolman Willis, frowning with care, established the squad ship's
direction, while Sergeant Madden observed without seeming to do so.
Presently Patrolman Willis pushed a button. The squad ship went into
overdrive.

It was perfectly commonplace in all its aspects.

       *       *       *       *       *

The galaxy went about its business. Stars shone, and planets moved
around them, and double stars circled each other like waltzing couples.
There were also comets and meteors and calcium-clouds and high-energy
free nuclei, all of which acted as was appropriate for them. On some
millions of planets winds blew and various organisms practiced
photosynthesis. Waves ran across seas. Clouds formed and poured down
rain. On the relatively small number of worlds so far inhabited by
humans, people went about their business with no thought for such things
or anything not immediately affecting their lives. And the cops went
about their business.

Sergeant Madden dozed most of the first day of overdrive travel. He had
nothing urgent to do, as yet. This was only a routine trip. The
_Cerberus_ had had a breakdown in her overdrive. Commercial ships'
drives being what they were, it meant that on her emergency drive she
could only limp along at maybe eight or ten lights. Which meant years to
port, with neither food nor air for the journey. But it was not even
conceivable to rendezvous with a rescue ship in the emptiness between
stars. So the _Cerberus_ had sent a message-torp and was crawling to a
refuge-planet, more or less surveyed a hundred years before. There she
would land by emergency rockets, because her drive couldn't take the
strain. Once aground, the _Cerberus_ should wait for help. There was
nothing else to be done. But everything was nicely in hand. The squad
ship headed briskly for the planet Procyron III, and Sergeant Madden
would take the data for a proper, official, emergency-call traffic
report on the incident, and in time the _Aldeb_ would turn up and make
emergency repairs and see the _Cerberus_ out to space again and headed
for port once more.

This was absolutely all that there was to anticipate. Traffic handled
such events as a matter of course. So Sergeant Madden dozed during most
of the first day of overdrive. He reflected somnolently when awake that
it was fitting for Timmy's father to be on the job when Timmy's girl was
in difficulty, since Timmy was off somewhere else.

On the second day he conversed more or less with Patrolman Willis.
Willis was a young cop, almost as young as Timmy. He took himself very
seriously. When Sergeant Madden reached for the briefing-data, he found
it disturbed. Willis had read up on the kind of ship the _Cerberus_ was,
and on the characteristics of Procyron III as recorded a century before.
The _Cerberus_ was a semi-freighter, Candless type. Procyron III was a
water-planet with less than ten per cent of land. Which was unfortunate,
because its average temperature and orbit made it highly suitable for
human occupation. Had the ten per cent of solid ground been in one
piece, it would doubtless have been colonized. But the ground was an
archipelago.

"Hm-m-m," said Sergeant Madden, after reading. "The survey recommends
this northern island for emergency landing. Eh?"

Willis nodded. "Huks used to use it. Not the island. The planet."

Sergeant Madden yawned. It seemed pathetic to him that young cops like
Willis and even Timmy referred so often to Huks. There weren't any, any
more. Being a cop meant carrying out purely routine tasks, nowadays.
They were important tasks, of course. Without the cops, there couldn't
be any civilization. But Willis and Timmy didn't think of it that way.
Not yet. To them being a cop was still a matter of glamour rather than
routine. They probably even regretted the absence of Huks. But when a
man reached Sergeant Madden's age, glamour didn't matter. He had to
remember that his job was worth doing, in itself.

"Yeah," said Sergeant Madden. "There was quite a time with those Huks."

"Did you ... did you ever see a Huk, sir?" asked Willis.

"Before my time," said Sergeant Madden. "But I've talked to men who
worked on the case."

       *       *       *       *       *

It did not occur to him that the Huks would hardly have been called a
"case" by anybody but a cop. When human colonies spread through this
sector, they encountered an alien civilization. By old-time standards,
it was quite a culture. The Huks had a good technology, they had
spaceships, and they were just beginning to expand, themselves, from
their own home planet or planets. If they'd had a few more centuries of
development, they might have been a menace to humanity. But the humans
got started first.

There being no longer any armies or navies when the Huks were
discovered, the matter of intelligent nonhumans was a matter for the
cops. So the police matter-of-factly tried to incorporate the Huk
culture into the human. They explained the rules by which human
civilization worked. They painstakingly tried to arrange a sub-precinct
station on the largest Huk home planet, with Huk cops in charge. They
made it clear that they had nothing to do with politics and were simply
concerned with protecting civilized people from those in their midst who
didn't want to be civilized.

The Huks wouldn't have it. They bristled, proudly. They were defiant.
They considered themselves not only as good as humans--the cops didn't
care what they thought--but they insisted on acting as if they were
better.

They reacted, in fact, as humans would have done if just at the
beginning of their conquest of the stars, they'd run into an expanding,
farther-advanced race which tried to tell them what they had to do. The
Huks fought.

"They fought pretty good," said Sergeant Madden tolerantly. "Not
killer-fashion--like delinks. The Force had to give 'em the choice of
joining up or getting out. Took years to get 'em out. Had to use all the
off-duty men from six precincts to handle the last riot."

The conflict he called a riot would have been termed a space battle by a
navy or an army. But the cops operated within a strictly police frame of
reference, which was the reverse of military. They weren't trying to
subjugate the Huks, but to make them behave. In consequence, their
tactics were unfathomable to the Huks--who thought in military terms.
Squadrons of police ships which would have seemed ridiculous to a
fighting-force commander threw the Huks off-balance, kept them
off-balance, did a scrupulous minimum of damage to them, and thereby
kept out of every trap the Huks set for them. In the end the cops
supervised and assisted at the embittered, rebellious emigration of a
race. The Huks took off for the far side of the galaxy. They'd neither
been conquered nor exterminated. But Sergeant Madden thought of the
decisive fracas as a riot rather than a battle.

"Yeah," he repeated. "They acted a lot like delinks."

Patrolman Willis spoke with some heat about delinks, who are the bane of
all police forces everywhere. They practice adolescent behavior even
after they grow up--but they never grow up. It is delinks who put
stink-bombs in public places and write threatening letters and give
warnings of bombs about to go off--and sometimes set them--and stuff
dirt into cold rocket-nozzles and sometimes kill people and go
incontinently hysterical because they didn't mean to. Delinks do most of
the damaging things that have no sense to them. There is no cop who has
not wanted to kill some grinning, half-scared, half-defiant delink who
hasn't yet realized that he's destroyed half a million credits' worth of
property or crippled somebody for life--for no reason at all.

Sergeant Madden listened to the denunciation of all the delink tribe.
Then he yawned again.

"I know!" he said. "I don't like 'em either. But we got 'em. We always
will have 'em. Like old age."

Then he made computations with a stubby pencil and asked reflectively:

"When're you coming out of overdrive?"

Patrolman Willis told him. Sergeant Madden nodded.

"I'll take another nap," he observed. "We'll be there a good twenty-two
hours before the _Aldeb_."

The little squad ship went on at an improbable multiple of the speed of
light. After all, this was a perfectly normal performance. Just an
ordinary bit of business for the cops.

       *       *       *       *       *

Sergeant Madden belched when the squad ship came out of overdrive. He
watched with seeming indifference while Patrolman Willis took a spectro
on the star ahead and to the left, and painstakingly compared the
reading with the ancient survey-data on the Procyron system. It had to
match, of course, unless there'd been extraordinarily bad astrogation.

Willis put the spectroscope away, estimated for himself, and then
checked with the dial that indicated the brightness of the still
point-sized star. He said:

"Four light-weeks, I make it."

Sergeant Madden nodded. A superior officer should never do anything
useful, so long as a subordinate isn't making a serious mistake. That is
the way subordinates are trained to become superiors, in time. Patrolman
Willis set a time-switch and pushed the overdrive button. The squad ship
hopped, and abruptly the local sun had a perceptible disk. Willis made
the usual tests for direction of rotation, to get the ecliptic plane. He
began to search for planets. As he found them, he checked with the
reference data. All this was tedious. Sergeant Madden grunted:

"That'll be it," he said, and pointed. "Water world. It's the color of
ocean. Try it."

Patrolman Willis threw on the telescope screen. The image of the distant
planet leaped into view. It was Procyron III. The spiral cloud-arms of a
considerable storm showed in the southern hemisphere, but in the north
there was a group or specks which would be the planet's only solid
ground--the archipelago reported by the century-old survey. The
_Cerberus_ should have been the first ship to land there in a hundred
years, and the squad ship should be the second.

Patrolman Willis got the squad ship competently over to the planet, a
diameter out. He juggled to position over the archipelago. Sergeant
Madden turned on the space phone. Nothing. He frowned. A grounded ship
awaiting help should transmit a beam signal to guide its rescuer. But
nothing came up from the ground.

Patrolman Willis looked at him uncertainly. Sergeant Madden rumbled and
swung the telescope below. The surface of the planet appeared--deep
water, practically black beneath a surface reflection of daytime sky.
The image shifted--a patch of barren rocks. The sergeant glanced at the
survey picture, shifted the telescope, and found the northern-most
island. He swelled the picture. He could see the white of monstrous surf
breaking on the windward shore--waves that had gathered height going all
around the planet. He traced the shoreline. There was a bay up at the
top.

He centered the shoreline of the bay and put on maximum magnification.
Then he pointed a stubby forefinger. A singular, perfectly straight
streak of black appeared, beginning a little distance inland from the
bay and running up into what appeared to be higher ground. The streak
ended not far from a serpentine arm of the sea which almost cut the
island in half.

"That'll be it," said Sergeant Madden, rumbling. "The _Cerberus_ had to
land on her rockets. She had some ground speed. She burned a ten-mile
streak on the ground, coming down." He growled. "Commercial skippers!
Should've matched velocity aloft! Take her down."

The squad ship drove for ground.

Patrolman Willis steadied the ship no more than a few thousand feet
high, above the streak of scorched ground and ashes.

"It was heading inland, all right," rumbled Sergeant Madden. "Lucky! If
it'd been heading the other way, it could've gone out and landed in the
sea. That would ha' been a mess! But where is it?"

The squad ship descended farther. It followed the lane of carbonized
soil. That marking narrowed--the _Cerberus_ had plainly been descending.
Then the streak came to an end. It pinched out to nothing. The
_Cerberus_ should have been at its end.

It wasn't. There was no ship down on Procyron III.

       *       *       *       *       *

The matter ceased to be routine. If the liner's drive conked out where
Procyron III was the nearest refuge planet, it should have landed here
at least six days ago. Some ship had landed here recently.

"Set down," grunted Sergeant Madden.

Patrolman Willis obeyed. The squad ship came to rest in a minor valley,
a few hundred yards from the end of the rocket-blast trail. Sergeant
Madden got out. Patrolman Willis followed him. This was a duly surveyed
and recommended refuge planet. There was no need to check the air or
take precautions against inimical animal or vegetable life. The planet
was safe.

They clambered over small rocky obstacles until they came to the end of
the scorched line. They surveyed the state of things in silence.

A ship had landed here recently. Its blue-white rocket flames had melted
gulleys in the soil, turned it to slag, and then flung silky, gossamer
threads of slag-wool over the rocks nearby.

At the end of the melted-away hollows, twin slag-lined holes went down
deep into the ground. They were take-off holes. Rockets had burned them
deeply as they gathered force to lift the ship away again.

Sergeant Madden scrambled to the edge of the nearest blast-well. He put
his hand on the now-solidified, glassy slag. It wasn't warm, but it
wasn't cold. The glass-lined hole a rocket leaves takes a long time to
cool down.

"She landed here, all right," he grunted. "But she took off again before
the torp arrived to tell us about it."

Willis protested:

"But, sergeant! She only had one set of rockets! She couldn't have taken
off again! She didn't have the rockets to do it with!"

"I know she couldn't," growled the sergeant. "But she did."

The _Cerberus_, once landed, should have waited here. It was not only a
police regulation; it was common sense. When a ship broke down in space,
the exclusive hope for that ship's company lay in a refuge planet for
ships in that traffic lane. Even lifeboats could ordinarily reach some
refuge planet, for picking up later. They couldn't possibly be located
otherwise. With three dimensions in which to be missed, and light-years
of distance in which to miss them--no ship or boat had ever been found
as much as a light-week out in space. No ship with a crippled drive
could possibly be helped unless it got to a specified refuge world where
it could be found. No ship which had reached a refuge planet could
conceivably want to leave it.

There was also the fact that no ship which had made such a landing would
have extra rockets with which to take off for departure.

The _Cerberus_ had landed. Timmy's girl was on it. It had taken off
again. It was either an impossible mass suicide or something worse. It
certainly wasn't routine.

Patrolman Willis asked hesitantly:

"D'you think, sergeant, it could be Huks sneaked back--?"

Sergeant Madden did not answer. He went back to the squad ship and armed
himself. Patrolman Willis followed suit. The sergeant boobied the squad
ship so no unauthorized person could make use of it, and so it would
disable itself if anyone with expert knowledge tried. Therefore, nobody
with expert knowledge would try.

The two cops began a painstaking quest for police-type evidence to tell
them what had happened, and how and why the _Cerberus_ was missing,
after a clumsy but safe landing on Procyron III and when all sanity
demanded that it stay there, and when it was starkly impossible for it
to leave.

       *       *       *       *       *

Sergeant Madden and Patrolman Willis were, self-evidently, the only
human beings on a planet some nine thousand miles in diameter. It was
easy to compute that the nearest other humans would be at least some
thousands of thousands of millions of miles away--so far away that
distance had no meaning. This planet was something over nine-tenth
rolling sea, but there were a few tens of thousands of square miles of
solid ground in the one archipelago that broke the ocean's surface. It
was such loneliness as very few people ever experience. But they did not
notice it. They were busy.

They went over the ground immediately about the landing place. Rocket
flame had splashed it, both at the _Cerberus'_ landing and at the
impossible take-off. There was nothing within a hundred yards not burned
to a crisp. They searched outside that area. Sergeant Madden rumbled to
his companion:

"Where'd the other ship land?"

Patrolman Willis blinked at him.

"There had to be another ship!" said Sergeant Madden irritably. "To
bring the extra rockets. The other ship had to've brought 'em. And it
had to have rockets of its own. There's no spaceport here!"

Patrolman Willis blinked again. Then he saw. The _Cerberus_ carried one
set of emergency-landing rockets, for use in a descent on a refuge
planet if the need arose. The need had arisen and the _Cerberus_ had
used them. Then, from somewhere, another set of rockets had been
produced for it to use in leaving. Those other rockets must have come on
another ship. But it was a trifle more complicated than that. The
_Cerberus_ had carried one set of rockets and used them. One. It had
been supplied with another set from somewhere. Two. They must have been
brought by a ship which also used a set of rockets to land by. That made
three. Then the other ship must have had a fourth set for its own
take-off, or it would be grounded forever on Procyron III.

Patrolman Willis frowned.

"We looked pretty carefully from aloft," he said uncomfortably. "If
there'd been another burned-off landing place, we'd have seen it."

"I know," rumbled Sergeant Madden. "And we didn't. But there must've
been another ship aground when the _Cerberus_ came in. Where was it? It
prob'ly knew the _Cerberus_ was landing to wait for help. How? If
somebody was coming to help the _Cerberus_ it would be bound to spot the
other ship, and it didn't want to be spotted. Why? Anyhow, it must've
taken the _Cerberus_ and sent it off, and then taken off itself, leaving
nothing sensible for us to think. 'Sounds like delinks." Then he
growled. "Only it's not. There'd have to be too many men. Delinks don't
work together more'n two or three. Too jealous of showin' off. But where
was that other ship, and what was it doin' here?"

Patrolman Willis hesitated, and then said:

"There used to be pirates, sergeant."

"Uh-huh," said the sergeant. "You had it right the first time, most
likely. Not delinks. Not pirates. You said Huks." He looked around,
estimatingly. "The rockets had to be brought here from somewhere else
where they'd been landed. I'm betting the tracks were covered pretty
careful. But rockets are heavy. Manhandlin' them, whoever was doin' it
would take the easiest way. Hm-m-m. There's water close by over yonder.
Sort of a sound in there--too narrow to be a bay. Let's have a look. And
the slopes are easiest that way, too."

He led off to the eastward. He thought of Timmy's girl. He'd never seen
her, but Timmy was going to marry her. She was on the _Cerberus_. It was
the job of the cops to take care of whatever dilemma that ship might be
in. As of here and now, it was Sergeant Madden's job. But besides that,
he thought of the way Timmy would feel if anything happened to the girl
he meant to marry. As Timmy's father, the sergeant had to do something.
He wanted to do it fast. But it had to be done the right way.

       *       *       *       *       *

The route he chose was rocky, but it was nearly the only practicable
route away from the burned-dead landing place. He climbed toward what on
this planet was the east. There were pinnacles and small precipices.
There were small, fleshy-leaved bushes growing out of such tiny
collections of soil as had formed in cracks and crevices in the rock.

Sergeant Madden noted that one such bush was wilted. He stopped. He bent
over and carefully felt of the stones about it. A small rock came out.
The bush had been out of the ground before. It had carefully been
replaced. By someone.

"The rockets came this way," said the sergeant, with finality. "Hauled
over this pass to the _Cerberus_. Somebody must've knocked this bush
loose while workin' at getting 'em along. So he replanted it. Only not
good enough. It wilted."

"Who did it?" demanded Patrolman Willis.

"Who we want to know about," growled Sergeant Madden. "Maybe Huks. Come
on!"

He scrambled ahead. He wheezed as he climbed and descended. After half a
mile, Patrolman Willis said abruptly:

"You figure they all left, before anybody tried to find 'em?"

The sergeant grunted affirmatively. A quarter mile still farther, the
rocky ground fell away. There was the gleam of water below them. Rocky
cliffs enclosed an arm of the sea that came deep into the land, here. In
the cliffs rock-strata tilted insanely. There were red and yellow and
black layers--mostly yellow and black. They showed in startlingly clear
contrast.

"Right!" said Sergeant Madden in morose satisfaction. "I thought there
might've been a boat. But this's it!"

He went down a steep descent to the very edge of the sound--it was even
more like a fjord--where the waters of the ocean came in among the
island's hills. On the far side, a little cascade leaped and bubbled
down to join the sea.

"You go that way," commanded Sergeant Madden, "and I'll go this. We've
got two things to look for--a shallow place in the water coming right up
to shore. And look for signs of traffic from the cliffs to the water. By
the color of those rocks, we'd ought to find both."

He lumbered away along the water's edge. There were no creatures which
sang or chirped. The only sounds were wind and the lapping of waves
against the shore. It was very, very lonely.

Half a mile from the point of his first descent, the sergeant found a
shoal. It was a flat space of shallow water--discoverable by the color
of the bottom. The water was not over four feet deep. It was a
remarkably level shoal place.

He whistled on his fingers. When Patrolman Willis reached him, he
pointed to the cliffs directly across the beach from the shallow water.
Lurid yellow tints stained the cliff walls. Odd masses of fallen stone
dotted the cliff foot. At one place they were piled high. That pile
looked quite natural--except that it was at the very center of the shore
line next the shoal.

"This rock's yellow," said Sergeant Madden, rumbling a little. "It's
mineral. If we had a Geiger, it'd be raising hell, here. There's a mine
in there. Uranium. If a ship came down on rockets, an' landed in that
shoal place yonder ... why ... it wouldn't leave a burned spot comin'
down or takin' off, either. Y'see?"

Patrolman Willis said: "Look here, sergeant--"

"I'm in command here," growled Sergeant Madden. "Huks didn't booby trap.
Proud as hell, and touchy as all get-out, but not killers. Not crazy
killers, anyhow. You go get up yonder. Up where we started down. Then go
on away. Back to the squad ship. If I don't come along, anyhow you'll
know what's what when the _Aldeb_ comes."

Patrolman Willis expostulated. Sergeant Madden was firm. In the end,
Patrolman Willis went away. And Sergeant Madden sat at ease and rested
until he had time enough to get back to the squad ship. It was true that
the Huks didn't booby trap. They hadn't had the practice, anyhow, eighty
years ago. But this was a very important matter. Maybe they considered
it so important that they'd changed their policy concerning this.

Wheezing a little, Sergeant Madden pulled away large stones and small
ones. An opening appeared behind them. He grunted and continued his
labor. Nothing happened. The mouth of a mine shaft appeared, going
horizontally into the cliff.

Puffing from his exertions, Sergeant Madden went in. It was necessary if
he were to make a routine examination.

       *       *       *       *       *

The _Aldeb_ came in a full day later. It descended, following the space
beacon the squad ship sent up from its resting place. The _Aldeb_ was
not an impressive sight, of course. It was a medium-sized police salvage
ship. It had a crew of fifteen, and it was powerfully engined, and it
contained a respectable amount of engineering experience and ability,
plus some spare parts and, much more important, the tools with which to
make others. It came down in a highly matter-of-fact fashion, and
Sergeant Madden and Patrolman Willis went over to it to explain the
situation.

"The _Cerberus_ came in on rockets," rumbled the sergeant, in the
salvage ship's skipper's cabin. "She landed. We found signs that some of
her people came out an' strolled around lookin' for souvenirs and such.
I make a guess that there was a minin' man among them, but it's only a
guess. Anyhow somebody went over to where there's some parti-colored
cliffs, where the sea comes away inland. And when they got to that
place ... why ... there was a ship there. Then."

He paused, frowning.

"It would've been standing on an artificial shoal place, about thirty
yards from a shaft that was the mouth of a mine. Uranium. And there's
been a lot of uranium taken outta there! It was hauled right outta the
mine shaft across the beach to the ship that was waitin'. And there's
fresh work in that mine, but not a tool or a scrap of paper to tell who
was workin' it. It must've been cleaned up like that every time a ship
left after loadin' up. Humans wouldn't've done it. They wouldn't care.
Huks would. There's not supposed to be any of them left in these parts,
but I'm guessing the mine was dug by Huks, and the _Cerberus_ was taken
away by them because the humans on the _Cerberus_ found out there was
Huks around."

Patrolman Willis said: "The sergeant took a chance on the mine being
booby-trapped and went in, after sending me out of range."

The sergeant scowled at him and went on.

"How it happened don't matter. Maybe somebody spotted the ship from the
_Cerberus_ as it was comin' down. Maybe anything. But whoever run the
mine found out somebody knew they were there, so they rushed the
_Cerberus_--there prob'ly wasn't even a stun-pistol on board to fight
with--and they put new rockets on her."

       *       *       *       *       *

The skipper of the salvage ship _Aldeb_ nodded wisely.

"A ship comin' to load up minerals where there wasn't any spaceport," he
observed, "would have a set of rockets to land on, empty, and a double
set to take off on, loaded. Yeah."

"They must've figured," said Sergeant Madden, "that we just couldn't
make any sense out of what we found. And if we hadn't turned up that
mine, maybe never would. But anyhow they sent the _Cerberus_ off and
covered everything up and went off to stay, themselves, until we gave up
and went home."

"I wonder," said the skipper of the _Aldeb_, "where they took the
_Cerberus_? That's my job!"

"Not far," grunted Sergeant Madden. "They had to be taking the
_Cerberus_ somewhere. If they just wanted to wipe it out, after they
rushed it, they coulda just set off its fuel like it'd happened in a bad
landing. And that landing was bad! If there'd been a fuel-explosion
crater at the end of that burnt line on the ground, nobody'd ever've
looked further. But there wasn't. So there's a place they're takin' the
_Cerberus_ to. But it's got a brokedown drive. It can only hobble along.
They can't try to get but so far! What's the nearest sol-type star?"

The _Aldeb_'s skipper pushed a button and the Precinct Atlas came out of
its slot. The skipper punched keys and the atlas clicked and whirred.
Then its screen lighted. It showed a report on a solar system that had
been fully surveyed.

"Uh-uh," grunted the sergeant. "A survey woulda showed up if a planet
was Huk-occupied. What's next nearest?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Again the atlas whirred and clicked. A single line of type appeared. It
said, "_Sirene, 1432. Unsurveyed._" The galactic co-ordinates followed.
That was all.

"This looks likely!" said the sergeant. "Unsurveyed, and off the ship
lanes. It ain't between any place and any other. It could go a thousand
years and never be landed on. It's got planets."

It was highly logical. According to Krishnamurti's Law, any sol-type sun
was bound to have planets of such-and-such relative sizes in orbits of
such-and-such relative distances.

"Willis and me," said the sergeant, "we'll go over and see if there's
Huks there and if they've got the _Cerberus_. You better get this stuff
on a message-torp ready to send off if you have to. Are you going to
come over to this--Sirene 1432?"

The skipper of the _Aldeb_ shrugged.

"Might as well. Why go home and have to come back again? There could be
a lot of Huks there."

"Yeah," admitted Sergeant Madden. "I'd guess a whole planet full of 'em
that laid low when the rest were scrapping with the Force. The others
lost and went clean across the galaxy. These characters stayed close.
I'm guessing. But they hid their mine, here. They could've been stewing
in their own juice these past eighty years, getting set to put up a hell
of a scrap when somebody found 'em. We'll be the ones to do it."

He stood up and shook himself.

"It's not far," he repeated. "Our boat's just fast enough we ought to
get there a couple of days after the _Cerberus_ sets down. You'd ought
to be five-six hours behind us." He considered. "Meet you north pole
farthest planet out this side of the sun. Right?"

"I'll look for you there," said the skipper of the _Aldeb_.

Sergeant Madden and Patrolman Willis went out of the salvage ship and
trudged to the squad ship. They climbed in.

"You got the co-ordinates?" asked the sergeant.

"I copied them off the atlas," said Willis.

Sergeant Madden settled himself comfortably.

"We'll go over," he grumbled, "and see what makes these Huks tick. They
raised a lot of hell, eighty years ago. It took all the off-duty men
from six precincts to handle the last riot. The Huks had got together
and built themselves a fightin' fleet then, though. It's not likely
there's more than one planetful of them where we're going. I thought
they'd all been moved out."

He shook his head vexedly.

"No need for 'em to have to go, except they wouldn't play along with
humans. Acted like delinks, they did. Only proud. Y'don't get mad
fighting 'em. So I heard, anyway. If they only had sense you could get
along with them."

He dogged the door shut. Patrolman Willis pushed a button. The squad
ship fell toward the sky.

Very matter-of-factly.

       *       *       *       *       *

On the way over, in overdrive, Sergeant Madden again dozed a great deal
of the time. Sergeants do not fraternize extensively with mere
patrolmen, even on assignments. Especially not very senior sergeants
only two years from retirement. Patrolman Willis met with the sergeant's
approval, to be sure. Timmy was undoubtedly more competent as a cop, but
Timmy would have been in a highly emotional state with his girl on the
_Cerberus_ and that ship in the hands of the Huks.

Between naps, the sergeant somnolently went over what he knew about the
alien race. He'd heard that their thumbs were on the outside of their
hands. Intelligent nonhumans would have to have hands, and with some
equivalent of opposable thumbs, if their intelligence was to be of any
use to them. They pretty well had to be bipeds, too, and if they weren't
warm-blooded they couldn't have the oxygen-supply that highgrade brain
cells require.

There were even certain necessary psychological facts. They had to be
capable of learning and of passing on what they'd learned, or they'd
never have gotten past an instinctual social system. To pass on acquired
knowledge, they had to have family units in which teaching was done to
the young--at least at the beginning. Schools might have been invented
later. Most of all, their minds had to work logically to cope with a
logically constructed universe. In fact, they had to be very much like
humans, in almost all significant respects, in order to build up a
civilization and develop sciences and splendidly to invade space just a
few centuries before humans found them.

_But_, said Sergeant Madden to himself, _I bet they've still got armies
and navies!_

Patrolman Willis looked at him inquiringly, but the sergeant scowled at
his own thoughts. Yet the idea was very likely. When Huks first
encountered humans, they bristled with suspicion. They were definitely
on the defensive when they learned that humans had been in space
longer--much longer--than they had, and already occupied planets in
almost fifteen per cent of the galaxy.

Sergeant Madden found his mind obscurely switching to the matter of
delinks--those characters who act like adolescents, not only while they
are kids, but after. They were the permanent major annoyance of the
cops, because what they did didn't make sense. Learned books explained
why people went delink, of course. Mostly it was that they were madly
ambitious to be significant, to matter in some fashion, and didn't have
the ability to matter in the only ways they could understand. They
wanted to drive themselves to eminence, and frantically snatched at
chances to make themselves nuisances because they couldn't wait to be
important any other way.

Sergeant Madden blinked slowly to himself. When humans first took to
space a lot of them were after glamour, which is the seeming of
importance. His son Timmy was on the cops because he thought it
glamorous. Patrolman Willis was probably the same way. Glamour is the
offer of importance. An offer of importance is glamour.

The sergeant grunted to himself. A possible course of action came into
his mind. He and Patrolman Willis were on the way to the solar system
Sirene 1432, where Krishnamurti's Law said there ought to be something
very close to a terran-type planet in either the third or fourth orbit
out from the sun. That planet would be inhabited by Huks, who were very
much like humans. They knew of the defeat and forced emigration of their
fellow-Huks in other solar systems. They'd hidden from humans--and it
must have outraged their pride. So they must be ready to put up a
desperate and fanatical fight if they were ever discovered.

       *       *       *       *       *

A squad ship with two cops in it, and a dumpy salvage ship with fifteen
more, did not make an impressive force to try to deal with a planetary
population which bitterly hated humans. But the cops did not plan
conquest. They were neither a fighting rescue expedition nor a punitive
one. They were simply cops on assignment to get the semi-freighter
_Cerberus_ back in shape to travel on her lawful occasions among the
stars, and to see that she and her passengers and crew got to the
destination for which they'd started. The cop's purpose was essentially
routine. And the Huks couldn't possibly imagine it.

Sergeant Madden settled some things in his mind and dozed off again.

When the squad ship came out of overdrive and he was awakened by the
unpleasantness of breakout, he yawned. He looked on without comment as
Patrolman Willis matter-of-factly performed the tricky task of
determining the ecliptic while a solar system's sun was little more than
a first-magnitude star. It was wholly improbable that anything like Huk
patrol ships would be out so far. It was even more improbable that any
kind of detection devices would be in operation. Any approaching ship
could travel several times as fast as any signal.

Patrolman Willis searched painstakingly. He found a planet which was a
mere frozen lump of matter in vastness. It was white from a layer of
frozen gases piled upon its more solid core. He made observations.

"I can find it again, sir, to meet the _Aldeb_. Orders, sir?"

"Orders?" demanded Sergeant Madden. "What? Oh. Head in toward the sun.
The Huks'll be on Planet Three or Four, most likely. And that's where
they'll have the _Cerberus_."

The squad ship continued sunward while Patrolman Willis continued his
observations. A star-picture along the ecliptic. An hour's run on
interplanetary drive--no overdrive field in use. Another picture. The
two prints had only to be compared with a blinker for planets to stick
out like sore thumbs, as contrasted with stars that showed no parallax.
Sirene I--the innermost planet--was plainly close to a transit. II was
away on the far side of its orbit. III was also on the far side. IV was
in quadrature. There was the usual gap where V should have been. VI--it
didn't matter. They'd passed VIII a little while since, a ball of stone
with a frigid gas-ice covering.

Patrolman Willis worked painstakingly with amplifiers on what oddments
could be picked up in space.

"It's Four, sir," he reported unnecessarily, because the sergeant had
watched as he worked. "They've got detectors out. I could just barely
pick up the pulses. But by the time they've been reflected back they'll
be away below thermal noise-volume. I don't think even multiples could
pick 'em out. I'm saying, sir, that I don't think they can detect us at
this distance."

Sergeant Madden grunted.

"D'you think we came this far not to be noticed?" he asked. But he was
not peevish. Rather, he seemed more thoroughly awake than he'd been
since the squad ship left the Precinct substation back on Varenga IV. He
rubbed his hands a little and stood up. "Hold it a minute, Willis."

He went back to the auxiliary-equipment locker. He returned to his seat
beside Patrolman Willis. He opened the breech of the ejector-tube beside
his chair.

"You've had street-fighting training," he said almost affably, "at the
Police Academy. And siege-of-criminals courses too, eh?" He did not wait
for an answer. "It's historic," he observed, "that since time began
cops've been stickin' out hats for crooks to shoot at, and that
crooks've been shooting, thinking there were heads in 'em."

He put a small object in the ejector tube, poked it to proper seating,
and settled himself comfortably, again.

"Can you make it to about a quarter-million miles of Four," he asked
cheerfully, "in one hop?"

Patrolman Willis set up the hop-timer. Sergeant Madden was pleased that
he aimed the squad ship not exactly at the minute disk which was Planet
IV of this system. It was prudence against the possibility of an error
in the reading of distance.

"Ever use a marker, Willis?"

Patrolman Willis said: "No, sir."

Before he'd finished saying it the squad ship had hopped into overdrive
and out again.

       *       *       *       *       *

Sergeant Madden approved of the job. His son Timmy couldn't have done
better. Here was Planet IV before them, a little off to one side, as was
proper. They had run no risk of hitting in overdrive.

The distance was just about a quarter-million miles, if Krishnamurti's
Law predicting the size and distance of planets in a sol-type system was
reliable. The world was green and had icecaps. There should always be,
in a system of this kind, at least one oxygen-planet with a
nearly-terran-normal range of temperature. That usually meant green
plants and an ocean or two. There wasn't quite as much sea as usual, on
this planet, and therefore there were some extensive yellow areas that
must be desert. But it was a good, habitable world. Anybody whose home
it was would defend it fiercely.

"Hm-m-m," said Sergeant Madden. He took the ejector-tube lanyard in his
hand. He computed mentally. About a quarter-million miles, say. A second
and a half to alarm, down below. Five seconds more to verification.
Another five to believe it. Not less than twenty altogether to report
and get authority to fire. The Huks were a fighting race and presumably
organized, so they'd have a chain of command and decisions would be made
at the top. Army stuff, or navy. Not like the cops, where everybody knew
both the immediate and final purposes of any operation in progress, and
could act without waiting for orders.

It should be not less than thirty seconds before a firing key made
contact down below. As a matter of history, years ago the Huks had used
eighty-gravity rockets with tracking-heads and bust-bombs on them. These
Huks would hardly be behind the others in equipment. And back then, too,
Huks kept their rocket missiles out in orbit where they could flare into
eighty-gee acceleration without wasting time getting out to where an
enemy was. In their struggle against the cops two generations ago the
Huks had had to learn that fighting wasn't all drama and heroics. The
cops had taken the glamour out when they won. So the Huks wouldn't waste
time making fine gestures now. The squad ship had appeared off their
planet. It had not transmitted a code identification-signal the instant
it came out of overdrive. The Huks were hiding from the cops, so they'd
shoot.

"Hop on past," commanded Sergeant Madden, "the instant I jerk the
ejector lanyard. Don't fool around. Over the pole will do."

Patrolman Willis set the hop-timer. Twenty seconds. Twenty-two. Three.
Four.

"Hop!" said Sergeant Madden. As he spoke, he jerked the lanyard.

Before the syllable was finished, Patrolman Willis pressed hard on the
overdrive button. There came the always-nauseating sensation of going
into overdrive combined with the even more unpleasant sensation of
coming out of it. The squad ship was somewhere else.

A vast, curving whiteness hung catercornered in the sky. It was the
planet's icecap, upside down. Patrolman Willis had possibly cut it a
trifle too fine.

"Right," said the sergeant comfortably. "Now swing about to go back and
meet the _Aldeb_. But wait."

The stars and the monstrous white bowl reeled in their positions as the
ship turned. Sergeant Madden felt that he could spare seconds, here. He
ignored the polar regions of Sirene IV, hanging upside down to rearward
from the squad ship. Even a planetary alarm wouldn't get polar-area
observers set to fire in much less than forty seconds, and there'd have
to be some lag in response to instrument reports. It wouldn't be as if
trouble had been anticipated at just this time.

The squad ship steadied. Sergeant Madden looked with pleasurable
anticipation back to where the ship had come out of overdrive and
lingered for twenty-four seconds. Willis had moved the squad ship from
that position, but the sergeant had left a substitute. The small object
he'd dropped from the ejector tube now swelled and writhed and
struggled. In pure emptiness, a shape of metal foil inflated itself. It
was surprisingly large--almost the size of the squad ship. But in
emptiness the fraction of a cubic inch of normal-pressure gas would
inflate a foil bag against no resistance at all. This flimsy shape even
jerked into motion. Released gas poured out its back. There was no
resistance to acceleration save mass, which was negligible.

A sudden swirling cloud of vapor appeared where the squad ship's
substitute went mindlessly on its way. The vapor rushed toward the
space-marker.

A star appeared. It was a strictly temporary star, but even from a
quarter-million-mile distance it was incredibly bright. It was a bomb,
blasting a metal-foil flimsy which the electronic brain of a
missile-rocket could only perceive as an unidentified and hence enemy
object. Bomb and rocket and flimsy metal foil turned together to
radioactive metal vapor.

Sergeant Madden knew professional admiration.

"Thirty-four seconds!" he said approvingly.

The Huks could not have expected the appearance of an enemy just here
and now. It was the first such appearance in all the planet's history.
They certainly looked for no consequences of the seizure of the
_Cerberus_, carefully managed as that had been. So to detonate a bomb
against an unexpected inimical object within thirty-four seconds after
its appearance was very good work indeed.

"Hm-m-m," said Sergeant Madden, "we've nothing more to do right now,
Willis. We'll go back to that hunk of ice you spotted comin' in, and
wait for the _Aldeb_."

Patrolman Willis obediently set the hop-timer and swung the squad ship
to a proper aiming. He pressed the overdrive button.

His manner, like that of Sergeant Madden, was the manner of someone
conducting a perfectly routine operation.

       *       *       *       *       *

"If my son Timmy were with me on this job," said Sergeant Madden, "I'd
point out the inner meaning of the way we're going about handling it."

He reposed in his bucket-seat in the squad ship, which at that moment
lay aground not quite right-side-up close to the north pole of Sirene
VIII. The local sun was not in view. The squad ship's ports opened upon
the incredible brilliance of the galaxy as seen out of atmosphere. There
was no atmosphere here. It was all frozen. But there was a horizon, and
the light of the stars showed the miniature jungle of gas crystals.
Frozen gases--frozen to gas-ice--they were feathery. They were lacy.
They were infinitely delicate. They were frost in three dimensions.

"Yes, sir," said Patrolman Willis.

"The _Aldeb_'s due soon," said Sergeant Madden, "so I'll make it short.
The whole thing is that we are cops, and the Huks are soldiers. Which
means that they're after feeling important--after glamour. Every one of
'em figures it's necessary to be important. He craves it."

Patrolman Willis listened. He had a proximity detector out, which would
pick up any radiation caused by the cutting of magnetic lines of force
by any object. It made very tiny whining noises from time to time. If
anything from a Huk missile rocket to the salvage ship _Aldeb_
approached, however, the sound would be distinctive.

"Now that," said Sergeant Madden, "is the same thing that makes delinks.
A delink tries to matter in the world he lives in. It's a small world,
with only him and his close pals in it. So he struts before his pals. He
don't realize that anybody but him and his pals are human. See?"

"I know!" said Patrolman Willis with an edge to his voice. "Last month a
couple of delinks set a ground-truck running downhill, and jumped off
it, and--"

"True," said Sergeant Madden. He rumbled for a moment. "A soldier lives
in a bigger world he tries to matter in. He's protectin' that world and
being admired for it. In old, old days his world was maybe a day's march
across. Later it got to be continents. They tried to make it planets,
but it didn't work. But there've got to be enemies to protect a world
against, or a soldier isn't important. He's got no glamour. Y'see?"

"Yes, sir," said Willis.

"Then there's us cops," said Sergeant Madden wryly. "Mostly we join up
for the glamour. We think it's important to be a cop. But presently we
find we ain't admired. Then there's no more glamour--but we're still
important. A cop matters because he protects people against other people
that want to do things to 'em. Against characters that want to get
important by hurtin' 'em. Being a cop means you matter against all the
delinks and crooks an' fools and murderers who'd pull down civilization
in a minute if they could, just so they could be important because they
did it. But there's no glamour! We're not admired! We just do our job.
And if I sound sentimental, I mean it."

"Yes, sir," said Willis.

"There's a big picture in the big hall in Police Headquarters on Valdez
III," said the sergeant. "It's the story of the cops from the early days
when they wore helmets, and the days when they rode bicycles, and when
they drove ground-cars. There's not only cops, but civilians, in every
one of the panels, Willis. And if you look careful, you'll see that
there's one civilian in every panel that's thumbin' his nose at a cop."

"I've noticed," said Willis.

"Remember it," said Sergeant Madden. "It bears on what we've got to do
to handle these Huks. Soldiers couldn't do what we've got to. They'd
fight, to be admired. We can't. It'd spoil our job. We've got to
persuade 'em to behave themselves."

Then he frowned, as if he were dissatisfied with what he'd said. He
shook his head and made an impatient gesture.

"No good," he said vexedly. "You can't say it. Hm-m-m ... I'll nap a
while until the _Aldeb_ gets here."

He settled back to doze.

Patrolman Willis regarded him with an odd expression. They were aground
on Sirene VIII, on which no human ship had ever landed before them, and
they had stirred up a hornet's nest on Sirene IV, which had orbital
eighty-gee rocket missiles in orbit around it with bust bomb heads and
all the other advantages of civilization. The _Aldeb_ was on the way
with a fifteen-man crew. And seventeen men, altogether, must pit
themselves against an embattled planet with all its population ready and
perhaps eager for war. Their errand was to secure the release of human
prisoners and the surrender of a seized spaceship from a proud and
desperate race.

It did not look promising. Sergeant Madden did not look like the kind of
genius who could carry it through. Dozing, with his chin tilted forward
on his chest, he looked hopelessly commonplace.

       *       *       *       *       *

The skipper of the _Aldeb_ came over to the squad ship, because Sergeant
Madden loathed spacesuits and there was no air on Sirene VIII. Patrolman
Willis watched as the skipper came wading through the lacy, breast-high
gas-frost. It seemed a pity for such infinitely delicate and beautiful
objects to be broken and crushed.

The sergeant unlocked the lock-door and spoke into a microphone when he
heard the skipper stamping on the steel lock-flooring.

"Brush yourself off," commanded the sergeant, "and sweep the stuff
outside. Part of its methane and there's some ammonia in those
crystals."

There was a suitable pause. The outer door closed. The lock filled with
air, and gas-crystal fragments turned to reeking vapor as they warmed.
The skipper bled them out and refilled the lock. Then he came inside. He
opened his face plate.

"Well?"

"There's Huks here," Sergeant Madden told him, "their hair in a braid
and all set to go. They popped off a marker I stuck out for them to
shoot at in thirty-four seconds by the clock. Bright boys, these Huks!
They don't wait to ask questions. When they see something, they shoot at
it."

The skipper tilted back his helmet and said beseechingly:

"Scratch my head, will you?"

When Patrolman Willis reached out his hand, the skipper revolved his
head under it until the itchy place was scratched. Most men itch
instantly they are unable to scratch. The skipper's space gloves were
sprouting whiskers of moisture-frost now.

"Thanks," he said gratefully. "What are you going to do, sergeant?"

"Open communication with 'em," said the sergeant, heavily.

The skipper waited. Opening communication with someone who shoots on
detector-contact may be difficult.

"I figure," rumbled the sergeant, "they're a lot like delinks. A cop can
figure how they think, but they can't figure how a cop thinks."

"Such as?" asked the skipper.

"They can't understand anybody not tryin' to be important," said
Sergeant Madden. "It baffles 'em."

"What's that got to do with the people on the _Cerberus_?" demanded the
skipper. "It's our job to get them and the _Cerberus_ back on the way to
port!"

"I know!" conceded Sergeant Madden, "and the girl my son Timmy's going
to marry is one of them. But I don't think we'll have much trouble. Have
you got any multipoly plastic on the _Aldeb_?"

The skipper nodded, blankly. Multipoly plastic is a substance as
anomalous as its name. It is a multiple polymer of something-or-other
which stretches very accommodatingly to a surprising expanse, and then
suddenly stops stretching. When it stops, it has a high and obstinate
tensile strength. All ships carry it for temporary repairs, because it
will seal off anything. A one-mill thickness will hold fifteen pounds
pressure. Ships have been known to come down for landing with bubbles of
multipoly glistening out of holes in their hulls. A salvage ship,
especially, would carry an ample supply. A minor convenience in its use
is the fact that a detonator-cap set off at any part of it starts a wave
of disintegration which is too slow to be an explosion and cleans up the
mess made in its application.

"Naturally I've got it," said the skipper. "What do you want with it?"

Sergeant Madden told him. Painfully. Painstakingly.

"The tough part," said the skipper, "is making 'em go out an ejector
tube. But I've got fourteen good men. Give me two hours for the first
batch. We'll make up the second while you're placing them."

Sergeant Madden nodded.

The skipper went into the lock and closed the door behind him. After a
moment Patrolman Willis saw him wading through the incredibly delicate
and fragile gas-ice crystals. Then the _Aldeb_'s lock swallowed him.

       *       *       *       *       *

The odd thing about the Huk business was the minute scale of the things
that happened, compared to the background in which they took place. The
squad ship, for example, lifted off Sirene VIII for the second time.
She'd been out once and come back for the second batch of multipoly
objects. Sirene VIII was not a giant planet, by any means, but it was a
respectable six thousand miles in diameter. The squad ship's sixty feet
of length was a mote so minute by comparison that no comparison was
possible.

She headed in toward the sun. She winked out of existence into
overdrive. She headed toward Sirene IV, in quadrature, where missile
rockets floated in orbit awaiting the coming of any enemy. The distance
to be traveled was roughly one and a half light-hours--some twelve
astronomical units of ninety-three million miles each.

The squad ship covered that distance in a negligible length of time. It
popped into normality about two hundred thousand miles out from the Huk
home-world. It seemed insolently to remain there. In a matter of seconds
it appeared at another place--a hundred fifty thousand miles out, but
off to one side. It seemed arrogantly to remain there, too--in a second
place at the same time. Then it appeared, with the arbitrary effect a
ship does give when coming out of overdrive, at a third place a hundred
seventy-five thousand miles from the planet. At a fourth place barely
eighty thousand miles short of collision with the Huk world. At a fifth
place. A sixth. Each time it appeared, it seemed to remain in plain,
challenging, insolent view, without ceasing to exist at the spots where
it had appeared previously. In much less than a minute, the seeming of a
sizable squadron of small human ships had popped out of emptiness and
lay off the Huk home world at distances ranging from eighty thousand
miles to three times as much.

Suddenly, light flashed intolerably in emptiness. It was in contact with
one of the seeming squad ships, which ceased to be. But immediately two
more ships appeared at widely different spots. A second flash--giant and
terrible nearby--a pin point of light among the stars. Another
ostensible human ship vanished in atomic flame--but still another
appeared magically from nowhere. A third and then a fourth flash. Three
more within successive seconds.

Squad ships continued to appear as if by necromancy, and space near the
planet was streaked by flarings of white vapor as eighty-gee rockets
hurled themselves to destruction against the invading objects. As each
bomb went off, its light was brighter than the sun. But each was a mere
flicker in enormousness. They flashed, and flashed--Each was a bomb
turning forty kilograms of matter into pure, raw, raging destruction.
Each was devastation sufficient to destroy the greatest city the galaxy
ever knew.

But in that appalling emptiness they were mere scintillations. In the
background of a solar system's vastness they made all the doings of men
and Huks alike seem ludicrous.

For a long time--perhaps five minutes, perhaps ten--the flashings which
were the most terrible of all weapons continued. Each flash destroyed
something which, in scale, was less than a dust mote. But more motes
appeared, and more and more and more.

And presently the flashes grew infrequent. The threads of vapor which
led to each grew longer. In a little while they came from halfway around
the planet. Then squad ships appeared even there. And immediately pin
points of intolerable brilliance destroyed them--yet never as fast as
they appeared.

Finally there came ten seconds in which no atomic flame ravened in
emptiness. One more glitter. Fifteen seconds. Twenty. Thirty seconds
without a flashing of atomic explosive--

The surviving objects which appeared to be squad ships hung in space.
They moved without plan. They swam through space without destination.
Presently the most unobservant of watches must have perceived that their
movement was random. That they were not driven. That they had no
purpose. That they were not squad ships but targets--and not even robot
targets--set out for the missile rockets of the Huk planet to expend
themselves on.

The missile rockets had expended themselves.

So Sergeant Madden opened communication with the Huks.

       *       *       *       *       *

"These Huks," observed Sergeant Madden as the squad ship descended to
the Huk planet's surface, "they must've had a share in the scrapping
eighty years ago. They've got everything the old-time Huks had. They've
even got recordings of human talk from civilian human prisoners of years
gone by. And they kept somebody able to talk it--for when they fought
with us!"

Patrolman Willis did not answer. He had a strange expression on his
face. At the moment they were already within the Huk home-planet's
atmosphere. From time to time a heavily accented voice gave curt
instructions. It was a Huk voice, telling Patrolman Willis how to guide
the squad ship to ground where--under truce--Sergeant Madden might hold
conference with Huk authorities.

"_Hold the course_," said the voice. "_That is r-right. Do as you are._"

The horizon had ceased to be curved minutes ago. Now the ground rose
gradually. The ground was green. Large green growths clustered off to
one side of the flat area where the ship was to alight. They were the
equivalent of trees on this planet. Undoubtedly there were equivalents
of grass and shrubs, and seed-bearing and root-propagating vegetation,
and Huks would make use of some seeds and roots for food. Because in
order to have a civilization one has to have a larger food-supply than
can be provided by even the thriftiest of grazing animals. But the Huks
or their ancestors would need to have been flesh-eaters also, for brains
to be useful in hunting and therefore for mental activity to be
recognized as useful. A vegetarian community can maintain a
civilization, but it has to start off on meat.

A clump of ground-cars waited for the squad ship's landing. The ship
touched, delicately. Sergeant Madden rumbled and got out of his chair.
Patrolman Willis looked at him uneasily.

"Huh!" said Sergeant Madden. "Of course you can come. You want them to
think we're bluffing? No. Nothing to fight with. The Huks think our
fleet's set to do the fighting."

He undogged the exit door and went out through the small vestibule which
was also the ship's air lock. Patrolman Willis joined him out-of-doors.
The air was fresh. The sky was blue. Clouds floated in the sky, and
growing things gave off a not-unpleasant odor, and a breeze blew
uncertainly. But such things happen on appropriate planets in most
sol-type solar systems.

Huks came toward them. Stiffly. Defiantly. The most conspicuous
difference between Huks and humans was of degree. Huks grew hair all
over their heads, instead of only parts of it. But they wore garments,
and some of the garments were identical and impressive, so they could be
guessed to be uniforms.

"How-do," said the voice that had guided the ship down. "We are r-ready
to listen to your message."

Sergeant Madden said heavily:

"We humans believe you Huks have got a good fleet. We believe you've got
a good army. We know you've got good rockets and a fighting force that's
worth a lot to us. We want to make a treaty for you to take over and
defend as much territory as you're able to, against some characters
heading this way from the Coalsack region."

Silence. The interpreter translated, and the Huks muttered astonishedly
among themselves. The interpreter received instructions.

"Do you mean others of our r-race?" he demanded haughtily. "Members of
our own r-race who r-return to r-recover their home worlds from humans?"

"Hell, no!" said Sergeant Madden dourly. "If you can get in contact with
them and bring them back, they can have their former planets back and
more besides--if they'll defend 'em. We're stretched thin. We didn't
come here to fight your fleet. We came to ask it to join us."

More mutterings. The interpreter faced about.

"This surpr-rises us," he said darkly. "We know of no danger in the
direction you speak of. Per-rhaps we would wish to make fr-riends with
that danger instead of you!"

Sergeant Madden snorted.

"You're welcome!" Then he said sardonically: "If you're able to reach us
after you try, the offer stands. Join us, and you'll give your own
commands and make your own decisions. We'll co-operate with you. But you
won't make friends with the characters I'm talking about! Not hardly!"

More hurried discussions still. The interpreter, defiantly: "And if we
r-refuse to join you?"

Sergeant Madden shrugged.

"Nothing. You'll fight on your own, anyhow. So will we. If we joined up
we could both fight better. I came to try to arrange so we'd both be
stronger. We need you. You need us."

       *       *       *       *       *

There was a pause. Patrolman Willis swallowed. At five-million-mile
intervals, in a circle fifty million miles across with the Huk world as
its center, objects floated in space. Patrolman Willis knew about them,
because he and Sergeant Madden had put them there immediately after the
missile rockets ceased to explode. He knew what they were, and his spine
crawled at the thought of what would happen if the Huks found out. But
the distant objects were at the limit of certain range for detection
devices. The planet's instruments could just barely pick them up. They
subtended so small a fraction of a thousandth of a second of arc that no
information could be had about them.

But they acted like a monstrous space fleet, ready to pour down
war-headed missiles in such numbers as to smother the planet in atomic
flame. Patrolman Willis could not imagine admitting that such a supposed
fleet needed another fleet to help it. A military man, bluffing as
Sergeant Madden bluffed, would not have dared offer any terms less
onerous than abject surrender. But Sergeant Madden was a cop. It was not
his purpose to make anybody surrender. His job was, ultimately, to make
them behave.

The Huks conferred. The conference was lengthy. The interpreter turned
to Sergeant Madden and spoke with vast dignity and caginess:

"When do you r-require an answer?"

"We don't," grunted Sergeant Madden. "When you make up your minds, send
a ship to Varenga III. We'll give you the information we've got. That's
whether you fight with us or independent. You'll fight, once you meet
these characters! We don't worry about that! Just ... we can do better
together." Then he said: "Have you got the co-ordinates for Varenga? I
don't know what you call it in your language."

"We have them," said the interpreter, still suspiciously.

"Right!" said Sergeant Madden. "That's all. We came here to tell you
this. Let us know when you make up your minds. Now we'll go back."

He turned as if to trudge back to the squad ship. And this, of course,
was the moment when the difference between a military and a cop mind was
greatest. A military man, with the defenses of the planet smashed--or
exhausted--and an apparent overwhelming force behind him, would have
tried to get the _Cerberus_ and its company turned over to him either by
implied or explicit threats. Sergeant Madden did not mention them. But
he had made it necessary for the Huks to do something.

They'd been shocked to numbness by the discovery that humans knew of
their presence on Sirene IV. They'd been made aghast by the brisk and
competent nullification of their eighty-gee rocket defenses. They'd been
appalled by the appearance of a space fleet which--if it had been a
space fleet--could have blasted the planet to a cinder. And then they
were bewildered that the humans asked no submission--not even promises
from them.

There was only one conclusion to be drawn. It was that if the humans
were willing to be friendly, it would be a good idea to agree. Another
idea followed. A grand gesture by Huks would be an even better idea.

"Wait!" said the interpreter. He turned. A momentary further discussion
among the Huks. The interpreter turned back.

"There is a ship here," he said uneasily. "It is a human ship. There are
humans in it. The ship is disabled."

Sergeant Madden affected surprise.

"Yeah? How come?"

"It ar-rived two days ago," said the interpreter. Then he plunged. "We
br-rought it. We have a mine on what you call Pr-rocyron Three. The
human ship landed, because it was disabled. It discovered our ship and
our mine there. We wished to keep the mine secret. Because the humans
had found out our secret, we br-rought them here. And the ship. It is
disabled."

"Hm-m-m," said Sergeant Madden. "I'll send a repair-boat down to fix
whatever's the matter with it. Of course you won't mind." He turned
away, and turned back. "One of the solar systems we'd like you to take
over and defend," he observed, "is Procyron. I haven't a list of the
others, but when your ship comes over to Varenga it'll be ready. Talk
our repair-boat down, will you? We'll appreciate anything you can do to
help get the ship back out in space with its passengers, but our
repair-boat can manage."

He waved his hand negligently and went back to the squad ship. He got
in. Patrolman Willis followed him.

"Take her up," said Sergeant Madden.

The squad ship fell toward the sky. Sergeant Madden said satisfiedly:

"That went off pretty good. From now on it's just routine."

       *       *       *       *       *

There was a bubble in emptiness. It was a large bubble, as such things
go. It was nearly a thousand feet in diameter, and it was made of
multipoly plastic which is nearly as anomalous as its name. The bubble
contained almost an ounce of helium. It had a three-inch small box at
one point on its surface. It floated some twenty-five million miles from
the Huk planet, and five million miles from another bubble which was its
identical twin. It could reflect detector-pulses. In so doing it
impersonated a giant fighting ship.

Something like an hour after the squad ship rose from Sirene IV, a
detonator-cap exploded in the three-inch box. It tore the box to atoms
and initiated a wave of disintegration in the plastic of the bubble. The
helium bubble-content escaped and was lost. The plastic itself turned to
gas and disappeared.

The bubble had been capable of exactly two actions. It could reflect
detector-pulses. In doing so, it had impersonated a giant fighting ship,
member of an irresistible fleet. It could also destroy itself. In so
doing, it impersonated a giant fighting ship--one of a fleet--going into
overdrive.

In rapid succession, all the bubbles which were members of a
non-existent fighting fleet winked out of existence about Sirene IV.
There were a great many of them, and no trace of any remained.

The last was long gone when a small salvage ship descended to the Huk
home planet. A heavily accented voice talked it down.

The salvage ship landed amid evidences of cordiality. The Huks were
extremely co-operative. They even supplied materials for the repair job
on the _Cerberus_, including landing rockets to be used in case of need.
But they weren't needed for take-off. The _Cerberus_ had been landed at
a Huk spaceport, which obligingly lifted it out to space again when its
drive had been replaced.

       *       *       *       *       *

And the squad ship sped through emptiness at a not easily believable
multiple of the speed of light. Sergeant Madden dozed, while Patrolman
Willis performed such actions as were necessary for the progress of the
ship. They were very few. But Patrolman Willis thought feverishly.

After a long time Sergeant Madden waked, and blinked, and looked
benignly at Patrolman Willis.

"You'll be back with your wife soon, Willis," he said encouragingly.

"Yes, sir." Then the patrolman said explosively: "Sergeant! There's
nothing coming from the Coalsack way! There's nothing for the Huks to
fight!"

"True, at the moment," admitted Sergeant Madden, "but something could
come. Not likely--But you see, Willis, the Huks have had armed forces
for a long time. They've glamour. They're not ready to cut down and have
only cops, like us humans. It wouldn't be reasonable to tell 'em the
truth--that there's no need for their fighting men. They'd make a need!
So they'll stand guard happily against some kind of monstrosities we'll
have Special Cases invent for them. They'll stand guard zestful for
years and years! Didn't they do the same against us? But now they're
proud that even we humans, that they were scared of, ask them to help
us. So presently they'll send some Huks over to go through the Police
Academy, and then presently there'll be a sub-precinct station over
there, with Huks in charge, and ... why ... that'll be that."

"But they want planets--"

Sergeant Madden shrugged.

"There's plenty, Willis. The guess is six thousand million planets fit
for humans in this galaxy. And by the time we've used them up,
somebody'll have worked out a drive to take us to the next galaxy to
start all over. There's no need to worry about that! And for
immediate--does it occur to you how many men are going to start getting
rich because there's a brand-new planet that's got a lot of things we
humans would like to have, and wants to buy a lot of things the Huks
haven't got?"

Patrolman Willis subsided. But presently he said:

"Sergeant ... what'd you have done if they hadn't told you about the
_Cerberus_?"

Sergeant Madden snorted.

"It's unthinkable! We waltzed in there, and told them a tale, and showed
every sign of walkin' right out again without askin' them a thing. They
couldn't even tell us to go to hell, because it looked like we didn't
care what they said. It was insupportable, Willis! Characters that make
trouble, Willis, do it to feel important. And we'd left them without a
thing to tell us that was important enough to mention--unless they told
us about the _Cerberus_. We had 'em baffled. They needed to say
something, and that was the only thing they could say!"

He yawned.

"The _Aldeb_ reports everybody on the _Cerberus_ safe and sound, only
frightened, and the skipper said Timmy's girl was less scared than most.
I'm pleased. Timmy's getting married, and I wouldn't want my
grandchildren to have a scary mother!"

He looked at the squad ship's instruments. There was a long way yet to
travel.

"A-h-h-h! It's a dull business this, overdrive," he said somnolently.
"And it's amazing how much a man can sleep when everything's in hand,
and there's nothing ahead but a wedding and a few things like that. Just
routine, Willis. Just routine!"

He settled himself more comfortably as the squad ship went on home.

THE END





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of A Matter of Importance, by 
William Fitzgerald Jenkins

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A MATTER OF IMPORTANCE ***

***** This file should be named 23636.txt or 23636.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/3/6/3/23636/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Bruce Albrecht, Mary Meehan and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
