Project Gutenberg's The Indulgence of Negu Mah, by Robert Andrew Arthur

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Indulgence of Negu Mah

Author: Robert Andrew Arthur

Release Date: December 3, 2007 [EBook #23688]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE INDULGENCE OF NEGU MAH ***




Produced by Greg Weeks and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net






Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from Comet, July, 1941.
Extensive research did not reveal any evidence that the U.S. copyright
on this publication was renewed.



[Illustration: _In silence Negu Mah and Sliss stood silent gazing
at the moon drenched field._]




The Indulgence of Negu Mah

by ROBERT ARTHUR


In his garden, Negu Mah, the Callisto uranium merchant, sat sipping a
platinum mug of molkai with his guest, Sliss the Venusian.

Nanlo, his wife, pushing before her the small serving cart with its
platinum molkai decanter, paused for an instant as she entered the
shell of pure vitrite which covered the garden, giving it the illusion
of out-of-doorness.

Negu Mah sat at his ease, his broad, merry, half-Oriental face
good-humored, his features given a ruddy tinge by the light of rising
Jupiter, the edge of whose sphere was beginning to dominate the
horizon. Sliss, the intelligent amphibian, squatted across from him in
the portable tub of water which he carried with him whenever absent
from the swamps of his native Venus.

The amphibian's popping eyes turned toward her, the wide frog-face
split in a smile of appreciation as Nanlo approached. She refilled
their mugs deftly and withdrew. But before she reentered the house she
could not resist hesitating to glance toward rising Jupiter and the
slim shaft of the rocketship silhouetted now against its surface.

The ship was the cargo rocket Vulcan, newest and swiftest of Negu Mah's
freighter fleet. Fully fueled and provisioned, storage space jammed
with refrigerated foods that in space the cold of the encompassing void
would keep perfectly for generations were it necessary, she would take
off in the morning from the close-by landing port for Jupiter's other
satellites, then go on to the Saturnian system, returning finally with
full holds of uranium for Negu Mah's refineries on Callisto.

She was a beautiful craft, the Vulcan, and one man could manage her,
though her normal crew was seven. She had cost a great sum. But Negu
Mah was wealthy.

Nanlo's face, sylph-like in its beauty, hardened. Negu Mah was wealthy
indeed. Had he not bought her, and had she not cost him more, much
more, than the Vulcan?

But no, it was not quite accurate to say that Negu Mah had bought her.
However, since time immemorial beautiful daughters had been, if not
sold, yet urged into marriages to wealthy men for the benefit of their
impoverished families. And though science had made great strides,
conquering the realms of the telescope and invading those below the
level of the microscope, finding cures for almost every disease the
flesh of man was heir to, there was one ailment it had not yet
conquered--poverty.

Nanlo's father had been a rocket port attendant. Once he had been a
pilot, but a crash had crippled him for life. Thereafter, his wages had
been quite insufficient to sustain him, his brood of half a dozen
children, and their hard-working mother.

But Nanlo, growing up, had developed into a mature beauty that rivaled
the exotic loveliness of the wild orchids of Io. And in debarking at
the rocket port on a business trip to earth, because hurricanes had
forced him to land far south of New York, Negu Mah had seen her.

Thereafter--But that is a story as ancient as history too.

It was a truth Nanlo conveniently overlooked now that she had not been
unwilling to be Negu Mah's bride. It was true she had driven a sharp
bargain with him--her father's debts paid, and sufficient more to ease
her parents' life and educate her brothers and sisters. Plus a marriage
settlement for herself, and a sum in escrow in the Earth Union bank,
should she ever divorce him for cruelty or mistreatment. But that had
been only innate shrewdness. She would still have married him had he
refused her demands for her family. For his wealth fascinated her, and
the prospect of being a virtual queen, even of a distant outpost colony
such as that on Callisto, appealed to her.

And she had thought that she was taking little risk, for if she were
dissatisfied, the law these days was very lenient toward unhappy
marital relationships. It required only definite proof of misconduct,
mistreatment, or oppression of any kind to win freedom from an unwanted
partner. Nanlo had been confident that after a year or two she would be
able to shake free of the bonds uniting her to Negu Mah and take flight
for herself into a world made vastly more pleasant by the marriage
settlement remaining to her.

But now she had been married, and had lived on Callisto, for a full
five years, and her tolerance of Negu Mah had long since turned to
bitter hate. Not because he was a bad husband, but because he was too
good a one!

                     *      *      *      *      *

There was an ironic humor in the situation, but Nanlo was not disposed
to recognize it. Lenient as the law was, yet it required some grounds
before it could free her. And she had no grounds whatever. Negu Mah was
at all times the model of courtesy and consideration toward her. He
granted every reasonable wish and some that were unreasonable--although
when he refused one of the latter, it was with a firmness as
unshakeable as a rock.

Their home was as fine as any on earth. She had more than adequate help
in taking care of it. She had ample time for any pursuits that
interested her. But she used it only to become more and more bitter
against Negu Mah because she could find no excuse to divorce him.

So great had her bitterness become that, if she could have gotten off
Callisto in any way, she would have deserted him. This would have meant
forfeiting her marriage settlement and the sum that was in escrow. It
would also have left her father in debt to Negu Mah for all that Negu
Mah had given him. But Nanlo's passionate rebellion had reached such a
state of ferment in her breast that she would have accepted all this to
strike a blow at the plump, smiling man who now sat drinking molkai in
their garden with their guest from Venus.

The answer to that was--Negu Mah would not let her leave Callisto. The
journey to earth, he logically argued, was still one containing a large
element of danger. There was no reason for her to visit any other
planet, and law and custom required that she look after their home
while he himself was away on business.

In this he was unshakeable. There was a stern and unyielding side to
him, inherited perhaps from his Eastern ancestors, that left Nanlo
shaken and frightened when it appeared. She had seen it the one time
she had seriously gone into a tantrum in an effort to make him let her
take a trip to earth. It had so startled and terrified her that she had
never used those tactics again.

But now, as she wheeled away the molkai decanter and left Negu Mah and
Sliss to themselves, joy and exultation was singing in her. Doubly. For
she was going to run away from Negu Mah, run away with the man she
loved, and in their flight they were going to steal the Vulcan. Thus
Negu Mah would be doubly punished. He would be hurt in his pride and in
his pocketbook. And all through the Jupiter and Saturn systems, where
his wealth, his position, and his beautiful wife were openly envied, he
would be laughed at and derided.

Humming lightly under her breath, Nanlo put the molkai decanter away in
a little pantry and hurried on to her own apartment. Molkai was a
powerful, though non-habit-forming drink. Under its influence one
became talkative, but disinclined to movement. Sliss and her husband
would remain as they were for hours, leaving her free to do as she
would. The servants were asleep in another part of the building, and
there was no one to note as she changed her clothes swiftly for a
light, warm travelling suit, caught up two small bags, one holding her
personal things, the other her jewels, and let herself out through her
own private entrance into the darkness of the rear gardens.

Where in the shadows the tall, blonde young engineer, Hugh Neils, was
waiting for her....

                     *      *      *      *      *

Negu Mah, when his beautiful wife had left the garden, sighed and put
to one side his mug of molkai.

"Sliss, my friend," he said to the Venusian, who was regarding him with
large, unblinking pop-eyes, "I am troubled in my mind. Tonight I must
dispense justice. Justice to myself and justice to another. To be just
is often to be terribly cruel."

Sliss blinked, once, a film moving horizontally across his large eyes
and retracting, to show that he understood. Due to the difficulty of
using his artificial speech mechanism, he refrained from speaking until
speech was necessary.

"My wife, Nanlo," Negu Mah said heavily, "is unhappy. I have done all
that is in my power to make her happy, but I have failed. She has made
some requests that I have denied, namely, to be permitted freedom to
visit earth. That I denied because I knew the paths she intended to
tread would not have led her to happiness either, and I hoped that in
the end, here she would find contentment. I have hoped in vain. Tonight
she intends to take matters into her own hands."

Sliss blinked again, politely, to indicate that he was interested if
Negu Mah cared to tell him more. Negu Mah rose.

"My friend," he said, "if you will come with me, I will show you what I
mean."

Sliss grasped the edge of his tub with webbed hands and swung his
webbed, yellow-skinned feet free from the water which kept the
sensitive membranes from drying, and at the same time supplied his body
tissues with liquid. Falling upon all fours, like a great, misshapen
pet, he waddled awkwardly after his host.

Negu Mah led him to an elevator within the house. This took them to a
higher floor, and there they followed a corridor to the rear of the
building. Here Negu Mah, without showing a light, opened a door, and in
silence they moved out upon a small balcony overlooking the rear
gardens, which were shrouded in darkness because rising Jupiter was on
the opposite side of the building.

They had stood there only a moment when below them a door opened, and a
small figure slipped through. Another figure appeared from beneath the
shadows of a cluster of slender, purple neklo trees and moved forward
to greet the first. They met in the center of a tiny open space, where
a fountain spurting through holes in crystal made a sweet murmuring
music. And to the two watchers rose whispered words--"Nanlo! Nanlo, my
darling!" "Hugh! Oh, Hugh, my love, hold me close and tell me that
everything is ready for us to leave!"

                     *      *      *      *      *

Hugh Neils' arms held her close, and his lips were hot on hers. That he
was here as they had planned meant that he had succeeded in the other
plans they had agreed upon. Exultation soared higher in Nanlo's breast.

"Then we can go? Go now?" she asked eagerly, as Hugh Neils released
her. "The crew is asleep? You were able to arrange it?"

The young engineer looked down at her, his thin face a pale blur in the
darkness.

"In five minutes, just five minutes, Nanlo, my own," he whispered. "I
left the guard half an hour ago, drinking molkai into which I put a
sleeping powder. Give him five more minutes to fall asleep, then we can
go to the ship unseen, unchecked. Until then, we can wait here in the
garden."

He led her toward the trilling fountain and they sat down upon a bench
before it, of rare Callisto crystal. They still were in darkness, but
the flame-like Jupiter light touched the tops of the neklo trees above
them with a ruddy light which brought faint glimmerings from the
radioactive leaves.

Hugh Neils was a recent college graduate whom Negu Mah had hired as an
assistant supervisor in the refining mills on Callisto, where the
precious uranium 235 was separated from the ordinary metal. It was not
a desirable job, but the best Hugh Neils could get. His college record
of reckless scrapes and entanglements with women had been against him.
Indeed, this position had only come to him because his home was in the
same section as Nanlo's, and Negu Mah had thought that perhaps his
company on occasion would help alleviate Nanlo's restlessness.

It had--but to an extent Negu Mah had not foreseen.

"In less than a quarter of an hour, Nanlo my darling," Hugh Neils
whispered now, "we'll be gone from here, and you'll belong only to me.
We'll leave this infernal barren satellite to spin itself dizzy out
here in no place. We'll leave that humpty-dumpty husband of yours and
his hypocritical good-nature to whistle for his wife and his ship. We
won't care. We'll be together, always together from now on, and he'll
never see us again."

Nanlo leaned against his shoulder, the prospect that he painted seemed
very sweet to her.

"You're sure you can manage the ship alone?" she asked. "But of course,
I can help, a little anyway. You can teach me."

"Of course," Hugh Neils answered confidently, and bent to kiss her
again. "I've been studying her for a week, asking questions, making
friends with the crew. I can handle her one-handed. We'll take off and
circle Jupiter first. They may think we landed on the other side, in
the Outlaw Crevice. Or they may figure that we went on to Saturn, and
will hide somewhere in the system there.

"But we won't do either, and they won't know where to look for us.
Instead of turning back on the other side of Jupiter, we'll make a
tangential angle out into space. We'll hold it for a month, for
safety's sake. We could hold for fifty years, or a hundred, if we
needed to. There's fuel and provisions, meant for the mines, enough to
last that long.

"At the end of the month, we'll swing back, cut into the path of the
sun, and pick up Mars as she comes in from behind Sol.

"On Mars, we can sell the Vulcan. There's an outfit in the Equator
Zone, in the mountains west of the Great Canal, that will buy her and
no questions asked. I learned about them from a fraternity brother
while I was in college. He'd run into some hard luck, they gave him a
job, and he was making money hand over fist. They're asteroid miners.
The work they do is illegal, but it's perfectly justified morally. What
right have men with more money than they know what to do with to own
everything in the Solar System? How can a young fellow get a start any
more, when corporations and rich old fogies own everything?

"Maybe I'll join up with this outfit. After we've sold the ship I'll
see. How does that sound to you?"

"Wonderful, Hugh," Nanlo whispered. "But I don't care about that. All I
want is for us to be together. Always. You and me, and our love,
together for eternity. That's all I want."

"That's all I want, too, darling Nanlo," Hugh Neils told her passionately,
and kissed her. "Together, forever. Just you and me."

Nanlo sighed, with luxuriant happiness, and peered at his radiumite
wrist watch.

"The five minutes are up," she murmured. "Can't we go now?"

Hugh Neils nodded.

"We've waited plenty long enough," he decided. "The guard will be
asleep by now. The crew were that way when I left them, in the
dormitory. I saw that they had plenty of spiked molkai at dinner.
Pretended it was my birthday celebration. And the ship's all ready and
waiting for the take-off. All we have to do is lock the port and close
the rising switch."

The two on the bench by the fountain rose, and for a long minute were
locked in an embrace. Then they turned toward the dark-shadowed trees
and disappeared beneath them, in the direction of the nearby space
port.

                     *      *      *      *      *

Negu Mah silently turned back into the house. Sliss shuffled after him.
The uranium merchant led the way back to the vitrite covered garden and
there, a little wearily, resumed his seat and picked up his mug again.
Sliss climbed back into his tub of water, sighed gratefully at the
comfort it gave him, and then turned his pop-eyes toward his host. He
blinked once, inquiringly, and Negu Mah understood that the intelligent
amphibian was asking if he intended to do nothing to stop the pair who
were running away.

Negu Mah sipped pensively at his drink.

"If she had only told me," he murmured. "If she had only come to me and
said she desired her freedom. If they had only both come together and
faced me, saying that though it meant giving up all they had, they
wanted only each other! I would have been generous. I would have been
indulgent. But they did not. They had not the courage. They were afraid
of me. And they hated me."

Negu Mah was silent for a moment. Both he and his guest stared toward
the graceful shaft of the Vulcan, now fully silhouetted against the
whole tremendous bulk of Jupiter, sitting like a titanic scarlet egg
upon the horizon of Callisto. The Jupiter light flooded the vitrite
garden, gave the plants there, chosen with an eye to this, strange,
exotic, glowing colors, flushed Negu Mah and Sliss with a ruby
radiance.

Towards that dark, waiting craft the two they had watched were even now
stealing, tense with the weight of their daring and their crime. In a
moment they would reach her, enter her, actuate machinery that was
miraculous in its complex simplicity, and be gone then on the wings it
gave them into the concealing embrace of universal space.

"You see, my friend Sliss," Negu Mah said finally, "Nanlo is beautiful,
but there is nothing within. Her beauty deceived me. I thought that
where such loveliness existed, there must be a soul to animate it. I
was wrong. She is like an imitation gem--beautiful on the surface,
paste within. Yet the mistake was mine, and I did not blame her. I
indulged her, and still hoped that something real would bloom within
her."

He drained the molkai in his mug, one great gulp, and slumped back.

"The young man, too, Hugh Neils. I thought he would be a companion for
her. But he too is weak. Yet they say they love each other. They
swear--we heard them--that they want only each other and their love for
all time."

Sliss blinked, twice, and Negu Mah nodded.

"Yes," he said. "If they carry out their plans as we heard them, that
feeling will soon go. The sale of the Vulcan, even as stolen property,
would give them many credits. After that--luxury, self-indulgence. And
their natures are too weak to withstand the ravages of such things. So
I have been troubled to know what to do.

"You see, my friend from Venus, though I would have let Nanlo go had
she asked me, my own honor is at stake when she seeks to deal me an
injury by slipping away in the night, and stealing from me the Vulcan.
She is doing evil, and must be punished. The young man, too--indulgent
as I am, I can not let him dishonor me thus without paying any
penalty."

Sliss' eye membranes shut, questioningly.

"Yet," the uranium merchant went on, "I have a fondness for Nanlo. I
will not prevent her from doing as she has chosen to do, for the intent
would still be there, and knowing it as I do, all between us is over. I
can not aid her to fulfill her plans, either, for that is to injure her
and myself too. But there is another course. I have chosen that."

He gestured with one plump hand toward the silhouetted ship.

"I believe they have entered the Vulcan," he announced. "I saw light as
the entrance port opened then."

The amphibian's great, frog head nodded agreement.

"So," Negu Mah continued, "I have decided to exercise what indulgence I
can in the face of the injury they would do me. They shall have their
chance."

He fell silent again. Sliss leaned forward in his tub. Both of them
watched intently. A flare of greenish light had sprung up beneath the
black pillar that was the Vulcan. For just an instant the freighter
stood there, green radiance expanding around her. Then she leaped into
the sky.

With her leap, she seemed to suck the radiance along. It became a great
cone of glowing light that, arrow-like, raced away upward. For a long
instant the black length of the ship, and the greenish fan of flame,
were outlined against the scarlet background of Jupiter. Then the
freighter rocket, flinging herself upward at three gravities or better,
passed the edge of the planet and vanished.

Negu Mah sat very quiet for some moments. But at last he stirred again.
Sliss' eyes turned toward him, immobile.

"Sometimes love transforms the weak," the uranium merchant said slowly.
"Like fire giving temper to soft metal. Sometimes a mutual love will
endure for all eternity, and the two who share it will gain from it a
soul they did not have before. Nanlo and Hugh Neils have this chance.
Both said they wanted only the other, and their love, for all eternity.
To gain this, both were willing to cheat, to steal, to dishonor me and
themselves.

"So, Sliss, my understanding friend, they have paid the price, they
shall have what they ask for.

"As the man, Hugh Neils, said, there is fuel and food in the holds of
the Vulcan to run the motors and last the lifetime of a man--or a man
and a woman. Indeed, two lifetimes, or three, for I was aware of their
plans, and secretly I placed aboard the craft many additional supplies.
Fuel, and food, and books, and tools. And one additional thing the two
who flee now there in space have not counted upon.

"Into the controls of the Vulcan one of my engineers has placed a small
device. After two hundred hours, or when they are well beyond Jupiter,
this device will swing the Vulcan straight toward Proxima Centauri, the
nearest star. In that position the controls will lock. And for twenty
years, a generation, it will be impossible either to alter the course
of the Vulcan or to shut her blast motors off.

"At the end of that time the last tank of reserve fuel will be
exhausted, and they will cease automatically. Then once more the Vulcan
may be controlled by those aboard. They may switch the motors onto the
tanks of fuel in the cargo holds, and continue onwards. If they were
celestial navigators, they might try to turn, and seek earth again. But
they are not navigators, and the sun will be but a tiny spark in the
limitless darkness, one with a million others, not to be told apart.
They will know that only Proxima Centauri in all space may the Vulcan
hope to reach in their lifetime, or perhaps even in that of their
descendants, for a message to that effect they will find presently.

"So it may be that they will continue onward of their own choice. If
they make no choice, momentum will carry them onward, perhaps forever.

"But in any case, Nanlo and Hugh Neils will have exactly what they have
asked for--each other, for all eternity. If truly that was what they
wanted, a great destiny may be theirs. A lifetime of travel can bring
them to the stars. They or their descendants can be the first humans to
bridge the gap of nothingness that has thus far daunted the stoutest
hearts."

As they watched, the green dart of light dwindled and was gone. And
quite invisible at last in the arms of outer darkness, the Vulcan sped
its two passengers onward toward the stars.





End of Project Gutenberg's The Indulgence of Negu Mah, by Robert Andrew Arthur

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE INDULGENCE OF NEGU MAH ***

***** This file should be named 23688.txt or 23688.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/3/6/8/23688/

Produced by Greg Weeks and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
