The Project Gutenberg EBook of Instinct, by George Oliver Smith

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Instinct

Author: George Oliver Smith

Illustrator: Martinez

Release Date: December 20, 2007 [EBook #23931]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK INSTINCT ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Bruce Albrecht, Stephen Blundell
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net









INSTINCT

[Illustration]

BY GEORGE O. SMITH

 _You can keep a good man down, if
 you've got enough headstart, are alert
 and persistent ... so long as he limits
 himself to acting like a good man...._

Illustrated by Martinez


It was 047-63-10 when he opened the door. Before his superior could chew
him for prepunctuality, Huvane said as the chief looked up and opened
his mouth to start:

"Sorry, but you should know. Terra is at it again."

Chelan's jaw snapped shut. He passed a hand over his face and asked in a
tone of pure exasperation. "The same?" and as Huvane nodded, Chelan went
on, "Why can't they make a mistake and blow themselves out of our hair?
How far did they get this time?"

"All the way."

"And out?"

Huvane sat down shaking his head slowly. "Not yet, but they're over the
hump, you know." Huvane's face brightened ever so slightly. "I can't be
criticized for not counting them, chief. But I'll estimate that there
must be at least a couple of hundred atoms of 109 already. And you know
that nobody could _make_ 109 if they hadn't already evolved methods of
measuring the properties of individual atoms. So as soon as they find
that their boom-sample doesn't behave like the standard mess out of a
bombardment chamber, they won't rest until they find out why. They'll
find out. Then it'll be 109, 109, 109 until we're forced to clobber them
again."

Bitterly Chelan looked up. "I don't think I need the lecture. I admire
their tenacity. I admire their ambition. I admire their blasphemous,
consignatory, obscenity attitude of acting as if the Great Creator had
concocted the whole glorious Universe for their own playground. Yes,"
said the chief wearily, "singly they aren't bad traits. Boiled down into
the self-esteem of a single race, I don't admire them any more. I'm
simply scared."

"Yeah. Well, we've got time."

"Not much. What's their space potential this time?"

"Still scragged on the mass-inertia-relativity barrier. Tailburners ...
er, chemical reaction engines. Manned and unmanned orbital flights. Half
a dozen landings on their sister planet. No," said Huvane as he saw the
chief's puzzlement, "I don't mean Number Two ... the one they call Venus
this time. I mean their co-orbital companion. _The_ Moon. They still
call it that."

The chief looked up wonderingly. "Do you suppose," he asked solemnly,
"that there is really something called a 'racial memory'?"

"It's against all the theory," objected Huvane. "But there seems to
be--" his voice trailed off absently. It returned after some thought:
"I've tried to sort it out, just as if I were one of them. The
recurrence of their ... er ... 'names of antiquity' as they call them,
seem to recur and recur. Their Planet Two, now called Venus, was called
Astarte last time, and before that it was Ishtar."

"Other way around."

"No matter. The names are still being used and, according to their
belief, merely parallel names culled out of local pagan religious
beliefs."

The chief nodded. "That's only part of the parallelism. The big thing is
the way they follow the same pattern. Savage, agrarian, urban, right on
up the ladder according to the rules of civic science but squabbling and
battling all the way right on up and out into space. Hell, Huvane,
warfare and conflict I can both understand and cope with, but not the
Terran flavor. They don't come out bent on conquest or stellar
colonialism. They come out with their little private fight still going
on and each side lines up its volume of influence and pits one against
the other until the whole section of that spiral arm is glittering like
a sputtering spark along a train of black powder. I wish," he said
savagely, "that we could cut off that arm and fling it deep into
extragalactic space."

Huvane shook his head. "And leave the problem for our children to
solve?"

"They'll have one to solve, I think," said Chelan. "In another twenty
thousand years the Terrans will be right back doing business at the same
old stand. Unless we can solve it for once and for all right now."

Huvane looked around as if he were seeking another door to the chief's
office. "How?" he asked sarcastically. "The first time we greeted them
and they took both our welcome and us for everything they could before
we pulled the rug out from under them. The second time we boxed them off
and they broke out after converting the isolation screen into an
offensive weapon. The third time we tried to avoid them and they ran
wild exploiting less ambitious races. The fourth time we missed the boat
and they were chewing at our back door before we knew about them;
containing them was almost a nova job. The fifth time we went in and
tried to understand them, they traded us two for one. Two things they
didn't want for one they did," Huvane's lips curled, "and I'm not sure
that they didn't trade us the other way around; two they needed for one
they declared useless. Sixth? that was the last time and they just came
out shooting as if the whole galaxy automatically objected. This time?
Who knows?" Huvane sat down again and put his hands between his knees.

"They don't operate like _people_. Sensible folk settle their own
problems, then look for more. Terra? One half of the globe is against
the other half of the globe. Fighting one another tooth and nail, they
still find time to invent and cross space to other planets and continue
their fight on unknown territory."

"Maybe we'd better just admit that we don't know the solution. Then we
can clobber Terra back to the swamp, juggle the place into another ice
age, put the details down in History, and hope that our remote progeny
will be smarter than we."

"Like maybe we're smarter than our remote ancestors?" jeered Huvane.

"Got a better idea?"

"Maybe. Has anybody really taken a couple of them and _analyzed_ them?"

"It's inhumane."

"I agree, but--?"

"Get me a healthy, well-balanced specimen of somewhat
better-than-average education and training. Can do?"

"Can do. But how are you going to keep him?"

"I don't intend to study him like I'd study a bug under a microscope.
This one won't get away. Make it in fourteen versaids, Huvane."

"Make it in ten plus or minus a radite or two. So long!"

       *       *       *       *       *

The beast at Cape Canaveral stood three hundred and fifteen feet tall
dwarfing her creators into microscopic proportions. Swarming up and down
the gantry, bug-sized humans crawled in and out of check ports with
instrument checks, hauling hoses, cables, lines. Some thousand feet
away, a puff-bomb of red smoke billowed out and a habit-flattened voice
announced: "At the mark, X Minus Fifteen Minutes ... ... ... Mark! X
Minus Fifteen Minutes!"

Jerry Markham said, "That's me!" He looked up at the lofty porthole and
almost lost his balance over backwards sighting it. He was a healthy
specimen, about twenty-four and full of life. He had spent the day going
through two routines that were sometimes simultaneous and at other times
serially; one re-stating his instructions letter by letter including the
various alternatives and contingencies that involved his making
decisions if the conditions on Venus were according to this theory or
that. The other was a rigorous medical checkup. Neither of them showed
that Jerry Markham had spent the previous night in activities not
recommended by his superiors but nothing that would bounce him if they
knew. He could hardly be broken for living it up at a party.

He shook hands with the boss and stepped into the elevator. It was not
his idea of a proper send-off. There should be bands playing and girls
throwing paper tape, flowers and a few drinks. Sally should send him off
with a proud smooch of lipstick and a tearful promise to wait. Instead
it was all very military and strict and serious--which is why he'd
whooped it up the night before. He'd had his good night and good by with
Sally Forman, but now eighteen hours later he was fit and raring for a
return match.

Jerry's mind was by no means concerned with this next half hour, which
would be the most perilous part of his flight. Tomorrow would take care
of itself. The possibility that thirty minutes from now he might be dead
in a flaming pyre did not cross his mind, the chance that an hour from
now he could be told that his bird was off-course and his fate
starvation if it obtained an untrue orbit or abrupt destruction if it
didn't orbit at all--nothing bothered him.

He sat there chanting the count down with the official timer and braced
himself when the call came:

"Zero! Fire!"

Inwardly, Jerry Markham's mind said, "We're off!" and he began to look
forward to his landing on Venus. Not the problems of landing, but what
he would find there when he soared down through the clouds.

Determined to hold up through the high-G even though nobody watched, he
went on and on and up and up, his radio voiced the progress tinnily.
Shock followed roaring pressure, release followed shock. Orientation was
lost; only logic and intellect told him where he was and which way he
was going.

Then he was free. Free to eat and drink and read and smoke one cigarette
every three hours and, in essence, behave in about the same way as a
prisoner confined in solitary. The similarity did not bother Jerry
Markham, for this was honor, not punishment.

       *       *       *       *       *

Huvane collected him with the ease of a fisherman landing a netted crab.
Easily, painlessly. Shockingly, for the crab doesn't exactly take to the
net with docility.

Huvane collected the whole shebang, man and machinery; then opened the
spacecraft with the same attitude as a man peeling the lid from a can of
sardines. He could have breached the air lock, but he wanted the Terran
to understand the power behind the act.

Jerry Markham came out blinking; very mildly wondering about the air. It
was good. Without considering the rather high probability that nobody
spoke the language, he blurted:

"What gives?"

He was not very much surprised when one of them in uniform said curtly,
"This way and make it snappy, Terran!"

No, he was not surprised. He was too stunned to permit anything as
simple as surprise. And through the shock and the stun, his months of
training came through. Jerry Markham worried his first worry: _How was
he going to get the word back home?_

Confinement in the metal cell of his top-stage hadn't bothered him. The
concept of landing on a planet that couldn't come closer to home than
some twenty-seven million miles was mere peanuts. Isolation for a year
was no more than a hiatus, a period of adventure that would be rewarded
many-fold. Sally? So she might not wait but there were others; he'd
envisioned himself fighting them off with a club after his successful
return. Hell, they'd swarmed him before his take-off, starting with the
moment his number had come up as possible candidate.

No, the meeting with competence in space did not shock him greatly. What
bothered him was his lack of control over the situation. Had he seen
them and passed on about his business, he recounted the incident.

As it was, his desire to tell somebody about it was cut off. As he sat,
alone and helpless, it occurred to him that he did not mind so much the
dying, if that was to be his lot. What mattered was the unmarked grave.
The mourning did not move him; the physical concept of "grave" and its
fill of moldering organic substances was nothing. It was mere symbol. So
long as people knew how and where, it made little difference to Jerry
Markham whether he was planted in a duridium casket guaranteed to
preserve the dead flesh for a thousand years or whether he went out in a
bright swift flame that glinted in its tongues of the color-traces of
incandescent elements of human organic chemistry.

So long as people knew. Where and how. Vague, vague, mass-volumized
concept. Granite tomb was one idea, here was a _place_. Point a
spread-fingered hand in a waving sweep across the sky that encompasses
the Plane of The Ecliptic and say, "It is there," and another _place_ is
identified. Lost on Venus is no more than a phrase; from Terra Haute or
Times Square, Venus is a tiny point in the sky smaller to the vision
than the granite of Grant's Tomb.

Imagination breeds irritation. Would they call it pilot error or
equipment unreliability? Dying he could face. Goofing would be a
disgrace that he would have to meet in fact or in symbol. Hardware
crackup was a matter of the laws of probability. Not only his duty
demanded that he report, his essence cried out for a voice to _let them
know_.

Anybody.

Just the chance to tell one other human soul.

Chelan asked, "Who are you? Your name and rank?"

He said sullenly, "Go to hell."

"We have ways and means."

He said, "Use 'em."

"If we said that we mean no harm; if we asked what we could do to prove
it, what would be your reply?"

"Take me back and let me go."

"Who are you? Will you identify yourself?"

"No."

"Stubborn Terran!"

"I know my rights. We are not at war. I'll tell you nothing. Why did you
capture me?"

"We'll ask the questions, Terran."

"You'll get no answers." He sneered at them angrily. "Torture me--and
then wonder whether my screamings tell the truth. Dope me and wonder
whether what I truly believe is fact or fantasy."

"Please," said Chelan, "we only want to understand your kind. To know
what makes you tick."

"Then why didn't you ask?"

"We've tried and we get no answers. Terran, the Universe is a vastness
beyond comprehension. Co-operate and give us what we want to know and a
piece of it is yours."

"Nuts!"

"Terran, you have friends."

"Who doesn't?"

"Why can't we be your friends?"

Angrily, resentfully, "Your way isn't friendly enough to convince me."

Chelan shook his head. "Take him away," he directed in his own tongue.

"Where? And how shall we keep him?"

"To the place we've prepared. And keep him safe."

Huvane asked, "Safe? Who knows what is safe? One bribed his guards. One
seduced her guards. One dug his way out scratch by scratch. Disappeared,
died, dead, gone, mingled off with the myriad of worlds--did one get
home, perhaps, to start their legend of the gods in the sky; the legend
that never dies through the rise and fall of culture from savagery to
... to ... to Element 109?"

Chelan looked at Jerry Markham, the Terran looked back defiantly as if
he were guest instead of captive. "Co-operate," breathed Chelan.

"I'll tell you nothing. Force me. I can't stop that."

Chelan shook his head sorrowfully. "Extracting what you know would be
less than the play of a child," he said. "No, Terran. We can know what
you know in the turn of a dial. What we need is that which you do not
know. Laugh? Or is that a sneer? No matter. What you know is worthless.
Your problems and your ambitions, both racial and personal, are minor.
We know them already. The pattern is repetitive, only some of the names
are changed.

"But why? Ah, that we must know. Why are you what you are? Seven times
in History Terra has come up from the mud, seven times along the same
route. Seven times a history of ten thousand years from savage to
savant, from beast to brilliance and always with the same will to
do--to do what? To die for what? To fight for what?"

Chelan waved Huvane to take the Terran away.

       *       *       *       *       *

Huvane said, "He's locked in air-tight with guards who can be trusted.
Now what do we do with him?"

"He will co-operate."

"By force?"

"No, Huvane. By depriving him of the one thing that Life cannot exist
without."

"Food? Safety?"

Chelan shook his head. "More primitive than these." He lowered his
voice. "He suffers now from being cut off from his kind. Life starts,
complaining about the treatment it receives during the miracle of birth
and crying for its first breath of air. Life departs gasping for air,
with someone listening for the last words, the last message from the
dying. Communication, Huvane, is the primary drive of all Life, from
plant to animal to man--and if such exists, superman.

"Through communication Life goes on. Communication is the prime
requisite to procreation. The firefly signals his mate by night, the
human male entices his woman with honeyed words and is not the gift of a
jewel a crystalline, enduring statement of his undying affection?"

Chelan dropped his flowery manner and went on in a more casual vein:
"Huvane, boil it down to the least attractive form of simplification, no
life stands alone. And no viable life goes on without communication, I
shall shut off the Terran's communication."

"Then he will go rank staring, raving mad."

"No, for I shall offer him the alternative. Co-operate, or molder in
utter blankness."

Huvane shrugged. "Seems to me that any Terran locked in a duralim cell
so far from home the distance means nothing is already cut from
communication."

"Deeper, deeper, Huvane. The brain lies prisoner within a cell of bone.
Its contact with the Outside world lies along five channels of sensory
communication. Everything that the brain believes about the Universe is
the product of sensory information carried inward by sight, touch,
sound, taste and smell. From five basic bits of information, knowledge
of the Great Truth is formed through logic and self-argument.
Everything."

"But--"

"Oh, now stop. I am not expressing my own singular opinion. I believe a
rather great proportion of the things that I was taught, and I was
taught through the self-same five sensory channel."

"Um-m-m."

"Good. Just plain 'Um-m-m.' Now we shall shut off the Terran's channels
of communication until he consents as an alternative. This, Huvane,
hasn't been tried before. It may bring us the final important bit of
information."

       *       *       *       *       *

Slowly the lights went out. Jerry Markham was prepared for dark
isolation, he could do nothing about it so he accepted it by the simple
process of assuring himself that things were going to get worse before
they got better.

The darkness became--absolute. Utter. Complete. Not even the dots and
whorls and specks that are technically called "Visual noise" occurred. A
level of mental alertness niggled at him; for nearly twenty-four years
it had been a busy little chunk of his mind. It was that section that
inspected the data for important program material and decided which was
trivial and which was worthy of the Big Boy's attention. Now it was out
of a job because there wasn't even a faint background count of
plateau-noise to occupy its attention.

The silence grew--vast. Brain said that the solid walls were no more
than ten feet from him; ears said that he was in the precise middle of
absolutely nowhere. Feeling said that the floor was under his feet, ears
said that upward pressure touched his soles. Deeper grew the deadening
of his ears, and orientation was lost. Feeling remained and he felt his
heart beating in a hunting rhythm because the sound-feedback through the
ear was gone, and the hortator had lost his audible beat.

Feeling died and he knew not whether he stood or sat or floated askew.
Feeling died and with it went that delicate motor control that directs
the position of muscle and limb and enables a man to place his little
finger on the tip of his nose with his eyes closed.

Aside from the presence of foreign matter, the taste of a clean mouth
is--tasteless. The term is relative. Jerry Markham learned what real
tastelessness was. It was flat and blank and--nothingness.

Chemists tell us that air is tasteless, colorless, and odorless, but
when sense is gone abruptly one realizes that the air does indeed have
its aroma.

In an unemployed body the primitive sensors of the mind had nothing to
do, and like a man trained to busy-ness, loafing was their hardest task.
Gone was every sensory stimulus. His heart pumped from habit, not
controlled by the feedback of sound or feeling. He breathed, but he did
not hear the inrush of air. Brain told him to be careful of his mouth,
the sharp teeth could bite the dead tongue and he could bleed to death
never feeling pain nor even the swift flow of salty warmth.
Habit-trained nerves caused a false tickle in his throat; he never knew
whether he coughed or whether he thought that he coughed.

The sense of time deserted him when the metronome of heartbeat died.
Determined Brain compromised by assuming that crude time could be kept
by the function of hunger, elimination, weariness. Logical Brain pointed
out that he could starve to death and feel nothing; elimination was a
sensory thing no more; weariness was of the body that brought no
information anyway--and what, indeed was sleep?

Brain considered this question. Brain said, I am Jerry Markham. But is
it true that no brain can think of nothing? Is it possible that "Sleep"
is the condition that obtains when the body stops conveying reliable
information to the brain, and then says to Hell with Everything and
decides to stop thinking?

The Brain called Jerry Markham did not stop thinking. It lost its time
sense, but not completely. A period of time passed, a whirlwind of
thoughts and dreamlike actions went on, and then calmness came for a
while.

Dreams? Now ponder the big question. Does the brain dream the dream as a
sensory experience--or is a dream no more than a sequence of assorted
memories? Would a dying brain expire in pleasure during a pleasant
dream--or is the enjoyment of a pleasant dream only available to the
after-awakened brain?

What is Man but his Memories?

       *       *       *       *       *

In one very odd manner, the brain of Jerry Markham retained its
intellectual orientation, and realized that its physical orientation was
uncontrollable and undetectable and therefore of no importance. Like the
lighthouse keeper who could not sleep when the diaphone did not
wrneeee-hrnawwww for five seconds of each and every minute, Jerry
Markham's brain was filled with a mild concern about the total lack of
unimportant but habitual data. There was no speckle of light to classify
and ignore, no susurrus of air molecules raining against the eardrum.
Blankness replaced the smell and taste and their absence was as
disturbing as a pungence or a poison. And, of course, one should feel
something if it is no more than the tonus of muscle against the mobile
bones.

Communication is the prime drive of life. Cut off from external
communication entirely, section A, bay 6, tier 9, row 13 hollered
over to box Q, line 23, aisle F and wanted to know what was going
on. The gang on the upper deck hailed the boiler room, and the
crew in the bleacher seats reported that the folks in charge of
C.I.C.--Communication Information Center--were sitting on their hands
because they didn't have anything to do. One collection of bored brain
cells stirred. They hadn't been called upon since Jerry Markham sang
"_Adeste Fidelis_" in memorized Latin some fifteen years earlier and so
they started the claque. Like an auditorium full of people impatient
because the curtain had not gone up on time, bedlam broke loose.

Bedlam is subject to the laws of periodicity, stochastic analysis, and
with some rather brilliant manipulation it can be reduced to a Fourier
Series. Fourier says that Maxwell is right and goes on to define exactly
when, in a series of combined periodicities of apparently random motion,
all the little particles will be moving in the same direction.
Stochastic analysis says that if the letter "U" follows the letter "Q"
in most cases, words beginning with "Q" will have "U" for a second
letter.

Jerry Markham began to think. Isolated and alone, prisoner in the cell
of bone, with absolutely nothing to distract him, the Brain by common
consent pounded a gavel, held a conference, appointed a chairman and
settled down to do the one job that the Brain was assembled to do. In
unison, ten to the sixteenth storage cells turned butter side up at the
single wave of a mental flag.

He thought of his father and his mother; of his Sally. He thought of his
commanding officer and of the fellows he liked and disliked. The
primitive urge to communicate was upon him, because he must first
establish communication before he could rise from the stony mineral
stage to the exalted level of a vegetable. Bereft of his normal senses,
undistracted by trivia such as noise and pain and the inestimable
vastness of information bits that must be considered and evaluated, his
brain called upon his memory and provided the background details.

The measured tread of a company of marching soldiers can wreck a bridge.

The cadence of ten to the sixteenth brain cells, undivided by the
distraction of incoming information, broke down a mental barrier.

As vividly as the living truth, Jerry Markham envisioned himself
sauntering down the sidewalk. The breeze was on his face and the
pavement was beneath his feet, the air was laden with its myriad of
smells and the flavor of a cigarette was on his tongue. His eyes saw
Sally running toward him, her cry of greeting was a welcome sound and
the pressure of her hug was strong and physical as the taste of her
lips.

Real.

She hugged his arm and said, "Your folks are waiting."

Jerry laughed. "Let the general wait a bit longer," he said. "I've got a
lot to tell him."

       *       *       *       *       *

Huvane said, "Gone!" and the sound of his voice re-echoed back and forth
across the empty cell.

"Gone," repeated Chelan. "Utterly incomprehensible, but none the less a
fact. But how--? Isolated, alone, imprisoned--cut off from all
communication. All communication--?"

"I'll get another specimen, chief."

Chelan shook his head. "Seven times we've slapped them down. Seven times
we've watched their rise--and wondered how they did it. Seven times they
would have surpassed us if we hadn't blocked them. Let them rise, let
them run the Universe. They're determined to do that anyway. And now I
think it's time for us to stop annoying our betters. I'd hate to face
them if they were angry."

"But chief, he was cut off from all communication--?"

"Obviously," said Chelan, "not!"


THE END




Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from _Astounding Science Fiction_ March
    1959. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed. Minor spelling and
    typographical errors have been corrected without note.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Instinct, by George Oliver Smith

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK INSTINCT ***

***** This file should be named 23931.txt or 23931.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/3/9/3/23931/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Bruce Albrecht, Stephen Blundell
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
