The Project Gutenberg eBook, The Measure of a Man, by Randall Garrett,
Illustrated by   Martinez


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: The Measure of a Man


Author: Randall Garrett



Release Date: January 3, 2008  [eBook #24135]
Most recently updated: January 14, 2009

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MEASURE OF A MAN***


E-text prepared by Greg Weeks, Bruce Albrecht, Mary Meehan, and the
Project Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading Team
(http://www.pgdp.net)



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustration.
      See 24135-h.htm or 24135-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/2/4/1/3/24135/24135-h/24135-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/2/4/1/3/24135/24135-h.zip)


Transcriber's note:

      This etext was produced from _Astounding Science Fiction_,
      April, 1960. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence
      that the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.





THE MEASURE OF A MAN

by

RANDALL GARRETT

Illustrated by Martinez







     _What is desirable is not always necessary, while that which is
     necessary may be most undesirable. Perhaps the measure of a man is
     the ability to tell one from the other ... and act on it._




Alfred Pendray pushed himself along the corridor of the battleship
_Shane_, holding the flashlight in one hand and using the other hand and
his good leg to guide and propel himself by. The beam of the torch
reflected queerly from the pastel green walls of the corridor, giving
him the uneasy sensation that he was swimming underwater instead of
moving through the blasted hulk of a battleship, a thousand light-years
from home.

He came to the turn in the corridor, and tried to move to the right, but
his momentum was greater than he had thought, and he had to grab the
corner of the wall to keep from going on by. That swung him around, and
his sprained ankle slammed agonizingly against the other side of the
passageway.

Pendray clenched his teeth and kept going. But as he moved down the side
passage, he went more slowly, so that the friction of his palm against
the wall could be used as a brake.

He wasn't used to maneuvering without gravity; he'd been taught it in
Cadets, of course, but that was years ago and parsecs away. When the
pseudograv generators had gone out, he'd retched all over the place, but
now his stomach was empty, and the nausea had gone.

He had automatically oriented himself in the corridors so that the doors
of the various compartments were to his left and right, with the ceiling
"above" and the deck "below." Otherwise, he might have lost his sense of
direction completely in the complex maze of the interstellar
battleship.

_Or_, he corrected himself, _what's left of a battleship_.

And what _was_ left? Just Al Pendray and less than half of the
once-mighty _Shane_.

The door to the lifeboat hold loomed ahead in the beam of the
flashlight, and Pendray braked himself to a stop. He just looked at the
dogged port for a few seconds.

_Let there be a boat in there_, he thought. _Just a boat, that's all I
ask. And air_, he added as an afterthought. Then his hand went out to
the dog handle and turned.

The door cracked easily. There was air on the other side. Pendray
breathed a sigh of relief, braced his good foot against the wall, and
pulled the door open.

The little lifeboat was there, nestled tightly in her cradle. For the
first time since the _Shane_ had been hit, Pendray's face broke into a
broad smile. The fear that had been within him faded a little, and the
darkness of the crippled ship seemed to be lessened.

Then the beam of his torch caught the little red tag on the air lock of
the lifeboat. _Repair Work Under Way--Do Not Remove This Tag Without
Proper Authority._

That explained why the lifeboat hadn't been used by the other crewmen.

Pendray's mind was numb as he opened the air lock of the small craft. He
didn't even attempt to think. All he wanted was to see exactly how the
vessel had been disabled by the repair crew. He went inside.

The lights were working in the lifeboat. That showed that its power was
still functioning. He glanced over the instrument-and-control panels. No
red tags on them, at least. Just to make sure, he opened them up, one by
one, and looked inside. Nothing wrong, apparently.

Maybe it had just been some minor repair--a broken lighting switch or
something. But he didn't dare hope yet.

He went through the door in the tiny cabin that led to the engine
compartment, and he saw what the trouble was.

The shielding had been removed from the atomic motors.

He just hung there in the air, not moving. His lean, dark face remained
expressionless, but tears welled up in his eyes and spilled over,
spreading their dampness over his lids.

The motors would run, all right. The ship could take him to Earth. But
the radiation leakage from those motors would kill him long before he
made it home. It would take ten days to make it back to base, and
twenty-four hours of exposure to the deadly radiation from those engines
would be enough to insure his death from radiation sickness.

His eyes were blurring from the film of tears that covered them; without
gravity to move the liquid, it just pooled there, distorting his vision.
He blinked the tears away, then wiped his face with his free hand.

Now what?

He was the only man left alive on the _Shane_, and none of the lifeboats
had escaped. The Rat cruisers had seen to that.

       *       *       *       *       *

They weren't really rats, those people. Not literally. They looked
humanoid enough to enable plastic surgeons to disguise a human being as
one of them, although it meant sacrificing the little fingers and little
toes to imitate the four-digited Rats. The Rats were at a disadvantage
there; they couldn't add any fingers. But the Rats had other
advantages--they bred and fought like, well, like rats.

Not that human beings couldn't equal them or even surpass them in
ferocity, if necessary. But the Rats had nearly a thousand years of
progress over Earth. Their Industrial Revolution had occurred while the
Angles and the Saxons and the Jutes were pushing the Britons into Wales.
They had put their first artificial satellites into orbit while King
Alfred the Great was fighting off the Danes.

They hadn't developed as rapidly as Man had. It took them roughly twice
as long to go from one step to the next, so that their actual
superiority was only a matter of five hundred years, and Man was
catching up rapidly. Unfortunately, Man hadn't caught up yet.

The first meeting of the two races had taken place in interstellar
space, and had seemed friendly enough. Two ships had come within
detector distance of each other, and had circled warily. It was almost a
perfect example of the Leinster Hypothesis; neither knew where the
other's home world was located, and neither could go back home for fear
that the other would be able to follow. But the Leinster Hypothesis
couldn't be followed to the end. Leinster's solution had been to have
the parties trade ships and go home, but that only works when the two
civilizations are fairly close in technological development. The Rats
certainly weren't going to trade their ship for the inferior craft of
the Earthmen.

The Rats, conscious of their superiority, had a simpler solution. They
were certain, after a while, that Earth posed no threat to them, so they
invited the Earth ship to follow them home.

The Earthmen had been taken on a carefully conducted tour of the Rats'
home planet, and the captain of the Earth ship--who had gone down in
history as "Sucker" Johnston--was convinced that the Rats meant no harm,
and agreed to lead a Rat ship back to Earth. If the Rats had struck
then, there would never have been a Rat-Human War. It would have been
over before it started.

But the Rats were too proud of their superiority. Earth was too far away
to bother them for the moment; it wasn't in their line of conquest just
yet. In another fifty years, the planet would be ready for picking off.

Earth had no idea that the Rats were so widespread. They had taken and
colonized over thirty planets, completely destroying the indigenous
intelligent races that had existed on five of them.

It wasn't just pride that had made the Rats decide to wait before
hitting Earth; there was a certain amount of prudence, too. None of the
other races they had met had developed space travel; the Earthmen might
be a little tougher to beat. Not that there was any doubt of the
outcome, as far as they were concerned--but why take chances?

But, while the Rats had fooled "Sucker" Johnston and some of his
officers, the majority of the crew knew better. Rat crewmen were little
short of slaves, and the Rats made the mistake of assuming that the
Earth crewmen were the same. They hadn't tried to impress the crewmen as
they had the officers. When the interrogation officers on Earth
questioned the crew of the Earth ship, they, too, became suspicious.
Johnston's optimistic attitude just didn't jibe with the facts.

So, while the Rat officers were having the red carpet rolled out for
them, Earth Intelligence went to work. Several presumably awe-stricken
men were allowed to take a conducted tour of the Rat ship. After all,
why not? The Twentieth Century Russians probably wouldn't have minded
showing their rocket plants to an American of Captain John Smith's time,
either.

But there's a difference. Earth's government knew Earth was being
threatened, and they knew they had to get as many facts as they could.
They were also aware of the fact that if you know a thing _can_ be done,
then you will eventually find a way to do it.

During the next fifty years, Earth learned more than it had during the
previous hundred. The race expanded, secretly, moving out to other
planets in that sector of the galaxy. And they worked to catch up with
the Rats.

They didn't make it, of course. When, after fifty years of presumably
peaceful--but highly limited--contact, the Rats hit Earth, they found
out one thing. That the mass and energy of a planet armed with the
proper weapons can not be out-classed by any conceivable concentration
of spaceships.

Throwing rocks at an army armed with machine guns may seem futile, but
if you hit them with an avalanche, they'll go under. The Rats lost
three-quarters of their fleet to planet-based guns and had to go home to
bandage their wounds.

The only trouble was that Earth couldn't counterattack. Their ships were
still out-classed by those of the Rats. And the Rats, their racial pride
badly stung, were determined to wipe out Man, to erase the stain on
their honor wherever Man could be found. Somehow, some way, they must
destroy Earth.

And now, Al Pendray thought bitterly, they would do it.

       *       *       *       *       *

The _Shane_ had sneaked in past Rat patrols to pick up a spy on one of
the outlying Rat planets, a man who'd spent five years playing the part
of a Rat slave, trying to get information on their activities there. And
he had had one vital bit of knowledge. He'd found it and held on to it
for over three years, until the time came for the rendezvous.

The rendezvous had almost come too late. The Rats had developed a device
that could make a star temporarily unstable, and they were ready to use
it on Sol.

The _Shane_ had managed to get off-planet with the spy, but they'd been
spotted in spite of the detector nullifiers that Earth had developed.
They'd been jumped by Rat cruisers and blasted by the superior Rat
weapons. The lifeboats had been picked out of space, one by one, as the
crew tried to get away.

In a way, Alfred Pendray was lucky. He'd been in the sick bay with a
sprained ankle when the Rats hit, sitting in the X-ray room. The shot
that had knocked out the port engine had knocked him unconscious, but
the shielded walls of the X-ray room had saved him from the blast of
radiation that had cut down the crew in the rear of the ship. He'd come
to in time to see the Rat cruisers cut up the lifeboats before they
could get well away from the ship. They'd taken a couple of parting
shots at the dead hulk, and then left it to drift in space--and leaving
one man alive.

In the small section near the rear of the ship, there were still
compartments that were airtight. At least, Pendray decided, there was
enough air to keep him alive for a while. If only he could get a little
power into the ship, he could get the rear air purifiers to working.

He left the lifeboat and closed the door behind him. There was no point
in worrying about a boat he couldn't use.

He made his way back toward the engine room. Maybe there was something
salvageable there. Swimming through the corridors was becoming easier
with practice; his Cadet training was coming back to him.

Then he got a shock that almost made him faint. The beam of his light
had fallen full on the face of a Rat. It took him several seconds to
realize that the Rat was dead, and several more to realize that it
wasn't a Rat at all. It was the spy they had been sent to pick up. He'd
been in the sick bay for treatments of the ulcers on his back gained
from five years of frequent lashings as a Rat slave.

Pendray went closer and looked him over. He was still wearing the
clothing he'd had on when the _Shane_ picked him up.

_Poor guy_, Pendray thought. _All that hell--for nothing._

Then he went around the corpse and continued toward the engine room.

The place was still hot, but it was thermal heat, not radioactivity. A
dead atomic engine doesn't leave any residual effects.

Five out of the six engines were utterly ruined, but the sixth seemed
to be in working condition. Even the shielding was intact. Again, hope
rose in Alfred Pendray's mind. If only there were tools!

A half hour's search killed that idea. There were no tools aboard
capable of cutting through the hard shielding. He couldn't use it to
shield the engine on the lifeboat. And the shielding that been on the
other five engines had melted and run; it was worthless.

Then another idea hit him. Would the remaining engine work at all? Could
it be fixed? It was the only hope he had left.

Apparently, the only thing wrong with it was the exciter circuit leads,
which had been sheared off by a bit of flying metal. The engine had
simply stopped instead of exploding. That ought to be fixable. He could
try; it was something to do, anyway.

It took him the better part of two days, according to his watch. There
were plenty of smaller tools around for the job, although many of them
were scattered and some had been ruined by the explosions. Replacement
parts were harder to find, but he managed to pirate some of them from
the ruined engines.

He ate and slept as he felt the need. There was plenty of food in the
sick bay kitchen, and there is no need for a bed under gravity-less
conditions.

After the engine was repaired, he set about getting the rest of the ship
ready to move--if it _would_ move. The hull was still solid, so the
infraspace field should function. The air purifiers had to be
reconnected and repaired in a couple of places. The lights ditto. The
biggest job was checking all the broken leads to make sure there weren't
any short circuits anywhere.

The pseudogravity circuits were hopeless. He'd have to do without
gravity.

       *       *       *       *       *

On the third day, he decided he'd better clean the place up. There were
several corpses floating around, and they were beginning to be
noticeable. He had to tow them, one by one, to the rear starboard air
lock and seal them between the inner and outer doors. He couldn't dump
them, since the outer door was partially melted and welded shut.

He took the personal effects from the men. If he ever got back to Earth,
their next-of-kin might want the stuff. On the body of the imitation
Rat, he found a belt-pouch full of microfilm. The report on the Rats'
new weapon? Possibly. He'd have to look it over later.

On the "morning" of the fourth day, he started the single remaining
engine. The infraspace field came on, and the ship began moving at
multiples of the speed of light. Pendray grinned. _Half gone, will
travel_, he thought gleefully.

If Pendray had had any liquor aboard, he would have gotten mildly drunk.
Instead, he sat down and read the spools of microfilm, using the
projector in the sick bay.

He was not a scientist in the strict sense of the word. He was a
navigator and a fairly good engineer. So it didn't surprise him any that
he couldn't understand a lot of the report. The mechanics of making a
semi-nova out of a normal star were more than a little bit over his
head. He'd read a little and then go out and take a look at the stars,
checking their movement so that he could make an estimate of his speed.
He'd jury-rigged a kind of control on the hull field, so he could aim
the hulk easily enough. He'd only have to get within signaling range,
anyway. An Earth ship would pick him up.

_If there was any Earth left by the time he got there._

He forced his mind away from thinking about that.

It was not until he reached the last spool of microfilm that his
situation was forcibly brought to focus in his mind. Thus far, he had
thought only about saving himself. But the note at the end of the spool
made him realize that there were others to save.

The note said: _These reports must reach Earth before 22 June 2287.
After that, it will be too late._

_22 June!_

That was--let's see....

_This is the eighteenth of September_, he thought, _June of next year
is--nine months away. Surely I can make it in that time. I've got to._

The only question was, how fast was the hulk of the _Shane_ moving?

It took him three days to get the answer accurately. He knew the
strength of the field around the ship, and he knew the approximate
thrust of the single engine by that time. He had also measured the
motions of some of the nearer stars. Thank heaven he was a navigator and
not a mechanic or something! At least he knew the direction and distance
to Earth, and he knew the distance of the brighter stars from where the
ship was.

He had two checks to use, then. Star motion against engine thrust and
field strength. He checked them. And rechecked them. And hated the
answer.

He would arrive in the vicinity of Sol some time in late July--a full
month too late.

What could he do? Increase the output of the engine? No. It was doing
the best it could now. Even shutting off the lights wouldn't help
anything; they were a microscopic drain on that engine.

He tried to think, tried to reason out a solution, but nothing would
come. He found time to curse the fool who had decided the shielding on
the lifeboat would have to be removed and repaired. That little craft,
with its lighter mass and more powerful field concentration, could make
the trip in ten days.

The only trouble was that ten days in that radiation hell would be
impossible. He'd be a very well-preserved corpse in half that time, and
there'd be no one aboard to guide her.

Maybe he could get one of the other engines going! Sure. He _must_ be
able to get one more going, somehow. Anything to cut down on that time!

He went back to the engines again, looking them over carefully. He went
over them again. Not a single one could be repaired at all.

Then he rechecked his velocity figures, hoping against hope that he'd
made a mistake somewhere, dropped a decimal point or forgotten to divide
by two. Anything. Anything!

But there was nothing. His figures had been accurate the first time.

For a while, he just gave up. All he could think of was the terrible
blaze of heat that would wipe out Earth when the Rats set off the sun.
Man might survive. There were colonies that the Rats didn't know about.
But they'd find them eventually. Without Earth, the race would be set
back five hundred--maybe five thousand--years. The Rats would would have
plenty of time to hunt them out and destroy them.

And then he forced his mind away from that train of thought. There had
to be a way to get there on time. Something in the back of his mind told
him that there _was_ a way.

He had to think. Really think.

       *       *       *       *       *

On 7 June 2287, a signal officer on the Earth destroyer _Muldoon_ picked
up a faint signal coming from the general direction of the constellation
of Sagittarius. It was the standard emergency signal for distress. The
broadcaster only had a very short range, so the source couldn't be too
far away.

He made his report to the ship's captain. "We're within easy range of
her, sir," he finished. "Shall we pick her up?"

"Might be a Rat trick," said the captain. "But we'll have to take the
chance. Beam a call to Earth, and let's go out there dead slow. If the
detectors show anything funny, we turn tail and run. We're in no position
to fight a Rat ship."

"You think this might be a Rat trap, sir?"

The captain grinned. "If you are referring to the _Muldoon_ as a rat
trap, Mr. Blake, you're both disrespectful and correct. That's why we're
going to run if we see anything funny. This ship is already obsolete by
our standards; you can imagine what it is by theirs." He paused. "Get
that call in to Earth. Tell 'em this ship is using a distress signal
that was obsolete six months ago. And tell 'em we're going out."

"Yes, sir," said the signal officer.

It wasn't a trap. As the _Muldoon_ approached the source of the signal,
their detectors picked up the ship itself. It was a standard lifeboat
from a battleship of the _Shannon_ class.

"You don't suppose that's from the _Shane_, do you?" the captain said
softly as he looked at the plate. "She's the only ship of that class
that's missing. But if that's a _Shane_ lifeboat, what took her so long
to get here?"

"She's cut her engines, sir!" said the observer. "She evidently knows
we're coming."

"All right. Pull her in as soon as we're close enough. Put her in
Number Two lifeboat rack; it's empty."

       *       *       *       *       *

When the door of the lifeboat opened, the captain of the _Muldoon_ was
waiting outside the lifeboat rack. He didn't know exactly what he had
expected to see, but it somehow seemed fitting that a lean, bearded man
in a badly worn uniform and a haggard look about him should step out.

The specter saluted. "Lieutenant Alfred Pendray, of the _Shane_," he
said, in a voice that had almost no strength. He held up a pouch.
"Microfilm," he said. "Must get to Earth immediately. No delay. Hurry."

"Catch him!" the captain shouted. "He's falling!" But one of the men
nearby had already caught him.

In the sick bay, Pendray came to again. The captain's questioning
gradually got the story out of Pendray.

"... So I didn't know what to do then," he said, his voice a breathy
whisper. "I knew I had to get that stuff home. Somehow."

"Go on," said the captain, frowning.

"Simple matter," said Pendray. "Nothing to it. Two equations. Little
ship goes thirty times as fast as big ship--big _hulk_. Had to get here
before 22 June. _Had_ to. Only way out, y'unnerstand.

"Anyway. Two equations. Simple. Work 'em in your head. Big ship takes
ten months, little one takes ten days. But can't stay in a little ship
ten days. No shielding. Be dead before you got here. See?"

"I see," said the captain patiently.

"_But_--and here's a 'mportant point: If you stay on the big ship for
eight an' a half months, then y' only got to be in the little ship for a
day an' a half to get here. Man can live that long, even under that
radiation. See?" And with that, he closed his eyes.

"Do you mean you exposed yourself to the full leakage radiation from a
lifeboat engine for thirty-six hours?"

But there was no answer.

"Let him sleep," said the ship's doctor. "If he wakes up again, I'll let
you know. But he might not be very lucid from here on in."

"Is there anything you can do?" the captain asked.

"No. Not after a radiation dosage like that." He looked down at Pendray.
"His problem was easy, mathematically. But not psychologically. That
took real guts to solve."

"Yeah," said the captain gently. "All he had to do was _get_ here alive.
The problem said nothing about his staying that way."



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MEASURE OF A MAN***


******* This file should be named 24135.txt or 24135.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/2/4/1/3/24135



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
