ï»¿The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Untouchable, by Stephen A. Kallis

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Untouchable

Author: Stephen A. Kallis

Illustrator: Douglas

Release Date: January 8, 2008 [EBook #24221]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE UNTOUCHABLE ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, David Wilson and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net





 +------------------------------------------------------------------+
 |                                                                  |
 | Transcriber's note:                                              |
 |                                                                  |
 | This story was published in Analog, December 1960. Extensive     |
 | research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S. copyright on |
 | this publication was renewed.                                    |
 |                                                                  |
 +------------------------------------------------------------------+




[Illustration]




THE
UNTOUCHABLE

By
STEPHEN A. KALLIS, JR.


Illustrated by Douglas




_"You can see it--you can watch it--but mustn't touch!" And what could
possibly be more frustrating ... when you need, most violently, to get
your hands on it for just one second...._


The man finally entered the office of General George Garvers. As the
door closed behind him, he saw the general, who sprang from his chair to
greet him.

"Max! You finally came."

"Got here as soon as I could. I wager half my time was taken up by the
security check points. You are certainly isolated in here."

"All of that," agreed the general. "Have a seat, won't you?" he asked,
indicating a chair.

His friend sank into it gratefully. "Now, what's this vital problem you
called me about? You weren't too specific."

"No," said Garvers, "I wasn't. This is a security matter, after a
fashion. It's vitally important that we get technical help on this
thing, and since you and I are friends, I was asked to call you in."

"Well?"

"I'm afraid I'll have to make a story of it."

"Quite all right by me, but don't mind if I interject a question now and
then. Mind if I smoke?"

"Go right ahead," said Garvers, fumbling out a lighter. "Just don't
spill ashes on the rug.

"This all began on the Third of May. I was working here on some
top-security stuff. I had suddenly got the feeling of being watched. I
know it seems silly, what with all the check points that a potential spy
would have to go through to get here, but that's just how I felt.

"Several times I glanced around the office, but of course it was empty.
Then I began to think that it was my nerves."

"You always were a bit of a hypochondriac," observed his friend.

"Be that as it may," continued Garvers, "it was the only explanation I
had at the time. Either someone was watching me, which seemed
impossible, or I was beginning to crack under the strain.

"Well, I put my papers away and tried to take a short break. I was
reaching into my drawer where I keep magazines when, so help me, a man
stepped out of the wall into my office."

"What? It seems as if you just said a guy stepped out of the wall."

"That's just what I did say. It sounds crazy, but let me finish, will
you? I'm not kidding, and I'll show you proof later if necessary.

"Anyway, this bird stepped straight out of the wall as if it had been a
waterfall or something, but the wall itself was undamaged. The only
proof I had that he had actually done it was the fact that he was in my
office, but that was proof enough.

"To put it mildly, I was thunderstruck. After jumping to my feet, I
could only stand there like an idiot. I was so shaken that I couldn't
speak a word. But he spoke first.

"'General Garvers?' he asked, just as if he had run into me at a
cocktail party or on the street.

"I told him he was correct, and asked him who _he_ was and what he
wanted. And how he got into my office.

"He identified himself as a Henry Busch and explained that he was acting
in behalf of a good friend of his, the late Dr. Hymann Duvall. Have you
ever heard of Duvall, Max?"

His friend twisted his face in thought. "Can't say that I have,
off-hand. But the name seems to ring a bell somewhere."

"Well, anyway, he said that Duvall had perfected an invention of great
national importance shortly before his death and asked Busch to deliver
it to the government if anything should happen to him. Then Duvall died
suddenly of a heart attack."

"And what was this invention?"

"Isn't it obvious? A machine that would enable a man to walk through
walls. And Busch has no idea how the thing works, other than the general
explanation that Duvall gave him. And Busch was poles apart from Duvall.
They were friends from college, but not because of professional
interests. It seems they were both doublecrossed by the same girl.

"Duvall was a brilliant but obscure nuclear and radiation physicist. He
was one of those once-in-a-lifetime fellows like Tesla. He was so shy
that he didn't bring himself to anybody's attention, save for a few
papers he published in the smaller physical societies' magazines. It was
only because he had inherited a considerable amount of money that he
could do any research whatsoever."

"Hm-m-m. I seem to remember a paper about wave propagation in one of the
quarterlies. Quite unorthodox, as I recall," said Max.

"Could be. But anyway, about Busch.

"Busch majored in psychology at college, but took special courses after
he graduated and took a Master's in English. He has written two novels
and three collections of poems under various pen names. At the time of
Duvall's death, he was working on the libretto of an opera. He has had
no technical training, unless you want to count a year of high school
general science. So he wasn't too much help in explaining how Duvall's
instrument works.

"And, just to make matters more juicy, Duvall kept no notes. He had
total recall and a childlike fear of putting anything into writing that
had not been experimentally verified."

"And this machine, how is it supposed to work?"


Garvers got up and began to pace. "According to Busch, Duvall devised
the instrument after stumbling into an entirely new branch of physics.

"This device of Duvall's is a special case of a new theory of matter and
energy. Matter is made up of subnuclear particles--electrons, protons
and the like. However, Duvall said that these particles are in turn made
up of much smaller particles grouped together in aggregate clouds. The
size ratio of these particles to protons is somewhat like the ratio of
an individual proton to a large star. They seem to be composed of tiny
clots of energy from a fantastically complex energy system, in which
electromagnetism is but a small part. Each energy-segment is represented
by a different facet of each particle, and the arrangement of the
individual particles to each other determines what super-particle they
will form, such as an electron. Duvall called these sub-particles
'lems'.

"Busch says he was told that a field of a special nature could be
generated so as to make the individual lems in the particles of matter
rotate in a special way that would introduce a 'polarization field', as
Duvall called it. This field seems to be connected somehow with gravity,
but Busch wasn't told how.

"The upshot is that matter in the _initial_ presence of the field is
affected so that it is able to pass through ordinary matter--"

"Hold on," interrupted Max. "If a device can do that, then the user
would immediately fall towards the center of the Earth."

"Just _you_ hold on. You didn't let me finish. A single plane of atoms,
at the base of the treated object is the point of contact. It remains
partially unaffected because it is closest to the 'gravetostatic field
center', which I guess is the Earth's center of attraction. This plane
of 'semi-treated' atoms can be forced through an object, if it is moved
horizontally, but its 'untreated' aspect prevents the subject wearing
the device from falling through the floor.

"Busch demonstrated this device to me, turning it on and strolling
through various objects in this room. Think of it! No soldier could be
killed or held prisoner. And--"

"Now hang on," objected Max. "Let's not run away with ourselves. He may
have perfected a device that would enable a soldier to avoid capture,
but there would certainly be other ways to kill him than by bullets.
Let's see now: suppose that the enemy shot a flamethrower at him. The
burning materials might pass through him, but he would be cooked anyway.
Or poison gas--"

"Hm-m-m. As far as gas goes, I suppose a gas mask would be necessary.
Busch doesn't know about the breathing mechanism, except that he had to
take breaths. But as far as fire or radiation goes, the man's protected.
If the radiation is either harmful by nature or by amount, the field
merely reflects it. It is something called the 'lemic stress' of the
field that causes the phenomenon.

"That's why we need your help."

Max scratched his head thoughtfully. "I don't understand."

Garvers looked pained. "When Busch had finished his demonstration, he
carelessly tossed the device on my desk. The thing skidded and hit my
paperweight so that the switch was thrown on again. So now the device
and my desk are both untouchable.

"Go over to the desk and try to touch it," said Garvers dryly.

His friend got up and ambled over to the desk. There he saw a small
black box resting near a paperweight. Its toggle switch was at the "on"
position, and it was lying on its side. He tried to pick the box up, but
his hand slid effortlessly through it as if it were so much air.

"_Well_!" Max said. He passed his hand through the desk again. "Well,
well. Are you sure Busch told you everything?"

"Busch! He honestly wants to help and we have taken him through the
mill. Pentathol, scopolamine and the like; hypnotism and the polygraph.
We've dug that man deeper than we have ever dug anybody before."

"And have you conducted any experiments of your own?"

"Certainly. That's what is so frustrating. We try to X ray the thing,
and we don't get a thing. We bombarded it with every radiation we could
think of, from radio to gamma and it just reflected them. We can detect
no radiation coming out of it. Magnetic fields don't effect it, nor do
heat and cold. Nuclear particles are ignored by it; it just _sits_ there
thumbing its nose at us. And we can't even wait for it to run down.
According to Busch, the power requirements of the thing are funny and
once the field is established, it takes no additional energy to maintain
it. And the collapsing power remains indefinitely until it is time to
turn the machine off, but it's unreachable by any means we have.

"It's pure frustration. There's no way we can analyze it until we can
handle it, and no way we can handle it until we can turn it off. And
there's no way we can turn it off until we have analyzed it. If it were
alive, I'd think that it was laughing at us.

"Do _you_ have any ideas?" asked Garvers hopefully.

"Nothing that would help a solution at present," said Max. "But do you
remember the legend of King Tantalus?"

"Slightly. What about it?"

"Well ... if _he_ were here," said Max thoughtfully, "he'd ...
sympathize."


THE END





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Untouchable, by Stephen A. Kallis

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE UNTOUCHABLE ***

***** This file should be named 24221-8.txt or 24221-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/4/2/2/24221/

Produced by Greg Weeks, David Wilson and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
