The Project Gutenberg EBook of Gun for Hire, by Dallas McCord Reynolds

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Gun for Hire

Author: Dallas McCord Reynolds

Illustrator: H. R. Van Dongen

Release Date: January 11, 2008 [EBook #24247]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GUN FOR HIRE ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









 _A gun is an interesting weapon; it can be hired, of
 course, and naturally doesn't care who hires it. Something
 much the same can be said of the gunman, too...._


 GUN FOR HIRE


 By

 MACK
 REYNOLDS


 Illustrated by van Dongen


Joe Prantera called softly, "Al." The pleasurable, comfortable, warm
feeling began spreading over him, the way it always did.

The older man stopped and squinted, but not suspiciously, even now.

The evening was dark, it was unlikely that the other even saw the circle
of steel that was the mouth of the shotgun barrel, now resting on the
car's window ledge.

"Who's it?" he growled.

Joe Prantera said softly, "Big Louis sent me, Al."

And he pressed the trigger.

And at that moment, the universe caved inward upon Joseph Marie
Prantera.

There was nausea and nausea upon nausea.

There was a falling through all space and through all time. There was
doubling and twisting and twitching of every muscle and nerve.

There was pain, horror and tumultuous fear.

And he came out of it as quickly and completely as he'd gone in.

He was in, he thought, a hospital and his first reaction was to think,
_This here California. Everything different._ Then his second thought
was _Something went wrong. Big Louis, he ain't going to like this._

[Illustration]

He brought his thinking to the present. So far as he could remember, he
hadn't completely pulled the trigger. That at least meant that whatever
the rap was it wouldn't be too tough. With luck, the syndicate would get
him off with a couple of years at Quentin.

A door slid open in the wall in a way that Joe had never seen a door
operate before. _This here California._

The clothes on the newcomer were wrong, too. For the first time, Joe
Prantera began to sense an alienness--a something that was awfully
wrong.

The other spoke precisely and slowly, the way a highly educated man
speaks a language which he reads and writes fluently but has little
occasion to practice vocally. "You have recovered?"

Joe Prantera looked at the other expressionlessly. Maybe the old duck
was one of these foreign doctors, like.

The newcomer said, "You have undoubtedly been through a most harrowing
experience. If you have any untoward symptoms, possibly I could be of
assistance."

Joe couldn't figure out how he stood. For one thing, there should have
been some kind of police guard.

The other said, "Perhaps a bit of stimulant?"

Joe said flatly, "I wanta lawyer."

The newcomer frowned at him. "A lawyer?"

"I'm not sayin' nothin'. Not until I get a mouthpiece."

The newcomer started off on another tack. "My name is Lawrence
Reston-Farrell. If I am not mistaken, you are Joseph Salviati-Prantera."

Salviati happened to be Joe's mother's maiden name. But it was unlikely
this character could have known that. Joe had been born in Naples and
his mother had died in childbirth. His father hadn't brought him to the
States until the age of five and by that time he had a stepmother.

"I wanta mouthpiece," Joe said flatly, "or let me outta here."

Lawrence Reston-Farrell said, "You are not being constrained. There are
clothes for you in the closet there."

Joe gingerly tried swinging his feet to the floor and sitting up, while
the other stood watching him, strangely. He came to his feet. With the
exception of a faint nausea, which brought back memories of that extreme
condition he'd suffered during ... during what? He hadn't the vaguest
idea of what had happened.

He was dressed in a hospital-type nightgown. He looked down at it and
snorted and made his way over to the closet. It opened on his approach,
the door sliding back into the wall in much the same manner as the
room's door had opened for Reston-Farrell.

Joe Prantera scowled and said, "These ain't my clothes."

"No, I am afraid not."

"You think I'd be seen dead wearing this stuff? What is this, some
religious crackpot hospital?"

Reston-Farrell said, "I am afraid, Mr. Salviati-Prantera, that these are
the only garments available. I suggest you look out the window there."

Joe gave him a long, chill look and then stepped to the window. He
couldn't figure the other. Unless he was a fruitcake. Maybe he was in
some kind of pressure cooker and this was one of the fruitcakes.

He looked out, however, not on the lawns and walks of a sanitarium but
upon a wide boulevard of what was obviously a populous city.

And for a moment again, Joe Prantera felt the depths of nausea.

This was not his world.

He stared for a long, long moment. The cars didn't even have wheels, he
noted dully. He turned slowly and faced the older man.

Reston-Farrell said compassionately, "Try this, it's excellent cognac."

Joe Prantera stared at him, said finally, flatly, "What's it all
about?"

The other put down the unaccepted glass. "We were afraid first
realization would be a shock to you," he said. "My colleague is in the
adjoining room. We will be glad to explain to you if you will join us
there."

"I wanta get out of here," Joe said.

"Where would you go?"

The fear of police, of Al Rossi's vengeance, of the measures that might
be taken by Big Louis on his failure, were now far away.

Reston-Farrell had approached the door by which he had entered and it
reopened for him. He went through it without looking back.

There was nothing else to do. Joe dressed, then followed him.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the adjoining room was a circular table that would have accommodated
a dozen persons. Two were seated there now, papers, books and soiled
coffee cups before them. There had evidently been a long wait.

Reston-Farrell, the one Joe had already met, was tall and drawn of face
and with a chainsmoker's nervousness. The other was heavier and more at
ease. They were both, Joe estimated, somewhere in their middle fifties.
They both looked like docs. He wondered, all over again, if this was
some kind of pressure cooker.

But that didn't explain the view from the window.

Reston-Farrell said, "May I present my colleague, Citizen Warren
Brett-James? Warren, this is our guest from ... from yesteryear, Mr.
Joseph Salviati-Prantera."

Brett-James nodded to him, friendly, so far as Joe could see. He said
gently, "I think it would be Mr. Joseph Prantera, wouldn't it? The
maternal linage was almost universally ignored." His voice too gave the
impression he was speaking a language not usually on his tongue.

Joe took an empty chair, hardly bothering to note its alien qualities.
His body seemed to _fit_ into the piece of furniture, as though it had
been molded to his order.

Joe said, "I think maybe I'll take that there drink, Doc."

Reston-Farrell said, "Of course," and then something else Joe didn't
get. Whatever the something else was, a slot opened in the middle of the
table and a glass, so clear of texture as to be all but invisible, was
elevated. It contained possibly three ounces of golden fluid.

Joe didn't allow himself to think of its means of delivery. He took up
the drink and bolted it. He put the glass down and said carefully,
"What's it all about, huh?"

Warren Brett-James said soothingly, "Prepare yourself for somewhat of a
shock, Mr. Prantera. You are no longer in Los Angeles--"

"Ya think I'm stupid? I can see that."

"I was about to say, Los Angeles of 1960. Mr. Prantera, we welcome you
to Nuevo Los Angeles."

"Ta where?"

"To Nuevo Los Angeles and to the year--" Brett-James looked at his
companion. "What is the date, Old Calendar?"

"2133," Reston-Farrell said. "2133 A.D. they would say."

Joe Prantera looked from one of them to the other, scowling. "What are
you guys talking about?"

Warren Brett-James said softly, "Mr. Prantera, you are no longer in the
year 1960, you are now in the year 2133."

He said, uncomprehendingly, "You mean I been, like, unconscious for--"
He let the sentence fall away as he realized the impossibility.

Brett-James said gently, "Hardly for one hundred and seventy years, Mr.
Prantera."

Reston-Farrell said, "I am afraid we are confusing you. Briefly, we have
_transported_ you, I suppose one might say, from your own era to ours."

Joe Prantera had never been exposed to the concept of time travel. He
had simply never associated with anyone who had ever even remotely
considered such an idea. Now he said, "You mean, like, I been asleep all
that time?"

"Not exactly," Brett-James said, frowning.

Reston-Farrell said, "Suffice to say, you are now one hundred and
seventy-three years after the last memory you have."

Joe Prantera's mind suddenly reverted to those last memories and his
eyes narrowed dangerously. He felt suddenly at bay. He said, "Maybe you
guys better let me in on what's this all about."

Reston-Farrell said, "Mr. Prantera, we have brought you from your era to
perform a task for us."

Joe stared at him, and then at the other. He couldn't believe he was
getting through to them. Or, at least, that they were to him.

Finally he said, "If I get this, you want me to do a job for you."

"That is correct."

Joe said, "You guys know the kind of jobs I do?"

"That is correct."

"Like hell you do. You think I'm stupid? I never even seen you before."
Joe Prantera came abruptly to his feet. "I'm gettin' outta here."

For the second time, Reston-Farrell said, "Where would you go, Mr.
Prantera?"

Joe glared at him. Then sat down again, as abruptly as he'd arisen.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Let's start all over again. I got this straight, you brought me, some
screwy way, all the way ... here. O.K., I'll buy that. I seen what it
looks like out that window--" The real comprehension was seeping through
to him even as he talked. "Everybody I know, Jessie, Tony, the Kid, Big
Louis, everybody, they're dead. Even Big Louis."

"Yes," Brett-James said, his voice soft. "They are all dead, Mr.
Prantera. Their children are all dead, and their grandchildren."

The two men of the future said nothing more for long minutes while Joe
Prantera's mind whirled its confusion.

Finally he said, "What's this bit about you wanting me to give it to
some guy."

"That is why we brought you here, Mr. Prantera. You were ... you are, a
professional assassin."

"Hey, wait a minute, now."

Reston-Farrell went on, ignoring the interruption. "There is small point
in denying your calling. Pray remember that at the point when we ...
_transported_ you, you were about to dispose of a contemporary named
Alphonso Annunziata-Rossi. A citizen, I might say, whose demise would
probably have caused small dismay to society."

They had him pegged all right. Joe said, "But why me? Why don't you get
some heavy from now? Somebody knows the ropes these days."

Brett-James said, "Mr. Prantera, there are no professional assassins in
this age, nor have there been for over a century and a half."

"Well, then do it yourself." Joe Prantera's irritation over this whole
complicated mess was growing. And already he was beginning to long for
the things he knew--for Jessie and Tony and the others, for his favorite
bar, for the lasagne down at Papa Giovanni's. Right now he could have
welcomed a calling down at the hands of Big Louis.

Reston-Farrell had come to his feet and walked to one of the large
room's windows. He looked out, as though unseeing. Then, his back
turned, he said, "We have tried, but it is simply not in us, Mr.
Prantera."

"You mean you're yella?"

"No, if by that you mean afraid. It is simply not within us to take the
life of a fellow creature--not to speak of a fellow man."

Joe snapped: "Everything you guys say sounds crazy. Let's start all over
again."

Brett-James said, "Let me do it, Lawrence." He turned his eyes to Joe.
"Mr. Prantera, in your own era, did you ever consider the future?"

Joe looked at him blankly.

"In your day you were confronted with national and international,
problems. Just as we are today and just as nations were a century or a
millennium ago."

"Sure, O.K., so we had problems. I know whatcha mean--like wars, and
depressions and dictators and like that."

"Yes, like that," Brett-James nodded.

The heavy-set man paused a moment. "Yes, like that," he repeated. "That
we confront you now indicates that the problems of your day were solved.
Hadn't they been, the world most surely would have destroyed itself.
Wars? Our pedagogues are hard put to convince their students that such
ever existed. More than a century and a half ago our society eliminated
the reasons for international conflict. For that matter," he added
musingly, "we eliminated most international boundaries. Depressions?
Shortly after your own period, man awoke to the fact that he had
achieved to the point where it was possible to produce an abundance for
all with a minimum of toil. Overnight, for all practical purposes, the
whole world was industrialized, automated. The second industrial
revolution was accompanied by revolutionary changes in almost every
field, certainly in every science. Dictators? Your ancestors found, Mr.
Prantera, that it is difficult for a man to be free so long as others
are still enslaved. Today the democratic ethic has reached a pinnacle
never dreamed of in your own era."

"O.K., O.K.," Joe Prantera growled. "So everybody's got it made. What I
wanta know is what's all this about me giving it ta somebody? If
everything's so great, how come you want me to knock this guy off?"

Reston-Farrell bent forward and thumped his right index finger twice on
the table. "The bacterium of hate--a new strain--has found the human
race unprotected from its disease. We had thought our vaccines immunized
us."

"What's that suppose to mean?"

Brett-James took up the ball again. "Mr. Prantera, have you ever heard
of Ghengis Khan, of Tamerlane, Alexander, Caesar?"

Joe Prantera scowled at him emptily.

"Or, more likely, of Napoleon, Hitler, Stalin?"

"Sure I heard of Hitler and Stalin," Joe growled. "I ain't stupid."

The other nodded. "Such men are unique. They have a drive ... a drive to
power which exceeds by far the ambitions of the average man. They are
genii in their way, Mr. Prantera, genii of evil. Such a genius of evil
has appeared on the current scene."

"Now we're getting somewheres," Joe snorted. "So you got a guy what's a
little ambitious, like, eh? And you guys ain't got the guts to give it
to him. O.K. What's in it for me?"

The two of them frowned, exchanged glances. Reston-Farrell said, "You
know, that is one aspect we had not considered."

Brett-James said to Joe Prantera, "Had we not, ah, taken you at the time
we did, do you realize what would have happened?"

"Sure," Joe grunted. "I woulda let old Al Rossi have it right in the
guts, five times. Then I woulda took the plane back to Chi."

Brett-James was shaking his head. "No. You see, by coincidence, a police
squad car was coming down the street just at that moment to arrest Mr.
Rossi. You would have been apprehended. As I understand Californian law
of the period, your life would have been forfeit, Mr. Prantera."

Joe winced. It didn't occur to him to doubt their word.

Reston-Farrell said, "As to reward, Mr. Prantera, we have already told
you there is ultra-abundance in this age. Once this task has been
performed, we will sponsor your entry into present day society.
Competent psychiatric therapy will soon remove your present--"

"Waita minute, now. You figure on gettin' me candled by some head
shrinker, eh? No thanks, Buster. I'm going back to my own--"

Brett-James was shaking his head again. "I am afraid there is no return,
Mr. Prantera. Time travel works but in one direction, _with_ the flow of
the time stream. There can be no return to your own era."

Joe Prantera had been rocking with the mental blows he had been
assimilating, but this was the final haymaker. He was stuck in this
squaresville of a world.

       *       *       *       *       *

Joe Prantera on a job was thorough.

Careful, painstaking, competent.

He spent the first three days of his life in the year 2133 getting the
feel of things. Brett-James and Reston-Farrell had been appointed to
work with him. Joe didn't meet any of the others who belonged to the
group which had taken the measures to bring him from the past. He didn't
want to meet them. The fewer persons involved, the better.

He stayed in the apartment of Reston-Farrell. Joe had been right,
Reston-Farrell was a medical doctor. Brett-James evidently had something
to do with the process that had enabled them to bring Joe from the past.
Joe didn't know how they'd done it, and he didn't care. Joe was a
realist. He was here. The thing was to adapt.

There didn't seem to be any hurry. Once the deal was made, they left it
up to him to make the decisions.

They drove him around the town, when he wished to check the traffic
arteries. They flew him about the whole vicinity. From the air, Southern
California looked much the same as it had in his own time. Oceans,
mountains, and to a lesser extent, deserts, are fairly permanent even
against man's corroding efforts.

It was while he was flying with Brett-James on the second day that Joe
said, "How about Mexico? Could I make the get to Mexico?"

The physicist looked at him questioningly. "Get?" he said.

Joe Prantera said impatiently, "The getaway. After I give it to this
Howard Temple-Tracy guy, I gotta go on the run, don't I?"

"I see." Brett-James cleared his throat. "Mexico is no longer a separate
nation, Mr. Prantera. All North America has been united into one unit.
Today, there are only eight nations in the world."

"Where's the nearest?"

"South America."

"That's a helluva long way to go on a get."

"We hadn't thought of the matter being handled in that manner."

Joe eyed him in scorn. "Oh, you didn't, huh? What happens after I give
it to this guy? I just sit around and wait for the cops to put the arm
on me?"

Brett-James grimaced in amusement. "Mr. Prantera, this will probably be
difficult for you to comprehend, but there are no police in this era."

Joe gaped at him. "No police! What happens if you gotta throw some guy
in stir?"

"If I understand your idiom correctly, you mean prison. There are no
prisons in this era, Mr. Prantera."

Joe stared. "No cops, no jails. What stops anybody? What stops anybody
from just going into some bank, like, and collecting up all the bread?"

Brett-James cleared his throat. "Mr. Prantera, there are no banks."

"No banks! You gotta have banks!"

"And no money to put in them. We found it a rather antiquated method of
distribution well over a century ago."

Joe had given up. Now he merely stared.

Brett-James said reasonably, "We found we were devoting as much time to
financial matters in all their endless ramifications--including bank
robberies--as we were to productive efforts. So we turned to more
efficient methods of distribution."

       *       *       *       *       *

On the fourth day, Joe said, "O.K., let's get down to facts. Summa the
things you guys say don't stick together so good. Now, first place,
where's this guy Temple-Tracy you want knocked off?"

Reston-Farrell and Brett-James were both present. The three of them sat
in the living room of the latter's apartment, sipping a sparkling wine
which seemed to be the prevailing beverage of the day. For Joe's taste
it was insipid stuff. Happily, rye was available to those who wanted it.

Reston-Farrell said, "You mean, where does he reside? Why, here in this
city."

"Well, that's handy, eh?" Joe scratched himself thoughtfully. "You got
somebody can finger him for me?"

"Finger him?"

"Look, before I can give it to this guy I gotta know some place where
he'll be at some time. Get it? Like Al Rossi. My finger, he works in
Rossi's house, see? He lets me know every Wednesday night, eight
o'clock, Al leaves the house all by hisself. O.K., so I can make plans,
like, to give it to him." Joe Prantera wound it up reasonably. "You
gotta have a finger."

Brett-James said, "Why not just go to Temple-Tracy's apartment and, ah,
dispose of him?"

"Jest walk in, eh? You think I'm stupid? How do I know how many
witnesses hangin' around? How do I know if the guy's carryin' heat?"

"Heat?"

"A gun, a gun. Ya think I'm stupid? I come to give it to him and he
gives it to me instead."

Dr. Reston-Farrell said, "Howard Temple-Tracy lives alone. He
customarily receives visitors every afternoon, largely potential
followers. He is attempting to recruit members to an organization he is
forming. It would be quite simple for you to enter his establishment and
dispose of him. I assure you, he does not possess weapons."

Joe was indignant. "Just like that, eh?" he said sarcastically. "Then
what happens? How do I get out of the building? Where's my get car
parked? Where do I hide out? Where do I dump the heat?"

"Dump the heat?"

"Get rid of the gun. You want I should get caught with the gun on me?
I'd wind up in the gas chamber so quick--"

"See here, Mr. Prantera," Brett-James said softly. "We no longer have
capital punishment, you must realize."

"O.K. I still don't wanta get caught. What _is_ the rap these days,
huh?" Joe scowled. "You said they didn't have no jails any more."

"This is difficult for you to understand, I imagine," Reston-Farrell
told him, "but, you see, we no longer punish people in this era."

That took a long, unbelieving moment to sink in. "You mean, like, no
matter what they do? That's crazy. Everybody'd be running around giving
it to everybody else."

"The motivation for crime has been removed, Mr. Prantera,"
Reston-Farrell attempted to explain. "A person who commits a violence
against another is obviously in need of medical care. And, consequently,
receives it."

"You mean, like, if I steal a car or something, they just take me to a
doctor?" Joe Prantera was unbelieving.

"Why would anybody wish to steal a car?" Reston-Farrell said easily.

"But if I _give it_ to somebody?"

"You will be turned over to a medical institution. Citizen Howard
Temple-Tracy is the last man you will ever kill, Mr. Prantera."

A chillness was in the belly of Joe Prantera. He said very slowly, very
dangerously, "You guys figure on me getting caught, don't you?"

"Yes," Brett-James said evenly.

"Well then, figure something else. You think I'm stupid?"

"Mr. Prantera," Dr. Reston-Farrell said, "there has been as much
progress in the field of psychiatry in the past two centuries as there
has in any other. Your treatment would be brief and painless, believe
me."

Joe said coldly, "And what happens to you guys? How do you know I won't
rat on you?"

Brett-James said gently, "The moment after you have accomplished your
mission, we plan to turn ourselves over to the nearest institution to
have determined whether or not we also need therapy."

"Now I'm beginning to wonder about you guys," Joe said. "Look, all over
again, what'd'ya wanta give it to this guy for?"

The doctor said, "We explained the other day, Mr. Prantera. Citizen
Howard Temple-Tracy is a dangerous, atavistic, evil genius. We are
afraid for our institutions if his plans are allowed to mature."

"Well if you got things so good, everybody's got it made, like, who'd
listen to him?"

The doctor nodded at the validity of the question. "Mr. Prantera, _Homo
sapiens_ is a unique animal. Physically he matures at approximately the
age of thirteen. However, mental maturity and adjustment is often not
fully realized until thirty or even more. Indeed, it is sometimes never
achieved. Before such maturity is reached, our youth are susceptible to
romantic appeal. Nationalism, chauvinism, racism, the supposed glory of
the military, all seem romantic to the immature. They rebel at the
orderliness of present society. They seek entertainment in excitement.
Citizen Temple-Tracy is aware of this and finds his recruits among the
young."

"O.K., so this guy is dangerous. You want him knocked off before he
screws everything up. But the way things are, there's no way of making a
get. So you'll have to get some other patsy. Not me."

"I am afraid you have no alternative," Brett-James said gently. "Without
us, what will you do? Mr. Prantera, you do not even speak the language."

"What'd'ya mean? I don't understand summa the big words you eggheads
use, but I get by O.K."

Brett-James said, "Amer-English is no longer the language spoken by the
man in the street, Mr. Prantera. Only students of such subjects any
longer speak such tongues as Amer-English, French, Russian or the many
others that once confused the race with their limitations as a means of
communication."

"You mean there's no place in the whole world where they talk American?"
Joe demanded, aghast.

       *       *       *       *       *

Dr. Reston-Farrell controlled the car. Joe Prantera sat in the seat next
to him and Warren Brett-James sat in the back. Joe had, tucked in his
belt, a .45 caliber automatic, once displayed in a museum. It had been
more easily procured than the ammunition to fit it, but that problem too
had been solved.

The others were nervous, obviously repelled by the very conception of
what they had planned.

Inwardly, Joe was amused. Now that they had got in the clutch, the
others were on the verge of chickening out. He knew it wouldn't have
taken much for them to cancel the project. It wasn't any answer though.
If they allowed him to call it off today, they'd talk themselves into it
again before the week was through.

Besides, already Joe was beginning to feel the comfortable, pleasurable,
warm feeling that came to him on occasions like this.

He said, "You're sure this guy talks American, eh?"

Warren Brett-James said, "Quite sure. He is a student of history."

"And he won't think it's funny I talk American to him, eh?"

"He'll undoubtedly be intrigued."

They pulled up before a large apartment building that overlooked the
area once known as Wilmington.

Joe was coolly efficient now. He pulled out the automatic, held it down
below his knees and threw a shell into the barrel. He eased the hammer
down, thumbed on the safety, stuck the weapon back in his belt and
beneath the jacketlike garment he wore.

He said, "O.K. See you guys later." He left them and entered the
building.

An elevator--he still wasn't used to their speed in this era--whooshed
him to the penthouse duplex occupied by Citizen Howard Temple-Tracy.

There were two persons in the reception room but they left on Joe's
arrival, without bothering to look at him more than glancingly.

He spotted the screen immediately and went over and stood before it.

The screen lit and revealed a heavy-set, dour of countenance man seated
at a desk. He looked into Joe Prantera's face, scowled and said
something.

Joe said, "Joseph Salviati-Prantera to interview Citizen Howard
Temple-Tracy."

The other's shaggy eyebrows rose. "Indeed," he said. "In Amer-English?"

Joe nodded.

"Enter," the other said.

A door had slid open on the other side of the room. Joe walked through
it and into what was obviously an office. Citizen Temple-Tracy sat at a
desk. There was only one other chair in the room. Joe Prantera ignored
it and remained standing.

Citizen Temple-Tracy said, "What can I do for you?"

Joe looked at him for a long, long moment. Then he reached down to his
belt and brought forth the .45 automatic. He moistened his lips.

Joe said softly, "You know what this here is?"

Temple-Tracy stared at the weapon. "It's a handgun, circa, I would say,
about 1925 Old Calendar. What in the world are you doing with it?"

Joe said, very slowly, "Chief, in the line you're in these days you
needa heavy around with wunna these. Otherwise, Chief, you're gunna wind
up in some gutter with a lotta holes in you. What I'm doin', I'm askin'
for a job. You need a good man knows how to handle wunna these, Chief."

Citizen Howard Temple-Tracy eyed him appraisingly. "Perhaps," he said,
"you are right at that. In the near future, I may well need an assistant
knowledgeable in the field of violence. Tell me more about yourself. You
surprise me considerably."

"Sure, Chief. It's kinda a long story, though. First off, I better tell
you you got some bad enemies, Chief. Two guys special, named Brett-James
and Doc Reston-Farrell. I think one of the first jobs I'm gunna hafta do
for you, Chief, is to give it to those two."


THE END




Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from _Analog_ December 1960. Extensive
    research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S. copyright on
    this publication was renewed. Minor spelling and typographical
    errors have been corrected without note.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Gun for Hire, by Dallas McCord Reynolds

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GUN FOR HIRE ***

***** This file should be named 24247.txt or 24247.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/4/2/4/24247/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
