The Project Gutenberg EBook of Criminal Negligence, by Jesse Francis McComas

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Criminal Negligence

Author: Jesse Francis McComas

Release Date: January 22, 2008 [EBook #24399]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CRIMINAL NEGLIGENCE ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Greg Bergquist and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







[Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from Astounding Science
Fiction June 1955. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed. Minor typographical
errors have been corrected without note.]




CRIMINAL NEGLIGENCE

[Illustration]

     _Somebody was going to have to be left behind ... and who it would
     be was perfectly obvious...._

BY J. FRANCIS MCCOMAS

Illustrated by Freas


Warden Halloran smiled slightly. "You expect to have criminals on Mars,
then?" he asked. "Is that why you want me?"

"Of course we don't, sir!" snapped the lieutenant general. His name was
Knox. "We need men of your administrative ability--"

"Pardon me, general," Lansing interposed smoothly, "I rather think we'd
better give the warden a ... a more detailed picture, shall we say? We
have been rather abrupt, you know."

"I'd be grateful if you would," Halloran said.

He watched the lanky civilian as Lansing puffed jerkily on his cigar. A
long man, with a shock of black hair tumbling over a high, narrow
forehead, Lansing had introduced himself as chairman of the project's
co√∂rdinating committee ... whatever that was.

"Go ahead," grunted Knox. "But make it fast, doctor."

Lansing smiled at the warden, carefully placed his cigar in the ash tray
before him and said, "We've been working on the ships night and day.
Both the dust itself and its secondary effects are getter closer to us
all the time. We've been so intent on the job--it's _really_ been a race
against time!--that only yesterday one of my young men remembered the
Mountain State Penitentiary was well within our sphere of control."

"The country--what's left of it--has been split up into regions," the
general said. "So many ships to each region."

"So," Lansing went on, "learning about you meant there was another batch
of passengers to round up. And when I was told the warden was
yourself--I know something of your career, Mr. Halloran--I was
delighted. Frankly," he grinned at Knox, "we're long on military and
scientific brass and short on people who can manage other people."

"I see." Halloran pressed a buzzer on his desk. "I think some of my
associates ought to be in on this discussion."

"Discussion?" barked Knox. "Is there anything to discuss? We simply want
you out of here in an hour--"

"Please, general!" the warden said quietly.

       *       *       *       *       *

If the gray-clad man who entered the office at that moment heard the
general's outburst, he gave no sign. He stood stiffly in front of the
warden's big desk, a little to one side of the two visitors, and said,
"Yes sir, Mr. Halloran?"

"Hello, Joe. Know where the captain is?"

"First afternoon inspection, sir." He cocked an eye at the clock on the
wall behind Halloran. "Ought to be in the laundry about now."

The warden scribbled a few words on a small square of paper. "Ask him to
come here at once, please. On your way, please stop in at the hospital
and ask Dr. Slade to come along, too." He pushed the paper across the
desk to the inmate. "There's your pass."

"Yes sir. Anything else, warden?" He stood, a small, square figure in
neat gray shirt and pants, seemingly oblivious to the ill-concealed
stares of the two visitors.

Halloran thought a moment, then said, "Yes ... I'd like to see Father
Nelson and Rabbi Goldsmid, too."

"Uh, Father Nelson's up on the Row, sir. With Bert Doyle."

"Then we'll not bother him, of course. Just the others."

"Yes, sir. On the double."

Lansing slouched around in his chair and openly watched Joe Mario walk
out. Then he turned back to Halloran and said, "That chap a ... a
trusty, warden?"

"To a degree. Although we no longer use the term. We classify the
inmates according to the amount of responsibility they can handle."

"I see. Ah--" he laughed embarrassedly, "this is the first time I've
been in a prison. Mind telling me what his crime was?"

Halloran smiled gently. "We try to remember the man, Dr. Lansing, and
not his crime." Then he relented. "Joe Mario was just a small-time crook
who got mixed up in a bad murder."

Lansing whistled.

"Aren't we wasting time?" growled the general. "Seems to me, warden, you
could be ordering your people to pack up without any conference. You're
in charge here, aren't you?"

Halloran raised his eyebrows. "In charge? Why, yes ... in the sense that
I shape the final decisions. But all of my assistants contribute to such
decisions. Further, we have an inmate's council that voices its opinion
on certain of our problems here. And we--my associates and I--listen to
them. Always."

Knox scowled and angrily shifted his big body. Lansing picked up his
cigar, relit it, using the action to unobtrusively study the warden.
Hardly a presence to cow hardened criminals, Lansing thought. Halloran
was just below middle height, with gray hair getting a bit thin, eyes
that twinkled warmly behind rimless glasses. Yet Lansing had read
somewhere that a critic of Halloran's policies had said the penologist's
thinking was far ahead of his time--too far, the critic had added.

       *       *       *       *       *

As Joe Mario closed the warden's door behind him, two inmates slowed
their typing but did not look up as he neared their desks. A guard left
his post at the outer door and walked toward Mario. The two of them
stopped beside the desks.

"What's the word, Joe?" the guard asked.

Mario held out his pass.

"Gotta round up the captain, Doc Slade and the Jew preacher," he said.

"All right. Get going."

"What do those guys want?" asked a typist as he pulled the paper from
his machine.

Mario looked quickly at the guard and as quickly away from him.

"Dunno," he shrugged.

"Somethin' about the war, I bet," grunted the typist.

"War's over, dope," said the other. "Nothin' behind the curtain now but
a nice assortment of bomb craters. All sizes."

"Go on, Joe," ordered the guard. "You heard something. Give."

"Well ... I heard that fat general say something about wanting the
warden outa here in a hour."

The typewriters stopped their clacking for a bare instant, then started
up again, more slowly. The guard frowned, then said, "On your way, Joe."
He hesitated, then, "No use to tell you to button your lip, I guess."

"I'm not causing any trouble," Mario said, as the guard opened the door
and stood aside for him to pass into the corridor.

O.K.'d for entrance into the hospital wing, Joe Mario stood outside the
railing that cut Dr. Slade's reception area off from the corridor that
led to the wards. An inmate orderly sat behind the railing, writing a
prescription for a slight, intelligent-looking man.

Mario heard the orderly say, "All right, Vukich, get that filled at the
dispensary. Take one after each meal and come back to see us when the
bottle's empty. Unless the pain gets worse, of course. But I don't think
it will."

"Thanks, doc," the patient drawled.

Both men looked up then and saw Mario.

"Hi, Joe," the orderly smiled. "What's wrong with you? You don't look
sick!"

"Nothin' wrong with me that a day outside couldn't cure."

"Or a _night_," laughed Vukich.

Mario ran a hand over his sleek, black hair. "Better a night, sure," he
grinned back. Then he sobered and said to the orderly, "Warden wants to
see the doc. Right away."

"Mr. Halloran sick?"

"Naw ... it's business. Urgent business."

"Real urgent, Joe? The doc's doing a pretty serious exam right now."

Mario paused, then said, "You guys might as well know about it. There's
a general and a civilian in the warden's office. They're talkin' about
something outside. Warden wants the doc in on it."

Sudden tension flowed out between the three men. Down the hall, a
patient screamed suddenly in the psycho ward. The three of them jerked,
then grinned feebly at each other.

Vukich said slowly, "Well, you don't start playing catch with atom bombs
without dropping a few. Wonder what it's like ... out there?"

"We haven't _heard_ that it's any different," the orderly's voice lacked
conviction.

"Don't be silly," Vukich said flatly. "Ever since they moved the dames
from Tehama into C block we've known _something_ happened."

"Get the doc," Mario said. "I've got to be on my way."

"Me, too." Vukich's thin, clever face looked thoughtful.

The others stared blankly at him and said nothing.

       *       *       *       *       *

As Alfred Court, captain of the prison, strode down the flower-bordered
path that led from the shops unit past A block to the administration
building, a side door in A block clanged open and a sergeant came out.
The sergeant turned without seeing his superior and walked hurriedly
toward the administration wing.

"Hey, sarge!" Court called. "What's the hurry?"

The sergeant whirled, recognized the captain and quickly saluted.

"Glad to see you, sir," he said. "Just the man I was looking for!"

"Good enough. What's on your mind? Better tell me as we go for the
warden's in a hurry to see me."

The two men walked abreast, both big, although Court lacked any trace of
the sergeant's paunch. As they walked and talked, their eyes darted
continually about, unconsciously checking the appearance of the
buildings, the position of the guard in the gun tower, the attitude of a
very old inmate who was meticulously weeding a flower bed.

"Captain, you going to let the men out for their yard time?"

Court's pace slowed. "Why not?"

"No real reason ... _now_. But there's trouble in the air, sir. I can
smell it. The whole place is buzzing ... with _something_."

"With what?"

"I can't put my finger on it. But all the men know there's some pretty
big shots--at least one general, they say--in the warden's office, right
now. There's a hot rumor that there's trouble outside--some sort of
disaster."

Court laughed shortly. "That Mario! He's going to lose a nice job if he
doesn't keep his mouth shut!"

"None of them keep their mouths shut, captain."

"Yes ... well, I don't know what's up, myself. I'm heading for that
conference right now. I'll ask the warden about letting the men out of
their cells. What's their attitude?"

The sergeant's broad, red face grew more troubled.

"Uh ... the men aren't hostile, captain. They seem worried, nervous ...
kind of scared. If somebody at the top--the warden or yourself--could
convince them things were as usual outside ... they'd quiet down, I'm
sure."

They were now thirty feet from the door to the administration building a
door that opened for but one man at a time. The officers stopped.

"Things are _not_ normal outside," Court growled, "and you know it. I've
been wondering how long this prison could go on--as if there were still
a state's capital, with its Adult Authority, its governor, its Supreme
Court. D'you think every man jack here doesn't know a visit from the
Authority's long overdue!"

"Yeah--"

"Well, I'll go in, sarge, and see what's what. If you _don't_ hear from
me, stick to routine."

"Right, captain."

He remained where he was while Captain Court walked slowly toward the
door, both hands well in sight. A pace from the door he stopped and
exchanged a few words with someone watching him through a barred
peephole. After a moment, the door slid open and he walked into the
building.

He was the last to arrive at the warden's office. Lansing gazed at him
in fascination. Goldsmid had been a Golden Gloves champion middleweight
before he had heeded the call of the Law, and he looked it. Dr. Slade
was the prototype of all overworked doctors. But Court was a type by
himself. Lansing thought he'd never seen a colder eye. Yet, the
captain's lean face--so unlike the warden's mild, scholarly one--was
quiet, composed, unmarked by any weakness of feature or line of
self-indulgence. A big, tough man, Lansing mused, a very tough man. But
a just one.

       *       *       *       *       *

"I've a problem, warden," Court said when the introductions were over.
"Something we should decide right away."

"Can't it wait?" Knox said irritably.

Lansing almost choked with stifled laughter when Court just glanced
briefly at Knox, then said quietly to the warden, "Sergeant Haines has
just advised me that the inmates know about these gentlemen and
they're--restless. I wonder if we shouldn't keep the men in their cells
this afternoon."'

"Blast it!" roared Knox. "Can't you people keep a secret?"

"There are no secrets in prison, general," Halloran said mildly. "I
learned that my first week as a guard, twenty years ago." To Court he
said, "Sit down, Alfred. Unless you disagree strongly, I think we'll let
the men out as usual. It's a risk, yes, but right now, the closer we
stick to normal routine, the better."

"You're probably right, sir."

Court sat down and Halloran turned to his two visitors.

"Now, gentlemen," he smiled, "we're at your disposal. As I told you, my
two associate wardens aren't here. Mr. Briggs is in town and Mr. Tate is
home ill. Dr. McCall, our Protestant clergyman, is also home, recovering
from a siege with one of those pesky viruses. But we here represent
various phases of our administration and can certainly answer all of
your questions."

"Questions!" Knox snorted. "We're here to tell you the facts--not ask."

"General," soothed Lansing. He looked across the desk at Halloran and
shrugged slightly. The warden twinkled. "General Knox is a trifle ...
ah, overblunt, but he's telling you the essential truth of the
situation. We've come to take you away from here. Just as soon as you
can leave."

"Hey?" cried Slade. "Leave here? The devil, man, I've got to take out a
gall bladder this afternoon!"

"I'm afraid I don't understand," murmured Goldsmid. "I thought the war
was over--"

"This is all nonsense!" There was an ominous note in Knox's hoarse
voice. "Do you people realize you're now under the authority of the
Fifth Defense Command?"

Lansing cried: "Let's be sensible about all this!" He pointed his cigar
at the fuming soldier. "General, these gentlemen have every right to
know the situation and we'll save time if you'll permit me to give them
a quick briefing."

"All right! All right!"

"Well, then." Lansing crossed his long legs, glanced nervously about the
room, and said, "The world as we know it is done with. Finished. In
another week it will be completely uninhabitable."

[Illustration]

"Hey," grunted Slade. "You Lansing, the physicist?"

"That's right, doctor."

"Didn't place you at first. Well, what's going to end this lousy old
world of ours?"

"Well," Lansing answered, "we wiped out our late antagonists with skill
and dispatch. But, in the end, they outsmarted us. Left behind some sort
of radioactive dust which ... _spreads_. It's rolling down on us from
Chicago and up from Texas. God knows what other parts of the country are
like--we haven't had time to discuss it with them on the radio."

Goldsmid muttered something in Hebrew.

"Isn't that lack of communication rather odd?" asked the warden.

"Not so very. We've been too busy building rocket ships."

"Rocket ships!" Court was jarred out of his icy calm.

"You mean spaceships?" cried the doctor.

"Yes, Slade, they do," murmured the warden.

"Precisely," Lansing said. "When it looked as if the cold war would get
rather warm, the allied governments faced up to the fact that our
venerable planet might become a ... ah, a battle casualty. So, in
carefully selected regions, rather extensive preparations were made for
a hurried departure from this sector of the universe."

"Oh, come to the point!" Knox exploded. "All you people need to know is
that one of those regions is this area of the Rocky Mountains, that the
ships are built and ready to go, and that you're to get aboard. Fast!"

"That," nodded Lansing, "is it."

       *       *       *       *       *

The four prison officials looked at each other. Halloran and Court sat
quiet; Goldsmid slowly dropped his eyes to the ground and his lips
moved. Slade scratched his chin.

"Going to Mars, hey?" he asked abruptly.

"That's our destination."

The doctor chuckled. "Comic-book stuff," he chortled.

"No, it isn't," Halloran said. "We've been expecting something like this
for a long time. Haven't we?"

"Indeed we have," Goldsmid said. "Expecting, but not quite believing."

Halloran looked thoughtfully at the physicist. "Dr. Lansing, these ships
of yours ... they're pretty big, I take it?"

"Not as big as we like. They never are. But they'll do. Why?"

"I should remind you that we have well over two thousand inmates here."

"Inmates!" barked the general. "Who the devil said anything about your
inmates? Think we'll take a lot of convicts to Mars! Populate it with
killers, thieves--"

"Who does go, then?" Halloran did not raise his voice but Knox looked
suddenly uneasy.

"Why ... uh, your operating personnel," he replied gruffly. "Your
guards, clerks ... hell, man, it's obvious, isn't it?"

"I'm afraid that is out," Goldsmid said. "For me, that is." He stood up,
a heavy-shouldered middleweight running a little to fat. "Excuse me,
warden, my counseling period's coming up."

"Sit down, Pete," Halloran said quietly. "We haven't finished this
conference."

"I admire your sentiments, Rabbi," Lansing said hurriedly, "but surely
you realize that we can't take any criminal elements to ... ah, what
will be our new world. And we do have a special need for you. We've
plenty of your co-religionists among our various personnel, but we don't
have an ordained minister for them. They're your responsibility."

"Afraid my first responsibility is here." Goldsmid's voice was quite
matter-of-fact.

"So's mine," grunted Slade. "Warden, even if the world ends tomorrow,
I've got to get Squeaker Hanley's gall bladder out today. No point in my
hanging around any longer is there?"

"Of course there is," Halloran answered. He took a package of cigarettes
from his pocket, selected one, and lit it. He exhaled smoke and looked
speculatively at Lansing. The scientist felt himself blushing and looked
away.

Halloran turned to Court.

"Quite a problem, isn't it, Alfred," he said. "I suppose these gentlemen
are right in keeping the inmates off their ships. At any rate, _we_
can't argue the matter--so let's do what we're asked. I think you'd
better plan to get the guards out of here tonight, at shift change.
Might pass the word to their wives now, so they can start packing a few
essentials. Doc," he turned to Slade, "before you get your greedy hands
on Squeaker's gall bladder, you'd better round up your staff and have
them make the proper arrangements."

"O.K., I'll put it up to them."

"You'll _not_ put it up to them," the warden said sharply. "You'll
_order_ them to be ready when the general, here, wants them."

"I'll give no orders," Slade said grimly.

"Just a minute," interposed Court. "Sir, aren't you going?"

"Of course not. But that's neither here nor there--"

The loud clangor of a bell pealed through the room. The two visitors
jumped.

"What's that?" cried Knox.

"Yard time," Halloran smiled. "The men are allowed two hours out in the
yard, now. They exercise, play games, or just sit around and talk."

"Oh."

"Did I understand you correctly, Warden Halloran?" Lansing's bony face
was pale now. "Do you refuse to come with us?"

       *       *       *       *       *

When the bell rang, Joe Mario had been standing near the door to the
warden's office, ostensibly filing reports. Now, he closed the drawer
with a bang, stretched, and started toward the outside door.

"Where are you going?" the guard asked suspiciously.

"The yard. Where else?"

"Not a word," Mario added virtuously. "I was too busy doin' my work.
Anyway, you gotta let me out. My team's got a ball game set for this
afternoon."

"Oh ... all right." He looked at the typists. "How about you two? Want
out?"

The two men glanced quickly at each other, then shoved back their chairs
and got up from their desks.

"Sure," one of them grinned, "I guess we'll take a little air."

       *       *       *       *       *

Lansing had the feeling he used to have occasionally, back in his
university days when he lectured on freshman physics--as if he were
talking to a class of deaf students. For, like the hapless freshmen,
Warden Halloran was quite obviously not listening to him. But the
scientist plunged on. "Sir," he said hoarsely, "we need you. We _will_
need you! I'm a scientist--I know nothing of the problems of ... ah,
community living. Neither does Knox. He's accustomed to major
crises--and solving them by giving orders. But both of us know there'll
come a time when people won't take orders--"

"Absolutely correct," Knox said unexpectedly. "Once we get settled on
Mars, the military takes a back seat. And--I mean this, Lansing--_I'll_
be damn' glad of it. When the people get their towns built they'll need
some gents with the right kind know-how to help them, show them--"

"That's all very interesting, general, but it's not for me."

"Why not?"

Halloran snubbed out his cigarette, looked up at the general and at the
scientist. He smiled briefly. "It's just my job, gentlemen--let's not
discuss the matter any further. You can't make me go."

"We will!" barked Knox. "I told you you were under the jurisdiction of
the Fifth Defense Command and you are. If I want to, I can send a tank
company over here and drag you to those ships!"

"He's right, you know," Lansing said.

Court stood up and took one step toward the general.

"Alfred!" the warden did not lift his voice, but Court stopped. "General
Knox," Halloran went on in a conversational tone, "you're being a bit of
bully, you know, and in this prison we've all been ... ah, conditioned
against bullies." He looked down at his desk and frowned. "However, I'll
admit that your position requires that I elaborate my reasons for
staying here. Well, then. As I see it, your people, your ... ah,
colonists, can help themselves. Most of _my_ people, the inmates here,
can't. A long time ago, gentlemen, I decided I'd spend my life helping
the one man in our society who seemingly can't help himself, the
so-called criminal. I've always felt that society owes a debt to the
criminal ... instead of the other way around."

He hesitated, grinned apologetically at Captain Court. "I'm sermonizing
again, eh, Alfred? But," he shrugged, "if I must get dramatic about it I
can only say that my life's work ends only with my--death."

"It's quite a rough job, you know," Goldsmid remarked. "This is a
maximum security institution. Too many of the inmates have disappointed
the warden. But he keeps trying and we've learned to follow his
example."

"Our psychiatric bunch have done some mighty interesting things," beamed
Slade, "even with cases that looked absolutely hopeless."

"None of them can be saved now," muttered Lansing.

"That is in the hands of God," Goldsmid replied.

"Well," Halloran said gently, "still going to send those tanks after me,
general?"

"Uh ... no ... I won't interfere with a man doing his duty."

Lansing cleared his throat, looked slowly from the somber-faced
clergyman, to the fidgeting medico, to the burly captain, still staring
impassively at the general, to, finally, the quiet, smiling warden.
"Gentlemen," he said slowly, "it occurs to me that the situation hasn't
actually registered on you. The earth is really doomed, you know. This
dust simply won't tolerate organic life. In some way--we have not had
time to discover how--it's self-multiplying, so, as I said, it spreads.
Right now, not a tenth of this entire continent--from the pole down to
the Panama Canal--is capable of supporting any kind of life as we know
it. And that area is diminishing hourly."

"No way of checking it?" Slade asked. His tone was one of idle
curiosity, nothing else.

"No. It's death, gentlemen. As deadly as your ... ah, gallows."

"We use the gas chamber," Halloran corrected him. His mouth twisted.
"More humane, you know."

There was brief quiet, then the warden said, "Well ... now that we've
finished philosophizing, let's get back to the matter at hand. We can
have everyone that's going ready to leave by seven tonight. Will that be
satisfactory?"

"It'll have to be," Knox grunted.

"Thank you." Halloran reached for his phone, then dropped his hands on
his desk. "I'd like to ask you a question," he said. "Perhaps it's
presumptuous, but I'm rather curious about the ... er, last workings of
our government. Tell me, don't you really have room for our inmates? You
haven't told us how many ships you've built. Or how big they are."

Lansing looked at Knox. The general flushed, then stared at the floor.
Lansing shrugged tiredly.

"Oh, we've plenty of room," he sighed. "But ... our orders are to take
only those completely fit to build a new world. We've ... well, we have
practiced a lot of euthanasia lately."

"Judges," murmured Goldsmid.

"If you had come sooner," there was no anger in Halloran's voice,
"couldn't you have selected some of our people, those that I ... all of
us know are ready for rehabilitation--even on another planet?"

"Perhaps. But no one remembered there was a prison nearby."

The warden looked at the rabbi. Goldsmid raised his heavy shoulders in
an ancient Hebraic gesture.

"That was always the trouble, wasn't it, Pete?" Halloran murmured.
"People never remembered the prisons!"

The telephone beside him shrilled loudly, urgently.

       *       *       *       *       *

The inmate mopping the floor of Condemned Row's single corridor slowed
in front of Bert Doyle's cell. Doyle was slated for a ride down the
elevator that night to the death cell behind the gas chamber. At the
moment, he was stretched out on his bunk, listening to the soft voice of
Father Nelson.

"Sorry to interrupt," the inmate said, "but I thought you'd like to know
that all hell's busting loose down in the yard."

Father Nelson looked up.

Doyle, too, looked interested. "A riot?" he asked.

"Yessiree, bob!"

"Nonsense!" snapped the priest. "This prison doesn't have riots!"

"Well, it's sure got one, now. 'Scuse me, Father, but it's the truth.
The men grabbed four or five yard guards and the screws in the towers
don't dare shoot!"

He gave up all pretense of work and stood, leaning on his mop-handle,
his rheumy old eyes glowing with a feverish excitement.

Nelson stood up.

"Will you excuse me, Bert?" he asked. "I'd better see if I can help the
warden."

Doyle, too, sat up, swung his feet to the steel floor, stood up and
stretched. "Sure," he said. His hard face was pale but otherwise he
seemed quite calm. "You've been a great help, Father." He looked
quizzically at the old inmate. "You lying, Danny? Seems to me the boys
have got nothing to beef about here."

"Heh, they sure have now."

"What?"

"Well, I got this from a guy who got it from Vukich who heard it from
Joe Mario. Seems there's a big-shot general and some kinda scientist in
Mr. Halloran's office." He shifted his grip on the mop-handle. "You
gents maybe won't believe this, but it's what Joe heard 'em say to the
warden. Outside is all covered with radium and this general and this
here scientist are goin' to Mars an' they want the warden to go along.
Leavin' us behind, of course. That's what the boys are riotin' about."

Bert Doyle burst into harsh laughter.

"Danny! Danny!" he cried. "I've been predicting this! You've gone
stir-bugs!"

"Ain't neither!"

"Just a moment, Bert," Nelson whispered. Aloud he said, "Dan, go call
the guard for me, please." When the old man had shuffled out of earshot
the priest said to the condemned man, "It could be true, Bert. By
radium, he means radioactive material. And there's no reason spaceships
can't get to Mars. We'd reached the Moon before the war started, you
know."

Doyle sank back on his bunk.

"Well, I'll be damned!" he breathed.

"Bert!"

Doyle grinned sheepishly. "Force of habit." Then, more soberly, "So
they're off to Mars, eh? Father, you better get down there and pick up
your reservations!"

"Don't be ridiculous!" The priest's voice softened and he patted the
killer's shoulder. "I will go down and see what's what, Bert. And I'll
be back just as soon as the men have quieted down. That is, if they
_are_ creating a disturbance."

The footsteps of the approaching guard sounded loud in the corridor.
Doyle frowned a little.

"When you come back, Father, you'll tell me the truth? No kidding, now!"

The guard stood in front of the door of heavy steel bars. Father Nelson
looked down at the man on the bunk.

"I'll tell you everything, Bert. I swear it."

"Uh, Father?" the guard's voice was nervous--and embarrassed.

"Yes, Perkins?"

"I ... I can't let you out right now. Orders from the warden. Not a
cell door opens till I hear from him direct."

[Illustration]

Doyle chuckled.

"Might as well sit down, Father," he said, "and make yourself
comfortable--"

       *       *       *       *       *

"What will you do?" cried Lansing.

"Go out and talk to them, of course," replied Halloran. He arose from
his desk, a calm, unhurried man.

"Look," growled Knox, "you get me through to the town. Some of our
people are still there. I'll order out as many soldiers as you want.
I'll see to it that they get here--on the double!"

Halloran flushed. "Would it ease your conscience, general," he grated,
"if you killed off my men instead of leaving them--behind! Now, you will
please keep quiet. You'll be perfectly safe!"

"What will we do with them, sir?" Court gestured at Lansing and Knox.

Halloran strode from behind his desk to the opposite end of the room. As
he twirled the dials of a wall safe he said, "They'll have to remain
here, for now. The men have got between this building and the gate
office." The safe swung open and he reached far inside and took out a
submachine gun. "Here," he held the weapon out to Court. "If I don't
come back, use this to get them to the gate office."

"Didn't know you had an arsenal in here!" cried Slade.

"No one else did, either, except Alfred. Now Doc, think you and Pete had
better stay here."

Slade and Goldsmid pulled themselves out of their chairs as one man.
Their timing was perfect.

"No, you don't, hero!" growled Slade.

"Warden," Goldsmid said, "perhaps _I_ could talk to the men--"

The warden smiled and walked toward the door. There he stopped and said
to Court, "Switch on the speaker system, Alfred. I'll take the portable
mike from the next office. While I'm out there, get word to all
custodial and operating personnel that they will be permitted to leave
tonight. Meantime, I hope they will stay on their jobs. Better phone Mr.
Tate, have someone try to locate Mr. Briggs, be sure and call Dr.
Slade's staff."

"Right, sir."

The three men left the office. Court, the gun cradled under one arm,
picked up the phone and spoke into it. His voice was a low, crisp
monotone. After a while, he replaced the receiver and stood quiet,
staring impassively at the others.

"You might say the warden's career has been twenty years of futility,"
he muttered. Lansing and Knox felt he wasn't actually speaking to them.
"Now me, I'm a screw of the old school. Hardboiled, they say. _I_ never
expected a thing from a con ... and cons have lied to him, politicians
have broken their promises ... but the liars have loved him and the
dumbest dope in the legislature has respected him."

"Will he ... be all right?" Lansing asked.

Court shrugged. "Who knows? You handled this very badly," he said
dispassionately. "Five minutes after you stepped through the main gate
every inmate in the place knew you were here and started wondering. Why
didn't you write--make arrangements to see the warden outside?"

"I'm sorry," Lansing said. "We know very little about prisons."

Court laughed shortly. "You'd better learn," he said grimly.

"Anyway we can see what's going on?" rumbled Knox. "And how about that
speaker business?"

"There's a window in the next office. Come along."

       *       *       *       *       *

They crouched at the window, the fat Knox whizzing a little, because
Court had ordered them to keep out of sight of the rioters. They saw
Halloran, Slade and Goldsmid at his heels, walking out into the small
courtyard that lay between them and safety. Over the wall speaker came a
sullen roar, something very like the ragged blast of a rocket whose
timing is off. A few gray-clad men in the courtyard saw the approaching
warden, surged toward him, screaming at their fellows in the big yard
behind them.

Halloran ignored the clutching hands. He held the mike up and they heard
him say, "There's no point in my talking with you unless you will be
quiet and listen." He paused. The roar slowly subsided into an angry
mutter. "Thanks. That's better."

Now, they could see Slade's head but both Halloran and the rabbi were
hidden by the swirl of gray figures that swept around the three prison
officials.

"Now," the warden went on, "it seems that you have something to say to
me. Good enough. But why didn't you send word through your council,
instead of roughing up guards, damaging property, yelling your heads off
and generally behaving like a bunch of spoiled brats. Go on, tell me!
Why?"

Someone's scream came clearly over the mike. "The world's coming to an
end! They're leaving us here to die!"

"Yeah!" the mike picked up another voice. "How about that?"

Before the wordless, mindless roar could rise again, the warden barked,
"Oh, hush up!" And they were quiet.

"My God," breathed Lansing.

"Now," Halloran's voice was easy, assured, "I want to make sure that all
of you hear me. So, I'm coming out in the center of the yard. Rabbi Pete
Goldsmid and Doc Slade insist on coming with me although," he chuckled,
"I understand Squeaker Hanley's screaming for the doc to cut out his
gall bladder." A few of the men laughed. "All right, here I come. And
you fellows behind me, keep off the wire. I don't want this mike to go
dead and have to yell my lungs out."

They saw the eddy of men around him move slowly through the broken gate
and out of their sight.

"What will he tell them," muttered Knox.

"Whatever--they'll believe it," Court said. The courtyard before them
was now empty. He stared thoughtfully out the barred window, then said,
"Think you could get to the gate office pretty soon, now--"

"No!" snarled Knox. "I want to see what happens to that gutty
so-and-so!"

Lansing grinned nervously. "Somehow, captain, I feel it won't be
necessary for us to sneak out of here."

       *       *       *       *       *

They listened again while assorted thieves, murderers, rapists,
men--save for an innocent few--whose hands were consistently raised
against their fellows' peace and property, heard their jailor tell them
that the end of their world, a world that many of them remembered but
dimly, was coming to an end. The screaming broke out again when Halloran
spoke of the Mars-bound ships, and, for a moment, the three in the
office thought he had lost control. But the amplifiers prevailed and
Halloran laughed and said, "Anyway, we're not going to Mars--"

"_You_ can go!"

The man who yelled that was apparently very close to the warden within
his view, for they heard him say: "Chrisman, you're a fool--as usual!
Would I bother to come out here and talk to you if I could go?"

That got them. That, they understood. If a guy didn't scram from a hot
spot when he could ... well, then, he couldn't scram in the first place.
So, the warden was stuck, just like they were.

Later, perhaps, a few of them might figure out why.

"Now, let's have no more interruptions," Halloran said. "_I_ don't think
there's any need to go. Neither does the doc, here, or the rabbi. We're
all staying--because the desert to the south of us has stopped the
spread of this dust and it seems it can't cross the rivers, either. So,
we're safe enough."

"But that's not true," groaned Lansing.

Court glanced at him. "Would you tell them different?" he said coldly.

"No--"

Halloran said, "Well, that's that. Life is a little difficult outside
and so the people out there want to try to get to Mars. Believe me,
that's a trip I want someone else to make first. But if they think life
will be easier on those deserts--why, let them go. But God help
them--they'll need it."

He paused. Knox tried to catch Lansing's eye, but the scientist's face
was blank, unseeing.

"What do _we_ do?" This voice was not hysterical, just seriously
questioning.

"_You_ should do darned well. Life should be easy enough for _you_.
You've got your own farms, your livestock, laundry, hospital,
shops--everything a man can need. So, take over and run things to suit
yourselves."

A unanimous gasp whistled over the speaker. Then, they all cried just
one word.

"Us?"

"Why not? Don't you think you can?"

Silence, broken by strange, wistful mutterings.

"I'd suggest this," Halloran said. "Let's follow our normal routine
tonight--no lock-ups, of course--and tomorrow, you fellows take over.
I'll help you in any way I can. But it will be _your_ job. Perhaps after
breakfast tomorrow, you ought to have a mass meeting. Under the
supervision of your council, I'd say. You can't keep going without some
kind of order, you know."

Again silence.

"My God," whispered Lansing, "he makes it all sound so _real_."

"Any questions?" Halloran asked.

"Hey, warden! How about the dames?"

"The ladies will join you tomorrow morning." He chuckled. "I imagine
they'll be able to handle you all right!"

A joyous roar.

"However," Halloran raised his voice, "I'd like to remind you fellows
that a successful community needs ... _families_!"

There was a long quiet, then, broken finally by an inmate who asked,
"Warden, how about the guys up on the Row?"

"Well," Halloran's voice lost all humor, "you can start ripping out the
gas chamber whenever you're ready to. I'll see that you get the tools."

The swell of applause was so loud in the office that Court hastily
turned down the speaker's volume.

"All right," Halloran said when they had quieted down, "that's about it.
You're free now, till supper-time. I'd suggest all of you start right
now, thinking about your future--"

     *     *     *     *     *

Outside the main gate, first Knox, then Lansing shook hands with the
gray-faced warden.

"Trucks'll be in town at seven for your people," Knox muttered. He gave
a windy sigh. "It's all fouled up. As usual. Damn it, we need people
like you, sir!"

Lansing looked at Halloran for a long time, trying to see behind the
mask of exhaustion. "I'm a mannerless fool," he said at last. "But Mr.
Halloran, would you tell me what you're thinking? I mean, really
thinking? Even if it's rough on us!"

Halloran laughed softly. "I wasn't thinking about you at all, Dr.
Lansing. I was--and am--regretting that what I told the men couldn't be
the truth. It's too bad they'll have so short a time. It would be very
interesting to see what they would do with--_life_."

Knox scowled. "Seems like they haven't done much with it so far."

"Come along, general," Lansing said quietly. "You don't understand. None
of us do. We never did."


THE END





End of Project Gutenberg's Criminal Negligence, by Jesse Francis McComas

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CRIMINAL NEGLIGENCE ***

***** This file should be named 24399-8.txt or 24399-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/4/3/9/24399/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Greg Bergquist and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
