The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Quantum Jump, by Robert Wicks

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Quantum Jump

Author: Robert Wicks

Release Date: January 24, 2008 [EBook #24418]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE QUANTUM JUMP ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, David Wilson and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









  +------------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                                  |
  | Transcriber's note:                                              |
  |                                                                  |
  | This story was published in _Amazing Science Fiction Stories_,   |
  | October 1958. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence    |
  | that the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.         |
  |                                                                  |
  +------------------------------------------------------------------+




THE QUANTUM JUMP

By ROBERT WICKS

Illustrator Llewellyn


    _Captain Brandon was a pioneer. He explored the far reaches
    of space and reported back on how things were out there. So
    it was pretty disquieting to find out that the "far reaches
    of space" knew more about what went on at home than he did._


Brandon was looking at the Milky Way. Through his perma-glas canopy, he
could see it trailing across the black velvet of space like a white
bridal veil. Below his SC9B scout-ship stretched the red dust deserts of
Sirius Three illuminated by the thin light of two ice moons. He looked
at the Milky Way.

He looked at it as a man looks at a flickering fireplace and thinks of
other things. He thought of the sun, 52 trillion miles away, a pinpoint
of light lost in the dazzle of the Milky Way--the Earth a speck of dust
in orbit just as this planet was to its master, Sirius.

Nine light years away. Of course, thirteen years had passed on Earth
since they had left, because the trip took four years by RT--relative
time. But even four years is a long time to be shut up in Astro One with
five other men, especially when one of them was the imperious Colonel
Towers.


"A quantum jump--that's the way to beat the Reds," the colonel had said
a thousand times. His well-worn expression had nothing to do with
quantum mechanics--the actual change in atomic configuration due to the
application of sufficient energy. Rather, it was a slang expression
referring to a major advance in inter-planetary travel due to a maximum
scientific and technological effort.

"Let 'em have Mars and Venus," the colonel would say--"Let 'em have the
whole damn Solar System! We'll make a quantum jump--leap-frog ahead of
'em. We'll be the first men to set foot on a planet of another solar
system."

Four years had gone by in the ship; thirteen years on Earth. Four years
of Colonel Towers. Military discipline grew more strict each day. Space
does funny things to some men. The "we'll be the first men" had turned
into, "_I'll_ be the first _man_."

But it was Captain Brandon who drew the assignment of scouting Sirius
Three for a suitable landing place for Astro, of sampling its atmosphere
and observing meteorological conditions. Even as Brandon climbed into
the scout-ship, Towers had cautioned him.

"Remember, your assignment is to locate a firm landing site with ample
protection from the elements. Under no circumstances are you to land
yourself. Is that clearly understood?"

Brandon nodded, was launched and now was cruising one hundred thousand
feet above the alien planet.

Brandon tilted the ship up on one wing and glanced down at the brick-red
expanse of desert. Tiny red mists marked dust storms. Certainly this was
no place to set down the full weight of Astro nor to protect the crew
and equipment from abrasive dust.

He righted the ship. Far on the horizon was a bank of atmospheric
clouds. Perhaps conditions were more promising there. He shoved the
power setting to 90 per cent.

A fire warning indicator light blinked on. Instantly Brandon's eyes were
on the instrument panel. The tailpipe temperature seemed all right. It
could be a false indication. He eased back on the power setting. Maybe
the light would go out. But it didn't. Instead he felt a surging rumble
deep in the bowels of the ship. Luminous needles danced and a second red
light flashed on.

He snapped the vidio switch and depressed the mike button.

"Astro One, this is Brandon. Over."

A steady crackling sound filled his earphones; a grid of light and
shadow fluttered on the screen. A thought entered his mind. Maybe he had
put too much planet curvature between Astro and himself.

"Astro One, this is Brandon. Come in, please."

A series of muffled explosions rocked the ship. He chopped the power
back all the way and listened intently.

"May Day! May Day! Astro, this is Brandon. May Day!"


A faint voice sputtered in his ear, the face of Reinhardt, the radioman
appeared before him. "Brandon, this is Astro One. What is your position?
Over."

Brandon's voice sounded strange and distant as he talked to his oxygen
mask. "Heading--one-eight-zero. Approximately six hundred miles from
you. Altitude one hundred thousand feet."

"What is the nature of your trouble, Brandon?"

Before Brandon could answer, the face of Colonel Towers appeared beside
the radioman's.

"Brandon, what're you trying to pull?"

"Engine trouble, sir. Losing altitude fast."

"Do you know the nature of the trouble?"

"Negative. Might have thrown a compressor blade. Got a fire indication,
then a compressor surge. Chopped off the power."

Towers frowned. "Why didn't you use straight rocket power?"

"Well, sir--"

"Never mind now. You may have encountered oxygen or hydrogen-rich
atmosphere--melted your compressor blades. Try an air start on straight
rocket. I want that ship back, Brandon. Repeat, I want that ship back!"

"I may be able to ride it down. Get it on the deck intact."

"Try an air start, Brandon." Towers leaned forward, his eyes fixed on
Brandon. "I don't want you to set foot on that planet, get me?"

But there wasn't time to try anything. The cabin was filling with fumes.
Brandon looked down. A fringe of blue flame crept along between the
floor and the bottom of the pilot's capsule. A cold ache filled the
cavity of his stomach.

"Too late. I'm on fire! Capsuling out. Repeat, capsuling out."

"Brandon--!"

The colonel's glaring face flicked off as Brandon pushed the
pre-ejection lever into the lock position severing all connections
between the ship and the pilot's capsule. Brandon had a strange,
detached feeling as he pushed the ejection button.

There was an explosion and the pilot's capsule shot up like a wet bar of
soap squeezed out of a giant's hand.

The ship turned into a torch and sank beneath him. Brandon closed his
eyes for a moment.

When he opened them he was staring at the Milky Way, then the desert as
he tumbled over and over. He talked to the Milky Way.

"Ten seconds. Should wait at least ten seconds before releasing the
drogue chute so I'll clear the ship." Then he spoke to the desert. "And
maybe another ten to give the capsule time to slow down."

He counted then pulled the chute release. Nylon streamed out behind him
and snapped open with a tremendous jar. A moment later, bundles of metal
ribbons floated out and billowed into a giant umbrella. The last thing
he remembered was the taste of blood on his lips.


When Brandon opened his eyes he was staring at the silvery disks of the
twin moons. They were high in the sky, obscuring the center of the Milky
Way. Funny he should be lying on his back looking at the sky, he
thought. Then he remembered.

The capsule was on its back and Brandon was still strapped securely to
the seat. His whole body ached. Tendons had been pulled, muscles
strained from the force of the ejection. His oxygen mask was still in
place, but his helmet hung partly loose. He adjusted it automatically,
then unbuckled the seat straps. He took a deep breath. Under the oxygen
mask, he was aware of dried blood clotted in his nostrils, caked around
the corners of his lips.

With an effort he sat up on the seat back and looked through the
perma-glas. A tangle of cords stretched out to the nylon of the main
chute draped over a dust dune. Beyond it he could see the gleaming metal
ribbons of the drogue chute.

Ahead of him, behind some low hills, he could see a dull red glow. The
ship, he thought. Astro may already be hovering over it.

He dragged the survival kit from behind the seat and pulled out some
rations, a first-aid kit, finally a tele-talkie. Raising the antenna, he
plugged in the mike cord from his mask and held down the "talk" key with
his thumb.

"Astro One, this is Brandon. Come in."

As he talked a picture flickered on the screen. It was the radio room on
Astro One. Colonel Towers was pacing back and forth in front of the
radioman.

"Shall I keep trying to raise him?" he heard Reinhardt ask.

"Damn fool stunt," Towers sputtered. "Know what I think? I think he went
down deliberately. Just to be the first human being to walk the ground
of a planet of another solar system."

"Astro, this is Brandon. Come in please."

Towers continued to pace and talk. "He did it to spite me."

"But we can't raise him sir," the radio operator said. "Maybe he didn't
get out of it alive."

"Colonel Towers, can't you hear me?" Brandon yelled into his oxygen
mask.

"He got out all right," the colonel said. "He's just stalling to make it
look good."

"We aren't going to give up the search are we, sir?" asked the radioman.

"It would serve his soul right." The colonel stopped pacing and faced
the radioman. "Keep trying to raise him, Reinhardt. I'm going to bring
us down to forty thousand feet and search the area where he went down.
Helluva waste of rocket fuel tooling around in the atmosphere," he
muttered, disappearing through a bulkhead door.


"Wait! Colonel Towers!" Brandon called. But he knew it was no use.
Obviously he could pick up Astro but they could neither see nor hear
him.

"Captain Brandon, this is Astro calling. Over." The radioman repeated
the phrase a dozen times and each time Brandon acknowledged, swore and
acknowledged again. Finally, in desperation, he switched off the
tele-talkie.

He snapped open the back of the unit and studied the maze of
transistors, resistors, and capacitators. If there was something wrong
it was subtle, like a burned out resistor or a shorted condenser.
Whatever it was, it was beyond emergency repair. He dropped the
tele-talkie behind the seat and examined the gauge on his oxygen tank.
There was enough to last the night but not much more.

He sat down in the capsule to think. The first thing they'd locate is
the burning ship, he decided. Then they would probably start searching
in ever-widening circles. But would they see him in the faint light of
the ice moons?

He looked back at the nylon chute again. Another thought ran through his
mind. Suppose they don't spot me in the dark. When the sun--Sirius, I
mean--comes up, there's a good chance they'll spot the parachute and
search for him.

He slid the canopy open and looked down at the red soil of Sirius Three.
He hesitated for a moment, then swung his feet over the side and dropped
to the ground.

"At least I'll have that satisfaction," he said, grinning under his
oxygen mask.

Very much aware of gravity after years of weightlessness, he walked to
the canopy of the chute and spread it out on the flat ground in a full
circle. It billowed in the wind. He searched around, found some glassy
black rocks and anchored down the chute.

Then he looked at the orange glow that marked the funeral pyre of the
ship. He had a decision to make; stay here with the capsule or head for
the fire.

Couldn't be more than a thousand yards away, he decided. Charging a
walk-around oxygen bottle, he transferred his oxygen hose to it. He
snapped the survival kit to his belt and picked up the tele-talkie.

The ship was more than a thousand yards away. The first mile was across
flat desert. He picked his way cautiously, his boots churning up clouds
of powdery dust. He remembered the Russian reports of the weird and
deadly creatures they had encountered in the Martian deserts.

But aside from a few gray patches of brush there seemed to be no sign of
life. After all, he thought, the Earth held no life for the better part
of its existence. And Towers had selected this planet because it bore
relatively the same relationship to the brighter, hotter Sirius as did
the Earth to the sun. While farther away it should have approximately
the same conditions as did the Earth. And it had seas, not as large as
on Earth, but seas, nevertheless.


Yet there was a fallacy in the argument. Presumably all of the stars in
the outer arms of the Milky Way and their planets were about the same
age. With similar conditions as the Earth, life must have been born and
walked out of the seas of Sirius Three just as it did on Earth.

Something scurried into a wisp of brush, as if to bear out Brandon's
realization. He froze, his eyes on the brush, his hand reaching for his
hydro-static shock pistol. He could hear nothing but the wind hollowing
his ears. He stood for a long moment, then cautiously skirted the brush,
and continued on toward the burning ship. There was an odd clicking
sound and he stopped. It sounded again. Brandon realized he was
perspiring despite the chill of the desert night. Again he moved on, the
sound fading in the distance behind him.

The next mile brought him to a great sheet of ancient lava laid bare by
the elements. He climbed to the top. The fire still seemed to be about a
thousand yards ahead, beyond a ridge of low hills.

A distant flare lit up the sky ahead of him. It glowed for a few moments
and died. They've found the ship, he thought. After four years, I had
completely forgotten about the store of photo-flash flares.

He watched for awhile but saw no more flares. Finally he scrambled down
the other side of the lava sheet and continued on toward the wreck,
moving slowly but steadily.

The third mile brought him to the scene of the crash. A smoking cylinder
of fused metal lay in a gully. Parts were strewn along the bottom. A
wing, untouched by the fire, was leaning tip down against the edge of
another lava sheet some distance away.

He sat down. Another flare flashed in the sky behind him silhouetting a
row of grotesque trees. I'm over here, you fools, he thought. He watched
until the flare flickered out, then turned his head back toward the
remains of the ship. There wasn't much of a glow to it now. It would be
hard to see unless Astro was right on top of it.

He raised the antenna on the tele-talkie and snapped it on. The screen
glowed into life. Towers was stepping through the bulkhead door into the
radio room. Just like a television play in installments, Brandon
thought. Scene two coming up.

"No sign of him at the scene of the crash," Towers told Reinhardt.

"If he got out," observed Reinhardt, "he could be a hundred miles away
or more."

"_If_ he got out," Towers said in a tone that irritated Brandon.

"I got out," Brandon said. "And right now I'm walking around your
precious planet like a boy scout. Damn this tele-talkie! I'd give a
year's pay if you could see me now, Towers."

"We may yet spot the escape capsule," Reinhardt was saying.

"We're still continuing the search," put in Towers. "But I don't mind
telling you I'm not wasting much more fuel."

The radio operator started to say something, hesitated and finally
settled for, "yes, sir."

Brandon swore and snapped off the set. He looked at his walk-around
bottle.

"Can't stay here any longer," he muttered.


He couldn't find the capsule. He walked three, perhaps four miles. He
stopped and blotted his moist brow with his sleeve. He wasn't going to
find it. Before him stretched an endless carpet of red dust. The light
from the two moons was growing dim, as each settled toward different
horizons.

He sat down. A cloud of powdery dust settled over his legs. The
lightness in his head told him that his oxygen was running out. The
weakness in his muscles reminded him that it had been a long time since
he had walked in a planet's gravity. A distant flare lit up the horizon.
He choked off a sob, and beat his fist in the red dust. A wave of nausea
swept over him. Bitter stomach juices welled up in his throat but he
swallowed them down again.

Desperately he turned on the tele-talkie.

"Astro, this is Brandon," he said.

"Brandon, this is Astro," Reinhardt said.

Brandon's body tensed. "Thank God I finally got through to you. Listen,
Reinhardt, I must be about three--"

"Brandon, this is Astro," said Reinhardt in a monotone. He said it again
and again and again.

Brandon fell back on the ground. His breathing was short, strained. His
face was bathed in perspiration. The oxygen, he realized, was giving
out.

What are the odds, that the air of Sirius Three is breathable, he
wondered. One in a hundred? The planet has water and both animal and
plant life. Certainly it has sufficient gravity to hold its oxygen. But
what other elements--noxious gases might be present. Maybe the odds are
closer to one in fifty, he decided.

"But it's no gamble when you have nothing to lose," he told the Milky
Way.

Ripping off his oxygen mask, he took a deep breath of the alien
atmosphere. The dust choked him, his ears rang. Black spots danced
before his eyes, then melted into solid blackness.


Brandon could hear Towers' voice in a vortex of darkness.

"Let's face it--Brandon is dead. Must have burned with the ship, at
least that's the way the report will read. Get me, Reinhardt?"

"Yes, sir," the disembodied voice of Reinhardt replied quietly.

"We're going to set her down on a solid piece of ground near one of the
oceans." There was a pause and Brandon could almost see Colonel Towers
drawing up to his full height. "I'm going to be the first man to set
foot on a planet of another solar system. Know what that means,
Reinhardt?"

"A quantum jump sir?"

"Right. Leap-frogging ahead of the Reds. Wait till they read the name
Colonel John Towers--maybe _General_ John Towers--_General_."

Brandon opened his eyes. Sirius was turning the sky to gray, trimming a
few scattered clouds with gold. As he stared at the sky, Sirius rose
with a brassy glare. Near it he could see its white hot dwarf star
companion. It was going to be a real scorcher, he decided; worse than
any desert on Earth. He sat up stiffly.

On the tele-talkie screen, Reinhardt, alone in the radio room, was
calling quietly for Brandon. The bulkhead door swung open and Towers
poked his head through.

"Knock that off," said Towers sternly, "and take your landing station."
As Reinhardt rose to his feet, Brandon reached over and turned off the
set.

Brandon took a deep breath. His head spun and for the first time he
realized that he was still alive. He gazed across the shimmering desert
to a ridge of scrubby hills. Blue mountains rose up beyond them. Great
floes of black lava had rolled down onto the desert floor at some
distant time. They were spotted with clumps of gray grass even as was
the desert. The hills were studded with weird trees standing stiff,
branches outstretched, like an army of scarecrows.

The air of Sirius Three was doing strange things to him. Two of the
trees seemed to be moving. He swayed and sat heavily.


As he watched through a haze of red dust whipped up by the morning
breeze, the two trees came closer, turned into men wearing desert
uniforms and leaned over him.

"Are you okay?" one of them asked.

Brandon said nothing.

"We saw you from our observation station over on the hill," said the
other pointing.

They helped Brandon to his feet and gave him a swig of cool, sweet water
from a canteen.

"I'm Captain Brandon, of the Astro One."

"Astro One?" The man removed his pith helmet to wipe his brow and
Brandon noticed the gleaming US insignia on the front of the helmet.
"The Astro One left Earth thirteen years ago," the man said.

"Only four years by RT," Brandon said.

The man smiled and put his helmet back on his head. "A lot of things
have happened since you left. There was a war which we won, and I guess
you guys were almost forgotten. And there was a lot of technological
development."

"You mean you had a quantum jump?" asked Brandon parroting Colonel
Towers' favorite expression.

"Odd you would know that," replied the second man. "It was through
quantum mechanics that we learned to approximate the speed of light.
While nine years pass on Earth when we make the trip, our RT is mere
moments."

"Good Lord!" Brandon said. "You must have passed us up."

"Been on this planet for nearly a year," the first man said. "Got men on
dozens of planetary systems throughout the Milky Way. One ship went a
thousand light years out. By the time they come back, civilization on
Earth will be two thousand years older."

"Have you got a tele-talkie?" Brandon asked.

"Sure," said the first man, producing a set one-third the size of
Brandon's.

"Could you tune it to 28.6 microcycles?"

"Sure," the man said again. He turned a dial with his thumb and handed
the unit to Brandon. Brandon depressed the "talk" button. A crystal
clear image of Colonel Towers, putting the finishing touches on his full
dress uniform, appeared on the screen.

"This is an historic occasion," Colonel Towers was announcing to his
crew. "Open the hatch--and, Reinhardt, be sure to stand by with the
motion picture camera."

"Excuse me, Colonel Towers," said Brandon quietly.

Towers swung around and looked out at Brandon. The colonel's face paled.

"I have something to tell you," said Brandon grinning, "about the
quantum jump."


THE END





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Quantum Jump, by Robert Wicks

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE QUANTUM JUMP ***

***** This file should be named 24418.txt or 24418.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/4/4/1/24418/

Produced by Greg Weeks, David Wilson and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
