The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Sun King, by Gaston Derreaux

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Sun King

Author: Gaston Derreaux

Release Date: April 1, 2008 [EBook #24973]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SUN KING ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









The SUN KING

By GASTON DERREAUX


 The people of Par'si'ya forgot their God, and
 worshipped only murder, and sin. But then the
 virgin Too-che gave birth to a male child....


Before the flood, even before Egypt's greatness, the world was divided
into three main countries, named Jaffeth, Shem and Arabin'ya. There were
other less populated lands and places; Uropa in the west, Heleste in the
north, and the two great lands of the far west, called North and South
Guatama.

Now, at the juncture of the borders of the three greatest countries, lay
a mighty city, named Oas. It was the capital city of the Arabin'yan
nation called Par'si'ya.

Its Temple of Skulls was the greatest known to any traveler, but the
temples built to the god, Mazda, and his son, Ihua'Mazda, were empty and
unadorned--the people had forgotten God.

So-qi, King of Oas, sent out his armies throughout Jaffeth (China),
conquering and slaying, bringing back ever more skulls for the Golgotha
temples, more gold and more slaves for the enriching of King So-qi. His
harem was the greatest of buildings of the mighty city, and his wives
beyond man's ability to count.

       *       *       *       *       *

Too-che was one of the finest ornaments of the city of Oas. Too-che was
slim, her breasts were two mounds of magic, her eyes were pools of
mystic green depths, her legs were subtle, sinuous beauty.

But Too-che was a virgin, and in all that city of a million sinful
souls, she alone held aloof from the sins of the flesh.

[Illustration: When the soldiers of the city Oas saw that their King had
not the backbone to enforce his own decree when it hurt himself, they
one and all took up stones, and they stoned King So-qi to death.]

Which was very strange, for Too-che became big with child, though she
had not been with a man!

Which came to the ears of So-qi, upon his great black throne supported
on a tower of human skulls, in his palace of Gran, across from the great
Golgotha, which was built entirely of human skulls--the skulls of people
conquered by the armies of Par'si'ya, over which the city of Oas
reigned.

So-qi shook his big belly under the lion's skin, let slip his serpent
skin headdress, and let the battle axe that was his symbol of office
drop from his hand as he shook with mirth at the great and thumping lie
told by Too-che.

"I suppose her child was fathered by Mazda, peering into her womb with
his All-light," laughed So-qi, for in Oas it was not the fashion to
worship the God Mazda anymore. The great skull temples had their priests
and their sacrifices, but no more did people bow down in the temples of
Mazda, or have anything but ridicule for those few who did still worship
in the old way.

His serpent skin headdress and battle axe scepter, too, were relics from
the past. Just as the belief in Mazda. But more _potent_ relics, by far.
With them he was the Sun King, Lord of Battles, Master of Life and
Death, Creator of the Universe, Lord of Souls, Maker of the Law, etc.
Without them he was just old So-qi, getting fatter and more stupid every
day.

"Bring this harlot before me, to see if she can produce a miracle to
prove her child is not a common one. If she cannot, she will be stoned
to death at once, do you hear! I have no time to be bothered with the
lies of every sinning woman who seeks to hide her bastard's origin."

       *       *       *       *       *

Asha, the philosopher who had told his king of the birth of the child,
nodded his head sadly and left the presence. Why did kings have to get
so blown up as to be inhuman? He sympathized with the girl and her
predicament. If it had been his to say, he would have had the child
proclaimed divine a thousand times in preference to shedding one drop of
her blood. But then, he had seen Too-che sauntering home from the well,
with her water jar on her head, and her hips the focal point of all eyes
in the street. Asha smiled, and took his grey-headed, bent, unnoticed
figure down the back streets to the house of Too-che.

As he went, he pondered gloomily on the fate of this great city under
the heartless and ignorant So-qi. Surely something dreadful would happen
to Par'si'ya, lying as it did at the juncture of the lands of the three
mightiest kingdoms of the world. Jaffeth (China), Shem (Africa) and
Arabin'ya. Any one of them could crush them, did they get themselves
organized for it. And So-qi preyed upon them all ruthlessly, knowing
they could never stop warring interiorly long enough to attack him.

Old Asha thought of the future, which his star studies were supposed to
give him power to foretell, and of the great flood that was to come and
wipe out all the old boundaries and nations. He thought of the peculiar
grey-blue sky, which the Wise men had taught him bore up within its
whirling self vast oceans of water, waiting for the time to drop the
whirling water-shell upon them all. He thought of Uropa, the great land
in the west, and all her peoples. He thought of Heleste, that mighty and
gracious land in the North, and all her beautiful and strong and
courageous people. And he thought of the two great lands of the far
west, called North and South Guatama. And he was sad, for they were all
to die in the great deluge to come! But the time was not yet come.

Sadly he pushed among the stalwart copper-colored men of Oas, gazing a
little wistfully at the women's proud breasts and the strong young thews
of their lovers beside them. If only he were young again.... Asha
sighed, and knocked upon the low, rude door of the house of Too-che.

       *       *       *       *       *

The smile of the beautiful Too-che made him welcome, very proud to have
the wise man from the court inquire after her child.

"He worries me, wise Asha," said Too-che, moving slim and supple as a
panther to sit protectively beside the little cradle of bent ash bows
lashed together with strips of hide. "He talks like a man grown, and him
not yet weaned!"

"Hmmm." Old Asha looked down upon the over-large infant solemnly looking
back at him. He nearly fainted when the tiny red lips opened, and a
strange, small voice, cultured and adult, said:

"I am not the child you see, but your God, Mazda, speaking through the
child's lips!"

Asha pondered for only a moment, then turned in anger upon the woman,
Too-che.

"I pitied you, harlot, because the King has ordered your death if you
did not produce a miracle. But I did not think you would hide a man
behind the child's cradle to befool me, old Asha! What do you take me
for?"

Too-che broke into tears, bending her graceful neck and sobbing to hear
that the king had decreed death for her. But the peculiar voice came
again from the child's mouth.

"Take me in your arms, Asha."

Feeling very foolish, but unable to refuse for some mysterious reason,
Asha bent and picked up the child.

"O man, temper thy judgment with patience and wisdom."

Asha knew now that it was the child's voice truly, and at last asked:

"Why do you come in such a weak and helpless guise, O Lord Mazda? I had
hoped to see a God appear in stronger shape."

"Nevertheless, through this helpless child in your arms, this city shall
be overthrown, yourself made King of Kings, and I shall deliver all the
slaves and strike off all the bonds from the old time. Mazda will have
this city for his own, or it will be destroyed forever."

Now Asha was filled with wonder, and asked the babe of many abstruse
things, receiving answers beyond his understanding. So, at last
convinced, he put the babe down, turned to Too-che.

"Listen, maiden who in my eyes is without fault. I cannot go to my King
and tell him one word of what this child has revealed, for I would only
die with both of you as a liar and worse. You must take this child and
hide him away from the eyes and the ears of the men of this city. You in
your innocence do not understand the ways of kings and courts and
warriors and such things. Flee, for if you are here tomorrow, you will
die and your child will die with you."

Asha took himself out, then, and made his way sadly along the crowded
streets to his home. There he packed up a few belongings and left to go
into hiding himself; for he knew better than to try to tell So-qi any
such cock-and-bull story. Yet if he went at all to So-qi, he had to tell
something, and either way someone would be doomed, if not himself.

Too-che took up the babe and fled through the city by night to the home
of one Chojon, a maker of songs. This man had long made love to her with
his poetry and his voice from afar, and she knew he would hide her and
protect her. Her heart was in her throat, because she wondered if he
would believe in her virtue now that she had a child, or in her love for
him when he felt that another had given her child when he had been
denied the privilege.

       *       *       *       *       *

Slender and dark-eyed and handsome he stood in his doorway, looking upon
this girl who had come to him with her babe in her arms. A babe by
another! His heart was hurt, tears came unbidden to his eyes as he
turned and allowed her to enter. For a long time he could not speak, the
shame and the hurt and pride and the strange new sudden emotions in him
not suffering him to talk. At last he said:

"Too-che, I love you and I cannot deny you anything. If you put this
shame upon me, I will bear it as my own. Consider this your home, and me
as your slave. If I did not love you, I would not bear this, but I do."

Too-che saw the conflicting emotions upon his face, how his dark red
lips struggled to remain firm, how his thin, wide nostrils trembled, how
his eyes were wet with unshed tears, how his shoulders bowed as with a
sudden burden.

"Oh my dear Chojon, I have no other friend to whom I can turn--and that
I thought of you, who has only loved me from afar with your eyes and
your soft, sad songs, should tell you that I bring you no shame or
insult. This is not the child of another man, for I have been with no
man, ever. This is a child of the legends, a son of a God in the skies,
our God, Mazda. He is a miracle, as hard for me to believe as for you,
but it is true."

Too-che could not stand the unbelieving eyes of Chojon, who thought that
Too-che lied, and looked down at the sleeping babe in her arms, saying
with a pitiful voice ...

"Please, little stranger who talks like a wise man, wake and tell my
Chojon that you are not the son of a man, but the son of one whom no
maid could resist or run away from, ever. Tell him, little one!"

And Mazda heard Too-che imploring speech of her child and made it to
speak with his own voice.

"Chojon, what my mother says is true. I am the child of the All-light,
endowed with powers beyond ordinary men to accomplish my Lord's
mysterious purposes here on earth. Do not hold my mother the less for my
birth."

Chojon sank slowly to his knees, realization stealing over him as he
heard the adult words issue from the suckling babe's mouth. The unshed
tears began to pour from his eyes in relief, for he knew now that
Too-che might not love him yet as she would when she learned love, but
at least she had given herself to no other mortal man. And the miracle
of the Child of a God there before him lighted up his face as his inward
soul, so that he took up his lute and lifted his rich, deep voice in a
joyous song--the Song of Zarathustra. For the legend of their people had
the name of the babe-to-come as Zarathustra, and Chojon knew that its
name was thus, now.

       *       *       *       *       *

Too-che dwelt for some time in the house of Chojon, and the songs of
Chojon were circulated among all the singers of the city, so that
everyone knew he sheltered the Child of the God, Mazda, in his home.

The songs of Chojon came at last to the King's ears, and as one of the
songs proclaimed Zarathustra as stronger in one finger than all the
power of So-qi, he let out a great oath and set his soldiers to find
Too-che and the babe. But Chojon heard of the search. He took Too-che
and her babe out of the gates in the night and went off into the forest
and joined a band of Listians, who are raisers of goats, and a fine,
strong people.

Now when the search failed to find the babe, So-qi proclaimed that every
male child of the City Oas would be slain if the child was not found.
And within a week So-qi was sorry, because his own wife gave birth to a
little son whose life was already forfeited by royal decree unless
Too-che and her child were found. And they were not to be found in all
Par'si'ya.

Asha, the old philosopher, who had been in hiding all this time, now
came out of his hole and went to the King to give him counsel.

As Asha progressed through the city, mothers with male children in their
arms on all sides were making their way through the streets to the gates
to flee the city. For no decree of a King of Oas may be repealed, but is
law forevermore.

The King sat upon his throne of skulls, gnawing his nails off his
fingers, for he had either to slay his own son or say that a law once
made by a king could be un-made.

If he allowed the law to be thus abused even by himself, such was the
nature of his people they would have no respect for him, and might even
kill him for a fool who could not enforce his own decrees when they hurt
him a little.

So it was that when Asha presented himself before the King, So-qi asked:

"What shall I do, O Asha? My son has smiled in my face!"

Asha was prepared for this, and answered:

"Thou shalt send me and thy son and thy daughter's son and every male
infant to the slaughter pens, and have us all beheaded and cast into
the fire! Otherwise it will come true as the infant Zarathustra
prophesied: his hand will smite Oas city, and it will fall as a heap of
straw."

So the king appointed a day for the slaughter, and ninety thousand male
infants were adjudged to death.

Chojon, from the safety of the forest, made a scornful song about the
tyrant of Oas who went to war against babes, and it was sung everywhere
in the city, and the king could do nothing about it, for it was cleverly
worded, seeming to approve, though in satire only.

       *       *       *       *       *

When the day for the slaughter arrived, there were but a thousand
appeared with their babes out of the ninety thousand adjudged to
death--all the rest having fled to the forest as had Chojon.

The King saw an excuse in this to get out of killing his own son, and
stood pondering how to escape his own decree. His wife, Betraj, came
before him, holding out her son, saying:

"Here, oh King, take thou thy flesh and blood and prove the inexorable
justice of the King's decrees."

But the King said:

"Let the officers go and collect all the others who have fled beyond the
walls, and until all are gathered here before me, no matter how long it
takes, let the decree be suspended."

Now the God, Mazda, moved the soldiers' minds to see that their King had
not the backbone to enforce his own decree when it hurt himself and
they, one and all, took up stones and stoned the King to death.

Asha, standing stripped for the slaughter, was made King by the clamor
of the men who stoned So-qi to death.

A great voice came out of the sky and announced to the people that God
had given them a new and righteous ruler. Asha bowed his head and
accepted the task put upon him. The people gave thanks to Mazda, the
God, and Asha proclaimed him to all the city.

Off in the forest, Too-che lifted her eyes to those of Chojon and
thanked him for saving her son. And Chojon touched her with his
fingertips, and kissed her on her lips, and the child crowed lustily to
see their love.

These two walked through the Forest of the Goats, Too-che bringing
beauty like a spring breeze with her, and Chojon singing and touching
his harp with magic fingers, so that joy and love walked before them,
announcing them to the Listians--the people of the forest.

When Zarathustra, the infant child the woman bore in her arms, lifted up
his piping voice and spoke to these rude wild people, their worship
sprang into life--for surely these were Gods come to them. And thus, all
the people gave up the worship of murder and became Zarathustrians.


THE END




Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from _Amazing Stories_ April 1949. Extensive
    research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S. copyright on
    this publication was renewed. Minor spelling and typographical
    errors have been corrected without note.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Sun King, by Gaston Derreaux

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SUN KING ***

***** This file should be named 24973.txt or 24973.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/4/9/7/24973/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
