The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Penal Cluster, by 
Ivar Jorgensen (AKA Randall Garrett)

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Penal Cluster

Author: Ivar Jorgensen (AKA Randall Garrett)

Release Date: April 12, 2008 [EBook #25061]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PENAL CLUSTER ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









[Illustration: Their combined thought-force hit him like a
thunderbolt.]


             THE
            PENAL
           CLUSTER

      By IVAR JORGENSEN


 _Tomorrow's technocracy will
 produce more and more things
 for better living. It will
 produce other things, also;
 among them, criminals too
 despicable to live on this
 earth. Too abominable to
 breathe our free air._


The clipped British voice said, in David Houston's ear, _I'm quite sure
he's one. He's cashing a check for a thousand pounds. Keep him under
surveillance._

Houston didn't look up immediately. He simply stood there in the lobby
of the big London bank, filling out a deposit slip at one of the long,
high desks. When he had finished, he picked up the slip and headed
towards the teller's cage.

Ahead of him, standing at the window, was a tall, impeccably dressed,
aristocratic-looking man with graying hair.

"The man in the tweeds?" Houston whispered. His voice was so low that it
was inaudible a foot away, and his lips scarcely moved. But the
sensitive microphone in his collar picked up the voice and relayed it to
the man behind the teller's wicket.

_That's him_, said the tiny speaker hidden in Houston's ear. _The
fine-looking chap in the tweeds and bowler._

"Got him," whispered Houston.

       *       *       *       *       *

He didn't go anywhere near the man in the bowler and tweeds; instead, he
went to a window several feet away.

"Deposit," he said, handing the slip to the man on the other side of the
partition. While the teller went through the motions of putting the
deposit through the robot accounting machine, David Houston kept his
ears open.

"How did you want the thousand, sir?" asked the teller in the next
wicket.

"Ten pound notes, if you please," said the graying man. "I think a
hundred notes will go into my brief case easily enough." He chuckled, as
though he'd made a clever witticism.

"Yes, sir," said the clerk, smiling.

Houston whispered into his microphone again. "Who is the guy?"

On the other side of the partition, George Meredith, a small,
unimposing-looking man, sat at a desk marked: MR. MEREDITH--ACCOUNTING
DEPT. He looked as though he were paying no attention whatever to
anything going on at the various windows, but he, too, had a microphone
at his throat and a hidden pickup in his ear.

At Houston's question, he whispered: "That's Sir Lewis Huntley. The
check's good, of course. Poor fellow."

"Yeah," whispered Houston, "if he is what we think he is."

"I'm fairly certain," Meredith replied. "Sir Lewis isn't the type of
fellow to draw that much in cash. At the present rate of exchange,
that's worth three thousand seven hundred and fifty dollars American.
Sir Lewis might carry a hundred pounds as pocket-money, but never a
thousand."

Houston and Meredith were a good thirty feet from each other, and
neither looked at the other. Unless a bystander had equipment to tune in
on the special scrambled wavelength they were using, that bystander
would never know they were holding a conversation.

"... nine-fifty, nine-sixty, nine-seventy, nine-eighty, nine-ninety, a
thousand pounds," said the clerk who was taking care of Sir Lewis's
check. "Would you count that to make sure, sir?"

"Certainly. Ten, twenty, thirty, ..."

While the baronet was double-checking the amount, David Houston glanced
at him. Sir Lewis looked perfectly calm and unhurried, as though he were
doing something perfectly legal--which, in a way, he was. And, in
another way, he most definitely was not, if George Meredith's suspicions
were correct.

"Your receipt, sir." It was the teller at Houston's own window.

Houston took the receipt, thanked the teller, and walked toward the
broad front doors of the bank.

"George," he whispered into the throat mike, "has Sir Lewis noticed me?"

"Hasn't so much as looked at you," Meredith answered. "Good hunting."

"Thanks."

       *       *       *       *       *

As Houston stepped outside the bank, he casually dropped one hand into a
coat pocket and turned a small knob on his radio control box. "Houston
to HQ," he whispered.

"London HQ; what is it, Houston?" asked the earpiece.

"Leadenhall Street Post. Meredith thinks he's spotted one. Sir Lewis
Huntley."

"Righto. We've got men in that part of the city now. We'll have a
network posted within five minutes. Can you hold onto him that long?"

Houston looked around. Leadenhall Street was full of people, and the
visibility was low. "I'll have to tail him pretty closely," Houston
said. "Your damned English fogs don't give a man much chance to see
anything."

There was a chuckle from the earphone. "Cheer up, Yank; you should have
seen it back before 1968. When atomic power replaced coal and oil, our
fogs became a devil of a lot cleaner."

The voice was quite clear; at the London headquarters of the UN
Psychodeviant Police, there was no need to wear a throat mike, which had
a tendency to make the voice sound muffled in spite of the Statistical
Information-Bit Samplers which were supposed to clarify the speech
coming through them.

"What do you know about 1968?" Houston asked sardonically. "Your mother
was still pushing you around in a baby-carriage then."

"In a pram," corrected the Headquarters operator. "That is true, but my
dear Aunt Jennifer told me all about it. She was--"

"The hell with your Aunt Jennifer," Houston interrupted suddenly. "Here
comes Sir Lewis. Get me cover--fast!"

"Right. Keep us posted."

Sir Lewis Huntley stepped out of the broad door of the bank and turned
left. He took a couple of steps and stopped. He didn't look around; he
simply took a cigarette out of a silver case, put it in his mouth, and
lit it. The glow of the lighter shone yellowly on the brass plate near
the door which said: _An Affiliate of Westminster Bank, Ltd._

Sir Lewis snapped the light out, drew on the cigarette, and strode on
down the street, swinging a blue plastex brief case which contained a
thousand pounds in United Nations Bank of England notes.

Houston decided the baronet had not been looking for a tail; he wished
he could probe the man's mind to make sure, but he knew that would be
fatal. He'd have to play the game and hope for the best.

"He's heading east," Houston whispered. "Doesn't look as if he's going
to get a cab."

"Check," said the earphone.

Sir Lewis seemed in no great hurry, but he walked briskly, as though he
had a definite destination in mind.

After a little way, he crossed to the south side of Leadenhall Street
and kept going east. Houston stayed far enough behind to be above
suspicion, but not so far that he ran a chance of losing his man.

"He's turning south on Fenchurch," Houston said a little later. "I
wonder where he's going."

"Keep after him," said Headquarters. "Our net men haven't spotted either
of you yet. They can hardly see across the street in this damned fog."

Houston kept going.

"What the hell?" he whispered a few minutes later. "He's still following
Fenchurch Street! He's doubling back!"

Leadenhall Street, the banking center of the City of London, runs almost
due east-and-west; Fenchurch Street makes a forty-five degree angle with
it at the western end, running southwest for a bit and then curving
toward the west, toward Lombard.

"Houston," said HQ, "touch your left ear."

Houston obediently reached up and scratched his left ear.

"Okay," said HQ. "Bogart's spotted you, but he hasn't spotted Sir Lewis.
Bogart's across the street."

"He can't miss Sir Lewis," whispered Houston. "Conservatively
dressed--matching coat and trousers of orange nylon tweed--royal blue
half-brim bowler--carrying a blue brief case."

There was a pause, then: "Yeah. Bogart's spotted him, and so has
MacGruder. Mac's on your side, a few yards ahead."

"Check. How about the rest of the net?"

"Coming, coming. Be patient, old man."

"I _am_ patient," growled Houston. _I have to be_, he thought to
himself, _otherwise I'd never stay alive_.

"We've got him bracketed now," HQ said. "If we lose him now, he's a
magician."

Sir Lewis walked on, seemingly oblivious to the group of men who had
surrounded him. He came to the end of Fenchurch Street and looked to his
left, towards London Bridge. Then he glanced to his right.

"I think he's looking for a cab," Houston whispered.

"That's what MacGruder says," came the reply. "We've got Arthmore in a
cab behind you; he'll pick you up. MacGruder will get another cab, and
we have a private car for Bogart."

Sir Lewis flagged a cab, climbed in, and gave an address to the driver.
Houston didn't hear it, but MacGruder, a heavy-set, short, balding man,
was standing near enough to get the instructions Sir Lewis had given to
the driver.

       *       *       *       *       *

A cab pulled up to the curb near Houston, and he got in.

Arthmore, the driver, was a thin, tall, hawknosed individual who could
have played Sherlock Holmes on TV. Once he got into character for a
part, he never got out of it unless absolutely necessary. Right now, he
was a Cockney cab-driver, and he would play the part to the hilt.

"Where to, guv'nor?" he asked innocently.

"Buckingham Palace," said Houston. "I've got a poker appointment with
Prince Charles."

"Blimey, guv'nor," said Arthmore. "You _are_ movin' in 'igh circles!
'Ow's 'Er Majesty these days?"

The turboelectric motor hummed, and the cab shot off into traffic.
"According to the report I get on the blinkin' wireless," he continued,
"a chap named MacGruder claims that the eminent Sir Lewis 'Untley is
'eaded for Number 37 Upper Berkeley Mews."

"One of these days," said Houston, "all those _H_'s you drop is going to
bounce back and hit you in the face."

"Beg pardon, Mr. Yewston?" Arthmore asked blankly.

Houston grinned. "Nothing, cabbie; it's just that you remind me of a
cultured, intelligent fellow named Jack Arthmore. The only difference is
that Jack speaks the Queen's English."

"Crikey!" said Arthmore. "Wot a coincidence!" He paused, then: "The
Queen's English, you say? She _'as_ to be, don't she?"

"Shut up," said Houston conversationally. "And give me a cigarette," he
added.

"There's a package of Players in my shirt pocket," Arthmore said,
keeping his hands on the wheel.

       *       *       *       *       *

Houston fished out a cigarette, lit it, and returned the pack.

Apropos of nothing, Arthmore said: "Reminds me of the time I was workin'
for a printer, see? We 'ad to print up a bunch of 'andbills advertisin'
a church charity bazaar. Down at the bottom was supposed to be printed
'Under the auspices of St. Bede's-on-Thames.' So I--"

He went on with a long, rambling tale about making a mistake in printing
the handbill. Houston paid little attention. He smoked in silence,
keeping his eyes on the red glow of the taillight ahead of them.

Neither man mentioned the approaching climax of the chase. Even hardened
veterans of the Psychodeviant Police don't look forward to the
possibility of having their minds taken over, controlled by some outside
force.

It had never happened to Houston, but he knew that Arthmore had been
through the experience once. It evidently wasn't pleasant.

"--and the boss was 'oppin' mad," Arthmore was saying, "but, crikey, 'ow
was I to know that _auspice_ was spelled A-U-S-P-I-C-E?"

Houston grinned. "Yeah, sure. How're we doing with Sir Lewis?"

"Seems to be headed in the right direction," Arthmore said, suddenly
dropping the Cockney accent. "This is the route I'd take if I were
headed for Upper Berkeley Mews. He probably hasn't told the driver to
change addresses--maybe he won't."

"The victims never do," Houston said. "He probably is actually headed
toward Number 37 Upper Berkeley Mews."

"Yeah. Nobody's perfect," said Arthmore.

       *       *       *       *       *

Forty-five minutes of steady progress through the streets of Greater
London brought Sir Lewis Huntley to Upper Berkeley and to the short
dead-end street which constituted the Mews. By the time the dapper
baronet stepped out of the machine and paid his driver, the whole area
was surrounded by and filled with the well-armed, silent, and careful
agents of the Psychodeviant Police.

Number 37 was an old concrete-and-steel structure of the George VI
period, faced with a veneer of red brick. It had obviously been
remodeled at least once to make the façade more modern and more
fashionable; the red-violet anodized aluminum was relatively fresh and
unstained. It wouldn't have taken vast wealth to rent a flat in the
building, but neither would an average income have been quite enough.

Houston looked out of the window of Arthmore's cab and glanced at the
tiers of windows in the building. Presumably, the man they were looking
for was up there--somewhere.

_So you occupy a station in the upper middle-class_, thought Houston. It
checked. Every bit of evidence that came his way seemed to check
perfectly and fit neatly into the hypothesis which he had formed. Soon
it would be time to test that theory--but the time had not yet come.

"Stand by and wait for orders, Houston," said the speaker in Houston's
ear. "We've got men inside the building."

Sir Lewis Huntley opened the sparkling, translucent door of Number 37
Upper Berkeley Mews and went inside.

Arthmore pulled the cab over to the curb a few yards from the entrance
and the two men waited in silence. All around them were other men, some
in private cars, some walking slowly along the street. All of them were
part of the net that had gathered to catch one man.

_Poor fish_, Houston thought wryly.

There was no noise, no excitement. Five minutes after Sir Lewis had
entered the front door, it opened again. A man whom Houston had never
seen before stepped out and gestured with one hand. At the same time,
Houston's speaker said: "They've got him. Hit him with a stun gun when
he tried to get out through the fire exit."

An ambulance which had been waiting at the entrance of the Mews pulled
up in front of Number 37, and a minute or so later a little clot of men
came out bearing a stretcher, which was loaded into the ambulance.
Immediately after them came another man who had a firm, but polite grip
on the arm of Sir Lewis Huntley.

Houston sighed and leaned back in his seat. That was that. It was all
over. Simple. Nothing to it.

Another Controller had been apprehended by the Psychodeviant Police.
Another deviant, already tried and found guilty, was ready to be exiled
from Earth and imprisoned on one of the Penal Asteroids. All in the
day's work.

_There's just one thing I'd like to know_, Houston thought blackly.
_What in the hell's going on?_

       *       *       *       *       *

In his hotel room near Piccadilly Circus, several hours later, David
Houston sat alone, drink in hand, and put that same question to himself
again.

"What's going on?"

On the face of it, it was simple. On the face of it, the answer was
right in front of him, printed in black and white on the front page of
the evening _Times_.

Houston lifted the paper off the bed and looked at it. The banner line
said: _Controller Captured in Lambeth!_

Beneath that, in smaller type, the headline added: Robert Harris Accused
of Taking Control of Barrister Sir Lewis Huntley.

The column itself told the whole story. Mr. Robert Harris, of No. 37
Upper Berkeley Mews, had, by means of mental control, taken over the
mind of Sir Lewis and compelled him to draw one thousand pounds out of
his bank. While Sir Lewis was returning to Harris with the money, the
United Nations Psychodeviant Police had laid a trap. Sir Lewis, upon
recovering his senses when Harris was rendered unconscious by a stun
gun, had given evidence to the PD Police and to officials at New
Scotland Yard.

Houston looked at the full-color photo of Harris that was printed
alongside the column. Nice-looking chap; late twenties or early
thirties, Houston guessed. Blond-red hair, blue eyes. All-in-all, a
very pleasant, but ordinary sort of man.

There had been evidence that a Controller had been at work in London for
some weeks now. Twelve days before, several men, following an impulse,
had mailed twenty pounds to a "Richard Hempstead," General Delivery,
Waterloo Station. By the time the matter had come to the authorities'
attention, the envelopes had been called for and the Controller had
escaped.

Robert Harris was not the first Controller to be captured, nor, Houston
knew, would he be the last. The first one had shown up more than sixteen
years before, in Dallas, Texas, USA.

Houston grinned as he thought of it. Projective telepathy had only been
a crackpot's idea back then. In spite of the work of many intelligent,
sane men, who had shown that mental powers above and beyond the ordinary
did exist, the average man simply laughed off such nonsense. It was
mysticism; it was magic; it was foolish superstition. It was anything
but true.

But ever since "Blackjack" Donnely had practically taken control of the
whole city of Dallas, the average man had changed his mind. It was still
mysterious; it was still magic; but now the weird machinations of the
supernormal mind were something to be feared.

In the sixteen years that had ensued since the discovery of the abnormal
mental powers of "Blackjack" Donnely, rumors had spread all over the
world. There were supposed to be men who could levitate--fly through the
air at will. Others could walk through walls, and still others could
make themselves invisible. The horrible monsters that were supposed to
be walking the Earth were legion.

       *       *       *       *       *

Actually, only one type of supernormal psychodeviant had been found--the
telepath, the mindreader who could probe into the mental processes of
others. Worse than that, the telepath could project his own thoughts
into the mind of another, so that the victim supposed that the thoughts
were his own. Actually, it was a high-powered form of hypnotism; the
victim could be made to do anything the projective telepath wanted him
to.

"Blackjack" Donnely had made that clear in his trial in Texas.

Donnely had been a big man--big physically, and important in city
politics. He had also been as arrogant as the Devil himself.

It was the arrogance that had finally tripped up Donnely. He had thought
himself impregnable. Haled into court on charges of misappropriation of
public funds, he had just sat and smirked while several witnesses for
the State admitted that they had aided Donnely, but they claimed he had
"hypnotized" them. Donnely didn't try to interfere with the
evidence--that's where he made his mistake. And that's where his
arrogance tripped him up.

       *       *       *       *       *

If he'd used telepathic projection to influence the State Attorney or
the witnesses or the judge or the Grand Jury _before_ the trial, he
might never have been discovered as the first of the Controllers. But
that wasn't Donnely's style.

"None of this namby-pamby stuff," he had once been quoted as saying; "if
you got enemies, don't tease 'em--show 'em who's running things.
Blackjack 'em, if you have to."

And that's exactly what "Blackjack" Donnely had done. The trial was a
farce from beginning to end; each witness gave his evidence from the
stand, and then Donnely took control of their minds and made them refute
every bit of it, publicly and tearfully apologizing to the "wonderful
Mr. Donnely" for saying such unkind things about him.

The judge and the jury knew something funny was going on, but they had
no evidence, one way or another. The case, even at that point, might
have ended with an acquittal or a hung jury, but Donnely wasn't through
using his blackjack.

He took over the mind of the foreman of the jury. The foreman claimed
later that the jury had decided that they could reach no decision. Other
jurors claimed that they had decided Donnely was guilty, but that was
probably an _ex post facto_ switch. It didn't matter, anyway; when the
foreman came out, he pronounced Donnely innocent. That should have ended
it.

The other jurors began to protest, but by that time, Donnely had gained
control of the judge's mind. Rapidly, the judge silenced the jurors,
declared Donnely to be free, and then publicly apologized for ever
daring to doubt Mr. Donnely.

The State's Attorney was equally verbose in his apology; he was almost
in tears because of his "deep contrition at having cast aspersions on
the spotless character of so great a man."

Donnely was released.

The next evening, "Blackjack" Donnely was shot down at the front door of
his own home. There were fifteen bullets in his body; three from a .32,
five from a .38, and seven from a .45.

The police investigation was far from thorough; any evidence that may
have turned up somehow got lost. It was labelled as "homicide committed
by person or persons unknown," and it stayed that way.

       *       *       *       *       *

Donnely was only the first. In the next two years, four more showed up.
Everyone of them, in one way or another, had attempted to gain power or
money by mental projection. Everyone of them was a twisted megalomaniac.

Houston looked again at Harris's picture on the front page of the
_Times_. Here was one Controller who neither looked nor acted like a
megalomaniac. That wouldn't make much difference to the PD Police; as
far as the officials were concerned, the ability to project
telepathically and the taint of delusions of grandeur went hand in hand.
Controllers were power-mad and criminal by definition.

Fear still ruled the emotional reactions against Controllers, in spite
of the protection of the Psychodeviant Police.

But David Houston knew damned good and well that all telepaths were not
necessarily insane.

He should know. He was a Controller, himself.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Brrrring!_

David Houston tossed the paper on the bed and walked over to the phone.
He cut in the circuit, and waited for the phone's TV screen to show the
face of his caller. But the screen remained blank.

"Who is it?" Houston asked.

"Is this CHAring Cross 7-8161?" It was a woman's voice, soft and
well-modulated.

"No, this is CHElsea 7-8161," Houston said. "You must have dialed C-H-E
instead of C-H-A."

"Oh. I'm very sorry. Excuse me." There was a click, and she hung up.

Houston walked back over to the bed and picked up his paper. He looked
at it, but he didn't read it. It no longer interested him.

So Dorrine was finally in London, eh? He'd recognized her voice
instantly; even years of training couldn't smother the midwestern
American of Chicago completely beneath the precise British of the
well-educated English girl.

The signal had been agreed upon, just in case his phone was tapped. Even
the Psychodeviant Police could be suspected of harboring a
Controller--although Houston didn't think it too likely. Nevertheless,
he wasn't one to take too many chances.

He glanced at his watch. He had an hour yet. He'd wait five minutes
before he phoned headquarters.

       *       *       *       *       *

He sat down in his chair again and forced himself to relax, smoke a
cigarette, and read the paper--the sports section. Perusing the records
of the season's cricket matches kept his mind off that picture on the
front page. At least, he hoped they would. Let's see, now--Benton was
being rated as the finest googly bowler on the Staffordshire Club ...

Everything went fine until he came across a reference to a John Harris,
a top-flight batsman for Hambledon; that reminded him of Robert Harris.
Houston threw down the paper in disgust and walked over to the phone.

The number was TROwbridge 5-4321, but no one ever bothered to remember
it. Simply dial 8-7-6-5-4-3-2-1, and every time a voice at the other end
would answer--

"Hamilton speaking."

"Houston here; will I be needed in the next hour or so?"

"Mmmm. Just a second; I'll check the roster. No; your evidence won't be
needed personally. You've filed an affidavit. No, I don't think--wait a
minute! Yes, there's a return here for you; reservation on the six A.M.
jet to New York. Your job here is done, Houston, so you can take the
rest of the evening off and relax. Going anywhere in particular?"

"I thought I'd get a bite to eat and take in a movie, maybe, but if I'm
due out at six, I'll forego the cinematic diversion. When's the trial?"

"It's scheduled for eleven-thirty this evening. Going to come?"

Houston shook his head. "Not if I'm not needed to give evidence. Those
Controllers always give me the creeps."

"They do everybody," said Hamilton. "Well, you caught him; there's no
need for you to stick around for the windup. Have a good time."

"Thanks," said Houston shortly, and hung up.

_The windup_, Houston thought. _Sure. That's all it will be. A
Controller's trial is a farce. Knock him out with a stun gun and then
pump him full of comatol. How can he defend himself if he's unconscious
all through the trial?_

Houston knew what the average man's answer to that would be: "If a
Controller were allowed to remain conscious, he'd take over the judge's
mind and get himself freed."

Houston said an obscene word under his breath, jammed his hat on his
head, put on his coat, and left his apartment.

       *       *       *       *       *

With the coming of darkness, the heavy fog had become still denser. The
yellow beams of the sodium vapor lamps were simply golden spots hanging
in an all-enveloping blackness. Walking the street was a process of
moving from one little golden island of light to another, crossing seas
of blankness between. The monochromatic yellow shone on the human faces
that passed beneath the lamps, robbing them of all color, giving them a
dead, grayish appearance beneath the yellow itself.

David Houston walked purposefully along the pavement, his hand jammed
deep in his overcoat pockets. One hand held the control box for the
little earpiece he wore. He kept moving the band selector, listening for
any sign that the Psychodeviant Police were suspicious of a Controller
in their midst.

If they were following him, of course, they would use a different
scrambler circuit than the one which was plugged into his own unit, but
he would be able to hear the gabble of voices, even if he couldn't
understand what they were saying.

So far, there hadn't been a sound; if he was being followed, his tailers
weren't using the personal intercom units.

He didn't try to elude anyone who might be following. That, in itself,
would be a giveaway. Let them watch, if they _were_ watching. They
wouldn't see anything but a man going to get himself a bit of dinner.

The _Charles II Inn_, on Regent Street, near Piccadilly Circus, was a
haven of brightness in an otherwise Stygian London. It was one of those
"old-fashioned" places--Restoration style of decoration, carried out in
modern plastics. The oak panelling looked authentic enough, but it was
just a little too glossy to be real.

Houston pushed open the door, stepped inside, removed his hat and coat
and shook the dampness from them. As he handed them to the checker, he
looked casually around. Dorrine was nowhere in sight, but he hadn't
expected her to be. There would be no point in their meeting physically;
it might even be downright dangerous.

The headwaiter, clad in the long waistcoat and full trunk-hose of the
late Seventeenth Century, bowed punctiliously.

"You're alone, sir?"

"Alone, yes," Houston said. "I'll just be wanting a light supper and a
drink or two."

"This way, sir."

Houston followed the man to a small table in the rear of the huge dining
room. It was set for two, but the other place was quickly cleared away.
Houston ordered an Irish-and-soda from a waiter who was only slightly
less elaborately dressed than the headwaiter, and then settled himself
down to wait. If he knew Dorrine, she would be on time to the minute.

She came while the waiter was setting the drink on Houston's table. She
stepped in through the door, her unmistakable hair glowing a rich red in
the illumination of the pseudo-candlelight.

She didn't bother to look around; she knew he would be there.

After a single glance, Houston averted his eyes from her and looked back
at his drink.

And in that same instant, their minds touched.

_Dave, darling! I knew you'd be early!_

_Dorrine!_

And then their minds meshed for an instant.

_I_--_(we)_--_you_--LOVE--_you_--(each other)--me!--us!

       *       *       *       *       *

Houston looked complacently at his drink while the headwaiter led
Dorrine to a table on the far side of the room. She sat down gracefully,
smiled at the waiter, and ordered a cocktail. Then she took a magazine
from her handbag and began--presumably--to read.

Her thought came: _Who is this Richard Harris? He's not one of our
Group._

Houston sipped at his drink. _No. An unknown, like the others. I wonder
if he's even a telepath._

_What?_ Her thought carried astonishment. _Why, Dave--he'd_ have _to be!
How else could he have controlled this Sir Lewis--whatsisname--Huntley?_

_Well--I've got a funny idea_, Houston replied. _Look at it this way: So
far as we know, there are two Groups of telepaths. There's our own
Group. All we want is to be left alone. We don't read a Normal's mind
unless we have to, and we don't try to control one unless our lives are
threatened. We stay under cover, out of everyone's way._

_Then there are the megalomaniacs. They try, presumably, to gain wealth
and power by controlling Normals. And they get caught with monotonous
regularity. Right?_

The girl caught an odd note in that thought. _What do you mean,
"monotonous regularity"?_ she asked.

_I mean_, Houston thought savagely, _why is it they're all so bloody
stupid? Look at this Harris guy; he is supposed to have taken over Sir
Lewis's mind in order to get a thousand pounds. So what did he have Sir
Lewis do? Parade all around the city to pick up a PD Police net, and
then give his address to a cabman in a loud voice and lead the whole
net right to Harris! How stupid can a man get?_

_It does look pretty silly_, Dorrine agreed. _Have you got an
explanation?_

_Several_, Houston told her. _And I don't know which one is correct._

_Let's have them_, the girl thought.

       *       *       *       *       *

Houston gave them to her. None of them, he knew, was completely
satisfactory, but they all made more sense that the theory that Harris
had done what the PD Police claimed he'd done.

Theory Number One: The real megalomaniac Controller had taken over Sir
Lewis's mind and made him draw out the thousand pounds and head west on
Leadenhall Street. Somehow, the Controller had found out that Sir Lewis
was being followed, and had steered him away from the original
destination, heading him toward the innocent Robert Harris. That implied
that the Controller had been within a few dozen yards of the net men
that afternoon. A Controller can't control a mind directly from a
distance, although orders can be implanted which will cause a man to
carry out a plan of action, even though he may be miles from the
Controller. But in order to change those plans, the Controller would
have to be within projection range.

Theory Two: Robert Harris actually was a megalomaniac Controller; with a
long record of success behind him, who had finally grown careless.

At that point, Dorrine interjected a thought: _Isn't it possible that he
wanted to be caught?_

Houston mulled it over for a minute. _A guilt-punishment reaction? He
wanted to be punished for his crimes? I suppose that might account for
part of it, yes. But if he'd been so successful, what did he do with all
his money?_

Dorrine gave a mental shrug. _Who knows? What's Theory Number Three?_

       *       *       *       *       *

Number Three was the screwiest one of all, yet it made a weird kind of
sense. Suppose that Sir Lewis himself had had a grudge against Harris?
The whole thing would have been ridiculously easy; all he'd have to do
would be to act just as he had acted and then give evidence against
Harris.

The thing that made it odd wasn't the actual frame-up (if that's what it
was); these days, every crime was blamed on a Controller. A man accused
of murder simply looked virtuous and said that he would never have done
such a thing if he hadn't been under the power of a Controller. Ditto
for robbery, rape, and any other felony you'd care to name.

An aura of fear hung over the whole Earth; each man half suspected
everyone with whom he came in contact of being a Controller.

So it wasn't that the frame-up in itself was peculiar in this case; it
was simply that it wasn't Sir Lewis Huntley's style. If Sir Lewis had
wanted to get Harris, he'd have done it legally, without any underhanded
frame-ups. Still, the theory remained as a possibility.

_I suppose it does_, Dorrine agreed, _but how does that tie in with our
own Group? What about Jackson and Marcy? What happened to them?_

_I don't know_, Houston admitted, _I just don't know_.

Jackson and Marcy had been members of the Group of telepaths who had
banded together for companionship and mutual protection. Both of them
had been trapped by the PD Police in exactly the same way that Harris
had been trapped. They were now where Harris would be in a matter of
hours--in the Penal Cluster.

Their arrests didn't make sense, either; they had been accused of taking
over someone's mind for the purpose of gaining money illegally--illegal,
that is, according to the new UN laws that had been passed to supersede
the various national laws that had previously been in effect.

But Houston had known both men well, and neither of them was the kind of
man who would pull such a stunt, much less do it in such a stupid
manner.

Dorrine thought: _Well, Dave, this Harris case is out of our hands now;
we've got to concentrate on getting others into the Group--we've got to
find the other sane ones._

_You're ready to take over here, then?_ he asked.

       *       *       *       *       *

At the table, several yards away from where Houston was sitting,
Dorrine, still looking at the book, smiled faintly.

_I'll have to; you're being transferred back to New York at six in the
morning._

Houston allowed a feeling of startled surprise to bridge the gap between
their minds. _How'd you know that?_ He hadn't told her, and she couldn't
have forced the knowledge from his mind. A telepath can open the mind
of a Normal as simply as he might open the pages of a book, but the mind
of another Controller is far stronger. One telepath couldn't force
anything from the mind of another; all thoughts had to be exchanged
voluntarily.

She was still smiling. _We've got a few spies in the UN now_, she told
him. _I got the information before you did._

_You knew before you left New York?_ he asked incredulously.

_That's right_, she thought. _The decision was made last night. Why?_

_Nothing_, he told her. _I was just surprised, that's all._ But deep
behind the telepathic barrier he had erected against her probing mind,
he was thinking something else. He had been assigned to London to
capture the Controller--then unknown--who was said to be active in
England. But his recall order had been decided upon _before_ Harris was
caught--or even suspected. Someone in the UN Psychodeviant Police
Supreme Headquarters in New York must have known that Harris would be
caught that day!

_Something's bothering you_, Dorrine stated flatly.

_I was thinking about leaving London_, he replied evasively. _I haven't
seen you for six months, and now I have to leave again._

_I'll be back in New York within three weeks_, the girl thought warmly.
_I'll be--_

Her thoughts were cut off suddenly by a strident voice in Houston's ear.
"Attention; all-band notice. Robert Bentley Harris, arraigned this
evening on a charge of illegal use of psychodeviant powers for the
purpose of compounding a felony, has been found guilty as charged. He
was therefore sentenced by the Lord Justice of Her Majesty's Court of
Star Chamber to be banished from Earth forever, such banishment to be
carried out by the United Nations Penology Service at the Queen's
pleasure."

The words that were running through Houston's brain, had been
transmitted easily to Dorrine. For a moment, neither of them made any
comment. Then Houston glanced at his watch.

_Twenty-one minutes_, he thought bitterly. _What took them so long?_

       *       *       *       *       *

High in the thin ionosphere, seventy miles above the surface of the
Earth, a fifteen-hundred-mile-an-hour rocket airliner winged its way
westward across the Atlantic, pushing herself forward on the thin,
whispering, white-hot jets of her atomic engine. Behind her, the
outdistanced sun sank slowly below the eastern horizon.

David Houston wasn't watching the sunrise-in-reverse; he was sitting
quietly in his seat, still trying to puzzle out his queer recall to New
York. When Hamilton had told him about it over the phone, he'd assumed
that New York, having been notified that Harris had been captured, had
decided to send for Houston, now that his job was over.

But now he knew that the order had come through nearly twenty-four hours
before Harris was captured.

Did someone at UN Headquarters know that Harris was going to be
captured? Or did someone there suspect that there was something odd
about Police Operative David Houston?

Or both?

Whatever it was, Houston would have to take his chances; to act
suspiciously would be a deadly mistake.

A stewardess, clad in the chic BOAC uniform, moved down the aisle,
quietly informing the passengers that they could have coffee served at
their seats or take breakfast in the lounge. The atmosphere of the
plane's interior was filled with the low murmur of a hundred
conversations against the background of the susurrant mutter of the
mighty engines.

_Uhhh--uh--uh--dizzy--head hurts--uh--uh--_

The sounds in the plane altered subtly as the faint thought insinuated
itself on every brain inside the aircraft. None of the Normal passengers
recognized it for what it was; it was too gentle, too weak, to be
recognized directly by their minds.

But David Houston recognized it instantly for what it was.

Somewhere on the plane, a Controller had been unconscious. _Had_ been.
For now, his powerful mind was trying to swim up from the black depths
of nothingness.

_Uh--uhhhh--uhh--_

The Normal passengers became uneasy, not knowing why they were
disturbed. To them, it was like a vaguely unpleasant but totally
unrecognizable nudge from their own subconscious, like some
long-forgotten and deeply buried memory that had been forced down into
oblivion and was now trying to obtrude itself on the conscious mind.

_Uhhh--Oooohh--where?--what happened?--_

A fully conscious telepath could project his thoughts along a narrow
locus, focusing them on a single brain, leaving all other brains
oblivious to his thoughts. Like a TV broadcasting station, he could
choose his wavelength and stick to it.

But a half-conscious Controller sprayed his thoughts at random, creating
mental disturbances in his vicinity. Like a thunderstorm creating radio
static, there was no selectivity.

Savagely, David Houston did what he had to do. It might be a trap, but
he had to avoid the carnage that might follow if this went on. He hurled
a beam of thought, hard-held, at the offending mind of the awakening
telepath.

_DON'T THINK! RELAX!_

Normally it was impossible for a Controller to take over the mind of
another Controller, but these were abnormal circumstances; the
half-conscious man, whoever he was, was weakened mentally by some kind
of enforced unconsciousness--either a drug or a stun gun. Houston took
over his mind smoothly and easily.

_Robert Harris!_

Houston recognized the mind as soon as he held it.

He didn't try to force anything on Harris's mind; he simply held it,
cradling it, helping Harris to regain consciousness easily, bringing him
up from the darkness gently.

In normal sleep, everyone's mind retains a certain amount of
self-control and awareness of environment. If it didn't, noise and
bright lights wouldn't awaken a sleeping person.

       *       *       *       *       *

In normal sleep, a telepath retained enough control to keep his thoughts
to himself, even when waking up.

But total anaesthesia brought on a mental blackout from which the victim
recovered only with effort. And during that time, a Controller's mind
was violently disturbing to the Normal minds around him, who mistook his
disordered thoughts for their own.

Like pouring heavy oil on choppy waters, Houston soothed the
disturbances of Harris's mind, focusing the random broadcasts on his own
brain.

And while he did that, he probed gently into the weakened mind of the
prisoner for information.

Harris was a Controller, all right; there was no doubt about that. But
nowhere in his mind was there any trace of any knowledge of what had
happened to Sir Lewis Huntley. If Sir Lewis had actually been
controlled, it hadn't been done by Robert Harris.

Houston wished he'd been able to probe Sir Lewis's mind; he'd have been
able to get a lot more information out of it than he had in his
possession now. But that would have been dangerous; if Sir Lewis was a
Controller himself, and had been acting a part, Houston would have given
himself away the instant he attempted to touch the baronet's mind. If,
on the other hand, Sir Lewis had actually been under the control of
another telepath, any probing into the mind of the puppet would have
betrayed Houston to the real Controller.

Harris knew nothing. He wasn't acquainted with any other Controllers,
and had kept his nose clean ever since he'd discovered his latent
powers. He knew that megalomaniac Controllers were either captured or
mobbed, and he had no wish to experience either.

The Normals had long since discovered that the only way to overcome a
Controller was by force of numbers. A Controller could only hold one
Normal mind at a time. That was why a mob could easily kill a single
Controller; that was why the Psychodeviant Police had evolved the "net"
system for arresting a telepath.

Harris, then, had been framed. Or could it be called a frame-up when
Harris was really guilty of the actual crime? Because the crime he had
really been accused of was not that of controlling Sir Lewis, but the
crime of being a telepath. That, and that alone, damned him in the eyes
of the Normals; the crime of taking over a mind for gain was incidental.
The stigma lies in what he _was_, not what he did.

Harris himself was in the bottom of the plane, in the baggage section
near the landing gear. After his trial, still drugged, he had been
secretly put aboard, to be taken to the Long Island Spaceport in New
York. It had had to be secret; no Normal would knowingly ride on an
aircraft which carried a Controller, even if he were drugged into total
unconsciousness.

With Harris were two PD Police guards. Their low conversation impinged
on Harris's ears, and was transmitted to Houston's mind.

Suddenly, one of them said: "Hey! He's moving!"

"Better give him another shot, Harry;" said the other, "when those guys
wake up, they drive you crazy."

Houston could almost feel the sting of the needle as it was inserted
into the arm of the helpless prisoner.

Slowly, Harris's thoughts, which had begun to become fully coherent,
again became chaotic, finally sliding off into silence and darkness.

"Are you all right, sir?"

Houston looked up from his intense concentration. The stewardess was
standing by his seat. He realized that there was a film of perspiration
on his brow, and that he probably had looked dazed while he was
concentrating on Harris's mind.

"Sure," he said quickly, "I'm all right. I'm just a little tired. Had to
get up too early to catch this plane." He rubbed his forehead. "I do
have a little headache; would you happen to have any aspirin aboard?"

She smiled professionally. "Certainly, sir. I'll get a couple of
tablets."

As she left for the first-aid cabinet, Houston thought bleakly to
himself: _Harris was framed. Possibly others have been, too. But by
whom? And why?_

He could see why a Normal might do such a thing. But why would a
Controller do it?

There was only one answer. Somewhere, there was a Controller, or a group
of Controllers who were megalomaniacs _par excellence_. If that were so,
he--or they--could make the late "Blackjack" Donnely look like a meek,
harmless, little mouse.

       *       *       *       *       *

The one part of Continental U.S.A. over which the American Government
had no jurisdiction was small, areawise, in comparison with its power.
The District of the United Nations occupied the small area of Manhattan
Island which ran from 38th Street on the south to 49th Street on the
north; its western border was Third Avenue, its eastern, the East River.
From here, the UN ruled Earth.

There were no walls or fences around it; only by looking at street signs
could anyone tell that they had crossed an international border.
Crossing Third Avenue from west to east, one found that 45th Street had
suddenly become Deutschland Strasse; 40th Street became Rue de France;
47th was the Via Italiano. 43rd Street's sign was painted in Cyrillic
characters, but beneath it, in English, were the words "Avenue of Mother
Russia."

Third Avenue was technically One World Drive. Second Avenue was labelled
as Planetary Peace Drive, and First was United Nations Drive.

But New Yorkers are, and always have been, diehards. Just as The Avenue
of the Americas had forever remained Sixth Avenue, no matter what the
maps called it, so had the other streets retained their old names in
conversation.

Even the International Post Office, after years of wrangling, had given
up, and letters addressed to _Supreme Headquarters, United Nations
Police, 45th Street at Second Avenue_, were delivered without comment,
even though the IPO still firmly held that they were technically
misaddressed. And, privately, even the IPO officials admitted that the
numbers were easier to say and remember than the polyglot street names
that had been tagged on by the General Assembly.

So when David Houston signalled a taxi at Grand Central Station and
said, "Forty-fifth and Second," the driver simply set his automatic
controls, leaned back in his seat, and said, "Goin' to see the cops,
huh?"

When no answer was forthcoming, the driver turned around and took a good
look at his passenger. "Maybe you're a UN cop yourself, huh?"

Houston shook his head. "Nope. Some kids have been scribbling dirty
words on my sidewalk, and I'm going to report it to the authorities."

The driver turned back around and looked ahead again. "Jeez! That's
serious. Hadn't you better take it up with the Secretary General? I
wouldn't be satisfied with no underlings in a case like that."

"I'm thinking of taking it up with the Atomic Energy Control Board,"
Houston told him. "I think those kids are using radioactive chalk."

"That's one way for 'em to get blue jeans," said the driver cryptically.

There was silence for a moment as the taxi braked smoothly to a halt,
guided and controlled by the automatic machinery in the hood.

Then, suddenly, the driver said: "Ship up!" He pointed east, along 45th
Street, toward Long Island. Far in the distance was a rapidly rising
vapor trail, pointing vertically toward the sky, the unmistakable sign
of a spaceship takeoff. They didn't leave often, and it was still an
unusual sight.

Houston said nothing as he climbed out and paid the driver, tossing in
an extra tip.

"Thanks, buddy," said the driver. "Watch out for them kids."

Houston didn't answer. He was still watching the vapor trail as the cab
pulled away.

       *       *       *       *       *

_There goes Harris_, he was thinking. _An innocent man, guilty of
nothing more than being born different. And because of that, he's
labelled as an inhuman monster, not even worthy of being executed.
Instead, he's taken into space, filled full of hibernene, and chained to
a floating piece of rock for the rest of his life._

Such was humanity's "humane" way of taking care of the bogey of
Controllers. Capital punishment had been outlawed all over Earth; it had
long since been proved that legalized murder, execution by the State,
solved nothing, helped no one, prevented no crimes, and did infinitely
more harm than good in the long run.

With the coming of the Controllers, a movement had arisen to bring back
the old evil of judicial murder, but it had been quickly put down when
the Penal Cluster plan had been put forth as a more "humane" method.

Hibernene was a drug that had been evolved from the study of animals
like the bear, which spent its winters in an almost death-like sleep. A
human being, given a proper dosage of the drug, lapsed into a deep coma.
The bodily processes were slowed down; the heart throbbed sluggishly,
once every few minutes; thought ceased. It was the ideal prison for a
mental offender that ordinary prisons could not hold.

But it wasn't quite enough for the bloodthirsty desire for vengeance
that the Normals held for the Controllers. There had to be more.

Following Earth in its orbit around the sun, trailing it by some
ninety-three million miles, were a group of tiny asteroids, occupying
what is known as the Trojan position. They were invisible from Earth,
being made of dark rock and none of them being more than fifteen feet in
diameter. But they had been a source of trouble in some of the early
expeditions to Mars, and had been carefully charted by the Space
Commission.

Now a use had been found for them. A man in a spacesuit could easily be
chained to one of them. With him was a small, sun-powered engine and
tanks of liquified food concentrates and oxygen. Kept under the
influence of hibernene, and kept cool by the chill of space, a man could
spend the rest of his life there--unmoving, unknowing, uncaring, dead as
far as he and the rest of Mankind were concerned--his slight bodily
needs tended automatically by machine.

It was a punishment that satisfied both sides of the life-or-death
argument.

Houston shook off the bleak, black feeling of terrible chill that had
crept over him and pushed his way into the UN Police building.

       *       *       *       *       *

The thirteenth floor housed the Psychodeviant Division. As he stood in
the rising elevator, Houston wondered wryly if the number 13 was good
luck or bad in this case.

He stepped out of the elevator and headed for the Division Chief's
office.

Division Chief Reinhardt was a heavy-set, balding man, built like a
professional wrestler. His cold blue eyes gleamed from beneath shaggy,
overhanging brows, and his face was almost expressionless except for a
faint scowl that crossed it from time to time. In spite of the fact that
a Canadian education had wiped out all but the barest trace of German
accent, his Prussian training, of the old Junkers school, was still
evident. He demanded--and got--precision and obedience from his
subordinates, although he had no use for the strictly military viewpoint
of obsequiousness towards one's superiors.

He was sitting behind his desk, scowling slightly at some papers on it
when Houston stepped in.

"You wanted me to report straight to you, Mr. Reinhardt?"

Reinhardt looked up, his heavy face becoming expressionless. "Ah,
Houston. Yes; sit down. You did a fine job on that London affair; that's
what I call coming through at the last moment."

"How so?"

"Your orders to return," he said, "were cut before you found your man.
We have a much more important case for you than some petty pilfering
Controller. We are after much more dangerous game."

Houston nodded. "I see." Inwardly, he wondered. It was almost as if
Reinhardt knew that Houston had found out that the recall had come
early. Houston would have given his right arm at that moment to be able
to probe Reinhardt's mind. But he held himself back. He had, in the
past, sent tentative probes toward the Division Chief and found nothing,
but he didn't know whether it would be safe now or not. It would be
better to wait.

       *       *       *       *       *

Reinhardt stood up, walked to the wall, and turned on a display screen.
He twisted a knob to a certain setting, and a map of Manhattan Island
sprang onto the screen in glowing color.

"As you know," Reinhardt said pedantically, "no Controller can do a
perfect job of controlling a normal person. No matter how much he may
want to make John Smith act naturally, some of the personality of the
Controller will show up in the actions of John Smith. Am I correct?"

Houston nodded without saying anything. The question was purely
rhetorical, and the statement was perfectly correct.

"Very well, then," Reinhardt continued, "by means of these
peculiarities, our psychologists have found that there is widespread,
but very subtle controlling going on right in the UN General Assembly
itself! The amazing thing is that they all bear the--shall we
say--trademark of the same Controller. Whoever he is, he seems to have a
long-range plan in mind; he wants to change, ever so slightly, certain
international laws so that he will profit by them. Do you follow?"

"I follow," said Houston.

"Good. It has taken painstaking research and a great deal of
psychological statistical analysis, but we have found that one
company--and one company only--benefits by these legal changes. Did you
ever hear of Lasser & Sons?"

"Sure," said Houston. "They're in the import-export business, with a few
fingers in shipping and air transport."

"That's them," said Reinhardt. "Someone in that company, presumably
someone at the top, is a Controller. And he's a very subtle, very
dangerous man. Unlike the others, there is nothing hasty or overt in his
plans. But within a few years, if this goes on, he will have more power
than the others ever dreamed of."

"And my job is to get him?" Houston asked.

Reinhardt nodded. "That's it. Get him. One way or another. You're in
charge; I don't care how you do it, but this one Controller is more
dangerous than any other we've come across, so get him."

Houston nodded slowly. "Okay. Can you give me all the data you have so
far?"

Reinhardt patted a heavy folder on his desk. "It's all here." Then he
tapped the projected map on the screen. "That's the Lasser
Building--Church Street at Worth. Somewhere in there is the man we're
looking for."

       *       *       *       *       *

David Houston spent the next six weeks gathering facts, trying to
determine the identity of the mysterious Controller at Lasser & Sons.
Slowly, the evidence began to pile up.

At the same time, he worried over his own problem. Who was betraying
non-criminal Controllers to the PD Police?

In that six-week period, two more men and a woman were arrested--one in
Spain, one in India, and one in Hawaii.

There weren't very many Controllers on Earth, percentagewise. Of the
three and a half billion people on Earth, less than an estimated
one-thousandth of one percent were telepathic. But that made a grand
total of some thirty-five thousand people.

Spread, as they were, all over the planet, it was rare that one
Controller ever met another. The intelligent ones didn't use their
power; they remained concealed, even from each other.

But _someone_, somewhere, was finding them and betraying them to the
Psychodeviant Police.

As more and more data came in on the Lasser case, Houston began to get
an idea. If there were a really clever, highly intelligent, megalomaniac
Controller, wouldn't it be part of his psychological pattern to attempt
to get rid of the majority of Controllers, those who simply wanted to
lead normal lives?

And, if so, wasn't it possible that both his cases--the official and the
unofficial--might lead to the same place: Lasser & Sons?

It began to look as though Houston could kill both his birds at once, if
he could just figure out when, how, and in what direction to throw the
stone.

In the middle of the seventh week, a Controller in Manchester, England,
was mobbed and torn to bits by an irate crowd before the PD Police
could get to him. There was no doubt in Houston's mind that this one was
a real megalomaniac; he had taken over another man's brain and forced
him to commit suicide. The controlled man had taken a Webley automatic,
put it to his temple, and blown his brains out.

The Controller's mistake was in not realizing what the sudden shock of
that bullet, transmitted to him telepathically, could do to his own
mind. In the mental disorder that followed, he was spotted and killed
easily.

       *       *       *       *       *

There was still no word from Dorrine. She had flown back to the States a
week after Houston had returned, but she had had to get back to England
after three days. Since then, he had had three letters, nothing more.
And letters are a damned unsatisfactory way for a telepath to conduct a
love affair.

The one other factor that entered in was The Group, the small band of
sane, reasonable telepaths who had begun to build themselves into an
organization--a sort of Mutual Protective Association.

Personally, Houston didn't think much of the idea; the Group didn't have
any real organization, and they refused to put one together. It was
supposed to be democratic, but it sometimes bordered on the anarchic.

He stayed with them more for companionship than any other reason. When
Dorrine had come back for her short stay, Houston had met with them and
tried to get them to help him trace down the megalomaniac Controller who
was doing so much damage, but they'd balked at the idea. Their job, they
claimed, was to get enough members so that they could protect themselves
from arrest by the Normals, and then just let things ride.

"After all," Dorrine had said, "things will work themselves out,
darling; they always do."

"Not unless somebody helps them, they don't," Houston had snapped back.
"Someone has to do something."

"But, Dave, darling--we _are_ doing something! Don't you see?"

He didn't, but there was no convincing either the Group or Dorrine. She
was passionately interested in the recruiting work she was doing, and
she thought that the Group was the answer to every Controller's
troubles.

And then she had rushed back to England. "I'll be back soon, Dave,"
she'd said. "I think I have a lead on a girl in Liverpool."

So far, the girl hadn't been found. Controllers didn't like to give
themselves away to anyone, so they kept a tight screen up most of the
time.

It seemed as though everyone on Earth was in deadly fear all the time.
The Normals feared losing their identities to Controllers, and the
Controllers feared death at the hands of the Normals.

And death or the Penal Cluster were their only choices if they were
discovered.

Houston worried about the risks Dorrine was taking, but there was
nothing he could do. She was doing what she thought was right, just as
he was; how could he argue with that?

Houston went on with his job, putting together facts and rumors and
statistical data analysis, searching out his quarry.

And, at the end of the eighth week, everything blew high, wide, and
hellish.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was late evening. A cool wind blew over New York, bringing with it a
hint of the rain to come. Church Street, in lower Manhattan, was not
crowded, as it had been in the late afternoon, but neither was it
entirely deserted. The cafes and bars did a lively business, but the
tall, many-colored office buildings gaped at the street with blind and
darkened eyes. Only a few of the windows glowed whitely with fluorescent
illumination.

In one of the small coffee shops, David Houston sat, smoking a cigarette
and stirring idly at a cup of cooling coffee.

Across the street was the Lasser Building; high up on the sixtieth
floor, a whole suite of offices was brightly lit. The rest of the
building was clothed in blackness.

Who was up there in that suite? Houston wasn't quite sure. He had
narrowed his list of suspects down to three men: John Sager, Loris
Pederson, and Norcross Lasser, three top officials in the company. Sager
and Pederson were both vice-presidents of the firm; Sager was in charge
of the Foreign Exports department, while Pederson handled the actual
shipping. Lasser, by virtue of being the grandson of the man who had
founded the firm, was president of Lasser & Sons, Inc.

Lasser seemed like a poor choice as chief villain of the outfit; he was
a mild, bland man, quiet and friendly. Besides, his position made him
an obvious suspect; naturally, the majority stockholder of the firm
would profit most by the increased power of the company. And, equally
obviously, a Controller wouldn't want to put himself in such an exposed
position.

Which made Lasser, in Houston's mind, a hell of a good suspect. If
anything happened, Lasser could cover by claiming that he, too, had been
controlled, and the chances were that he could get away with it. A
Controller never did anything directly; their dirty work was done by
someone else--a puppet under their mental control. At least, so ran the
popular misconception. If Lasser were the man, he stood a good chance of
getting away with it, even if he were caught, provided he played his
cards right.

       *       *       *       *       *

That reasoning still didn't eliminate Sager or Pederson. Either of them
could be the Controller. And there still remained the possibility that
some unknown, unsuspected fourth person had the company of Lasser & Sons
under his thumb.

That was what Houston intended to find out tonight.

He took a sip of his coffee, found it still reasonably hot.

Damn the megalomaniacs, anyway! Houston subconsciously tightened his
fists. He, personally, had more to fear from the Normals than from
another Controller. Normals could kill or imprison him, while a
Controller would have a hard time doing either, directly.

But Houston could understand the Normal man; he could see how fear of a
Controller could drive a man without the ability into a frenzied panic.
He could understand, even forgive their actions, born and bred in
ignorance and fear.

No, the ones he hated were the ones who had conceived and fostered that
fear--the psychologically unstable megalomaniac Controllers. There were
only a handful of them--probably not more than a few hundred or a
thousand. But because of them, every telepath on Earth found his life in
danger, and every Normal found his life a hell of terror.

Let Dorrine and her do-nothing friends run around the globe recruiting
members for their precious Group; that was all right for them.
Meanwhile, David Houston would be doing something on a more basic action
level.

He glanced at his watch. Almost time.

"How's the deployment?" he whispered in his throat.

"We've got the building surrounded now," said the voice in his ear. "You
can go in anytime."

"How about the roof?"

"That's taken care of, sir; we've got 'copter that can be on the top of
the Lasser Building at any time you call. They can land within thirty
seconds of your signal."

"Okay," Houston said; "I'm going in now. Remember--no matter what I say
or do, no one is to leave that building if they're conscious. And keep
your eyes on me; if I act in the least peculiar, handcuff me--but don't
knock me out.

"And if I'm not back on time, come in anyway."

"Right."

       *       *       *       *       *

Houston finished his coffee, dropped a coin on the counter, and headed
for the other side of the street.

The big problem was getting into the building itself. It was ringed with
alarms; Lasser & Sons didn't want just anybody wandering in and out of
their building.

So Houston had arranged a roundabout way. The building next to the
Lasser Building was a good deal smaller, only forty-five stories high. A
week before, Houston had rented an office on the eighteenth floor of
the building; on the door, he had already had a sign engraved: Ajax
Enterprises.

It was a shame the office would never be used.

Houston walked straight to the next-door building and opened the front
door with his key. Inside, a night watchman lounged behind a desk,
smoking a blackened briar. He looked up, smiled, and nodded.

"Evening, Mr. Griswold; working late tonight?"

Houston forced a smile he did not feel. "Just doing a little paper
work," he said.

He took the automatic elevator to the eighteenth floor. He didn't relish
the idea of walking up to the roof, but taking the elevator would make
the nightwatchman suspicious.

He didn't bother going to the office; he headed directly for the
stairway and began his long climb--twenty-seven floors to the roof.

All through it, he kept up a running comment through his throat mike. "I
wish I weighed about fifty pounds less; carrying two hundred and twenty
pounds of blubber up these stairs isn't easy."

"Blubber, hooey!" the earphone interrupted. "Any man who's
six-feet-three has a right to carry that much weight. Actually, you're
a skinny-looking sort of goop."

Both men were exaggerating; Houston wasn't fat, but his broad, powerful
frame couldn't be called skinny, either.

When he finally reached the roof, he paused and surveyed the wall of the
Lasser Building, which towered high above him, spearing an additional
thirty stories in the air. Up there, the lights on the sixtieth floor
gleamed in the night.

The air was growing cooler, and the beginnings of a mist were forming.
Houston hoped it wouldn't start to rain before he got inside.

       *       *       *       *       *

The forty-sixth floor of the Lasser Building had no windows on this
side, but there were plenty on the forty-seventh.

Leading up to them was an inviting looking fire escape, but Houston knew
he didn't dare take that. By law, every fire escape was rigged with a
fire alarm, in addition to the regular burglar alarm. He'd have to use
another way.

The Lasser Building was a steel structure, shelled over with a bright
blue anodized aluminum sheath. Only the day before, Houston, wearing the
gray coverall of a power-line workman, had checked the wall to find the
big steel beams beneath the aluminum. He had also installed certain
other equipment; now he was going to make use of it.

Concealed in the louvres of the air-conditioner intake of the lower
building was a specially constructed suit and several hundred feet of
power line which was connected to the main line of the building.

In the darkness, Houston slipped on the suit. It was constructed
somewhat like a light diving suit or a spacesuit, but without the
helmet. In the toes, knees, and hands, were powerful electromagnets
controlled by switches in the fingers of the gloves and powered by the
current in the long line.

Houston stepped over to the blue aluminum wall, reached out a hand, and
lowered one finger. Instantly, the powerful magnet anchored his hand to
the wall, held by the dense magnetic field to the steel beam beneath the
aluminum sheath. That one magnet alone could support his full body
weight, and he had six magnets to work with.

Slowly, carefully, David Houston began to crawl up the wall.

Turn on a magnet in the right hand; lift up the left hand and anchor it
higher; turn on the right hand and lift it even with the left, then
anchor it again; do the same with both legs; then begin the process all
over again, turning the magnets off and on in rotation.

Up and up he went. Past the forty-sixth floor, past the forty-seventh,
the forty-eighth, and the forty-ninth. Not until he reached the fiftieth
floor did he attempt to open one of the windows.

There was a magnetic lock inside the window, but Houston had taken that,
too, into account. The powerful magnet in his right glove slid it aside
easily. Houston lifted the window and stepped inside.

He had ten more floors to go.

He took off the suit and rolled it up into a tight package, then dropped
it out the window. It landed with a barely audible thump. Houston took a
deep breath, drew his stun gun, and headed for the stairway.

       *       *       *       *       *

On the landing of the sixtieth floor of the Lasser Building, David
Houston paused for a moment.

"Sounds like you're out of breath," said the voice in his ear.

"You try climbing all that way sometime," Houston whispered. "I'm no
superman, you know."

"Shucks," said the voice, "you've disillusioned me. What now?"

"I'm going to try to get a little information," Houston told him. "Hold
on."

On the other side of the door, he could hear faint sound, as if someone
were moving around, but he could hear no voices.

Carefully, he sent out a probing thought, trying to see if he could
attune his mind with that of someone inside without betraying himself.

He couldn't detect anything. The sixtieth floor covered a lot of space;
if whoever was inside was too far away, their thoughts would be too
faint to pick up unless Houston stepped up his own power, and he didn't
want to do that.

Cautiously, he reached out a hand and eased open the door.

The hallway was brightly lit, but there was no one in sight. The
unaccustomed light made Houston blink for a moment before his eyes
adjusted to it; the hallways and landings below had been pitch dark,
forcing him to use a penlight to find his way up.

He stepped into the hallway, closing the door behind him.

Now he could hear voices. He stopped to listen. The conversation was
coming from an office down the hall--if it could be called a
conversation.

There would be long periods of silence, then a word or two: "But not
that way." "Until tomorrow." "Vacillates."

There were three different voices.

Houston moved on down the hall, his stun gun ready. A few yards from the
door, he stopped again, and, very gently, he sent out another
thought-probe, searching for the minds of those within, carefully
forging his way.

       *       *       *       *       *

And, at that crucial instant, a voice spoke in his ear.

"Houston! What's going on? You haven't said a thing for two full
minutes!"

"I'm all right!" Houston snapped. Only the force of long training and
habit kept him from shouting the words aloud instead of keeping them to
a subvocal whisper.

"All right or not," said the other, "we're coming in in seven minutes,
as ordered. Meanwhile, there's a news bulletin for you; the British
division has picked up another Controller--a woman named Dorrine Kent.
Two in one night ought to be a pretty good bag."

For a moment, Houston's mind was a meaningless blur.

_Dorrine!_

And then another voice broke through his shock.

"Dear me, sir! Calm yourself! You're positively fizzing!"

Houston jerked. Standing in the doorway of the office was Norcross
Lasser, with a benign smile on his face and a deadly-looking .38
automatic in his hand. Behind him stood John Sager and Loris Pederson,
their faces wary.

"Please drop that stun gun, Mr. Cop."

       *       *       *       *       *

In those few moments, Houston had regained control of himself. He
realized what had happened. The interruption of his thought-probe had
startled him just a little, but that little had been enough to warn the
Controller.

He wondered which of the three men was the actual Controller.

He began to lower his weapon, then, suddenly, with all the force and
hatred he could muster, he sent a blistering, shocking thought toward
the man with the gun.

Lasser staggered as though he'd been struck. His gun wavered, and
Houston fired quickly with his stun gun. At the same time, Lasser's
automatic went off.

The bullet went wild, and the stun beam didn't do much better. It struck
Lasser's hand, paralyzing it, but it didn't knock out Lasser.

The mental battle that ensued only took a half second, but at the speed
of thought, a lot of things can happen in a half second.

Houston realized almost instantaneously that he had made a vast mistake.
He had badly underestimated the enemy.

There was no need to worry, now, about which one of the men was a
Controller--_all three of them were!_

As soon as Sager and Pederson realized what had happened, they
leaped--mentally--into the battle. Lasser, already weakened by the
unexpected mental blow from Houston, lost consciousness when the others
let loose their blasts because his mind was still linked with Houston's,
and he absorbed a great deal of the mental energy meant for Houston's
brain.

Houston, fully warned by now, held up a denial wall which screened his
mind from the worst that Sager and Pederson could put out, but he knew
he couldn't hold out for long.

"Come in--_now!_" he said hoarsely into the microphone.

"Stupid swine!" Sager susurrated sibilantly.

Pederson said nothing aloud, but his brain was blazing with fear and
hatred. His gun hand jerked towards a holster under his arm. Lasser was
still crumpling towards the floor.

The entire action had taken less than a second.

Houston tried to fire again with his stun gun, but it required every bit
of concentration he could sum up to hold off the combined mental
assaults of Sager and Pederson.

But they, too, were at somewhat of a disadvantage. In order to keep all
their efforts concentrated on the PD policeman, both Controllers had to
refrain from putting too much attention on their bodily motions.
Pederson was still fumbling for his gun, and Sager hadn't yet started
for his.

Lasser barely touched the floor before his consciousness began to
return. The resulting fraction of a second of mental static afforded
Houston a brief respite; it disturbed Pederson just as he was getting
his fingers on the butt of his weapon.

Both Controllers were focusing their mental energies on Houston's brain,
and during the brief respite, Houston made one vital mental adjustment.
He allowed both thought-probes to fuse in a small part of his
consciousness. They went _through_ him and lashed back at the two
Controllers.

Both of them had had their minds tuned to Houston's, and in that instant
they found they, were also attuned to each other.

The resultant of the energy was shocking to Houston, but it was
infinitely worse for Sager and Pederson, since neither of them had been
expecting it. Pederson, who had already been slightly distracted, got
the major brunt of the force. He managed to jerk his gun free, but his
brain was already lapsing into unconsciousness.

       *       *       *       *       *

Houston's fingers tightened on his own weapon. It fired once at Lasser,
who was trying to lift himself from the floor. Then it swept up and
coughed again, dropping Pederson. His pistol barked once, sending a
singing ricochet along the hall.

Sager, who had staggered to one side when he and Pederson had
short-circuited each other, had time to get behind the protection of
the office door. He couldn't close it because Lasser's and Pederson's
inert forms blocked the doorway, but at least it afforded protection
against Houston's stun gun.

His thought came through to Houston: _So the stupid Normals have a
Controller working for them! Traitor!_

_You're the traitor_, Houston thought coldly. _You and your megalomaniac
friends. It's madmen like you who have made telepaths hated and feared
by the Normals._

_And so they should hate and fear us_, came the snarling mental answer.
_Within a few generations, we will have supplanted them. We will control
Earth--not they._

       *       *       *       *       *

The exchange had only taken a fraction of a second. Houston was already
charging toward the open door, hoping to get inside before Sager could
reach a weapon.

_You call me a traitor_, Houston thought, _but you have been framing
innocent Controllers, putting them into the hands of the PD Police_.

_That's a lie!_ the reply came hotly. _We would never betray another
telepath to the stupid Normals! If a telepath were so bullheaded as to
get in our way, we'd dispose of him. But it would be Controller
justice; we wouldn't turn him over to animals!_

In one blazing moment, Houston realized that the Controller was telling
the truth!

No mental communication can be expressed properly in words. In, behind,
and around each statement, other, dimmer nuances of thought gleam
through. Each thought tells the receiver much more than can be put down
in crude verbal symbols.

Thus, Houston already knew that Lasser, Sager, and Pederson were the
three top men in a world-wide clique of megalomaniac Controllers. This
was the top of the madmen's organization; these three were the _creme de
la creme_ of the Normal human's real enemies.

He knew that there were twelve others scattered over Earth, and he knew
where and who they were. That brief exchange had brought all the
information into Houston's own mind as it leaked from the minds of the
others. He knew it without thinking about how he knew it.

And they were _not_ the ones who had been turning the sane Controllers
over to the Psychodeviant Police!

Then who was? And why?

Houston was right back where he had started.

But that brief instant of confusion was Houston's downfall. Sager
instantly realized that he had delivered, inadvertently, a telling blow
to Houston's mind.

Physically, Houston had been propelling himself toward the open door. At
the instant of the revelation, he had been part way through it. And at
that moment, Sager acted.

He slammed all his weight violently against his side of the door,
knocking Houston off balance as the door swung and struck him. He went
down, and Sager was on top of him before he struck the floor.

It was the weirdest battle ever fought, but its true worth could only
have been detected by another telepath. It was intense and brutal.

The men fought both physically and mentally. They struggled for
possession of the stun gun, at the same time hurling emotion-charged
shafts of mental energy at each other's brains.

The struggle lasted less than a minute. Somehow, Sager managed to get
one hand on the gun, twisting it. Houston, trying to keep it out of
Sager's hand, jerked it up between them.

It coughed once, sending a beam of supersonic energy into the bodies of
both men.

The effect was the same as if they had both been crowned with baseball
bats.

       *       *       *       *       *

Little pinpoints of light against a sea of darkness.

_I'm cold_, Houston thought. _And I'm sick._

He couldn't tell whether his eyes were open or closed--and he didn't
much care.

He tried to move his arms and legs, found he couldn't, and gave it up.

He blinked.

_My eyes must be open_, he thought, _if I can blink_.

Well, then, if his eyes were open, why couldn't he see anything? All he
could see were the little pinpoints of light against a background of
utter blackness.

_Like stars_, he thought.

_Stars? STARS!_

With a sudden rush, total awareness came back to him, and he realized
with awful clarity where he was.

He was chained, spread-eagled, on an asteroid in the Penal Cluster,
nearly a hundred million miles from Earth.

It was easy to piece together what had happened. He dimly remembered
that he had started to wake up once before. It was a vague, confused
recollection, but he knew what had taken place.

The PD Police, coming in response to his call, had found all four men
unconscious from the effects of the stun beam. Naturally, all of them
had been taken into custody; the PD Police had to find out which one of
the men was the Controller and which the controlled. That could easily
be tested by waiting until they began to wake up; the resulting mental
disturbances would easily identify the telepath.

Houston could imagine the consternation that must have resulted when the
PD men found that all three suspects--_and_ their brother officer--were
Controllers.

And now here he was--tried, convicted, and sentenced while he was
unconscious--doomed to spend the rest of his life chained to a rock
floating in space.

A sudden chill of terror came over him. Why wasn't he asleep? Why wasn't
he under hibernene?

_It's their way of being funny_, came a bitter thought. _We're supposed
to be under hibernene, but we're left to die, instead._

For a moment, Houston did not realize that the thought was not his own,
so well did it reflect his own bitterness. It was bad enough to have to
live out one's life under the influence of the hibernation drug, but it
was infinitely worse to be conscious. Under hibernene, he would have
known nothing; his sleeping mind in his comatose body would never have
realized what had happened to him. But this way, he would remain fully
awake while his body used up the air too fast and his stomach became
twisted with hunger pangs which no amount of intravenous feeding could
quell. Oh, he'd live, all right--for a few months--but it would be
absolute hell while he lasted. Insanity and catatonia would come long
before death.

       *       *       *       *       *

_That's a nasty thought; I wish you hadn't brought it up._

That wasn't his own thought! There was someone else out here!

_Hell, yes, my friend; we're all out here._

"Where are you?" Houston asked aloud, just to hear his own voice. He
knew the other couldn't hear the words which echoed so hollowly inside
the bubble of the spacesuit helmet, but the thought behind them would
carry.

"You mean with relation to yourself?" came the answer. "I don't know. I
can see several rocks around me, but I can't tell which one you're on."

Houston could tell now that the other person was talking aloud, too. So
great was the illusion carried to his own brain that it almost seemed as
though he could hear the voice with his ears.

"Then there are others around us?" Houston asked.

"Sure. There were three of us: a Hawaiian named Jerry Matsukuo; a girl
from Bombay, Sonali Siddhartha; and myself, Juan Pedro de Cadiz. Jerry
and Sonali are taking a little nap. You're the first of your group to
wake up."

"My group?"

"Certainly, my friend. There are five of you; the other four must still
be unconscious."

Four? That would be Lasser, Sager, Pederson, and--_and Dorrine!_

Juan Pedro de Cadiz picked up the whole thought-process easily.

"The girl--I'm sorry," he said. "But the other three--of us all, I
think, they deserve this."

"Juan!" came another thought-voice. "Have our newcomers awakened?"

"Just one of them, my sweet," replied the Spaniard. "Sonali, may I
present Mr. David Houston. Mr. Houston, the lovely Sonali Siddhartha."

"Juano has a habit of jumping to conclusions, David," said the girl.
"He's never even seen me, and I'm sure that after three weeks of being
locked in this prison whatever beauty I may have had has disappeared."

"Your thoughts are beautiful, Sonali," said Juan Pedro, "and with us,
that is all that counts."

"It is written," said a third voice, "that he who disturbs the slumber
of his betters will wake somebody up. You people are giving me dreams,
with your ceaseless mental chatter."

"Ah!" the Spaniard said. "Mr. Matsukuo, may I--"

"I heard, Romeo, I heard," said the Hawaiian. "An ex-cop, eh? I wonder
if I like you? I'll take a few thousand years to think it over; in the
meantime, you may treat me as a friend."

"I'll try to live down my reputation," said Houston.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was an odd feeling. Physically, he was alone. Around him, he could
see nothing but the blackness of space and the glitter of the stars. He
knew that the sun must be shining on the back of his own personal
asteroid, but he couldn't see it. As far as his body was concerned,
there was nothing else in the universe but a chunk of pitted rock and a
set of chains.

But mentally, he felt snug and warm, safe in the security of good
friends. He felt--

"David! David! Help me! Oh, David, David, David!"

It was Dorrine, coming up from her slumber. Like a crashing blare of
static across the neural band, her wakening mind burst into sudden
telepathic activity.

       *       *       *       *       *

Gently, Houston sent out his thoughts, soothing her mind as he had
soothed Harris's mind weeks before. And he noticed, as he did it, that
the other three were with him, helping. By the time Dorrine was fully
awake, she was no longer frightened or panicky.

"You're wonderful people," she thought simply, after several minutes.

"To one so beautiful, how else could we be?" asked Juan Pedro.

"Ignore him, Dorrine," said Sonali, "he tells me the same thing."

"But not in the same way, _amiga_!" the Spaniard protested. "Not in the
same way. The beauty of your mind, Sonali, is like the beauty of a
mountain lake, cool and serene; the beauty of Dorrine is like the beauty
of the sun--warm, fiery, and brilliant."

"By my beard!" snorted Matsukuo. "Such blather!"

"I'll be willing to wager my beautiful _hacienda_ in the lovely
countryside of Aragon against your miserable palm-leaf _nipi_ shack on
Oahu that you have no beard," said Juan Pedro.

"Hah!" said Matsukuo; "that's all I need now--Castles in Spain."

It was suddenly dizzying for Houston. Here were five people, doomed to
slow, painful death, talking as though there were nothing to worry
about. Within minutes, each had learned to know the others almost
perfectly.

It was more than just the words each used. Talking aloud helped focus
the thoughts more, but at the same time, thousands of little, personal,
fringe ideas were present with the main idea transmitted in words.
Houston had talked telepathically to Dorrine hundreds of times, but
never before had so much fine detail come through.

Why? Was there something different about space that made mental
communication so much more complete?

"No, not that, I think," said Matsukuo. "I believe it is because we have
lost our fear--not of death; we still fear death--but of betrayal."

That was it. They knew they were going to die, and soon. They had
already been sentenced; nothing further could frighten them. Always
before, on Earth, they had kept their thoughts to themselves, fearing to
broadcast too much, lest the Normals find them out. The little, personal
things that made a human being a living personality were kept hidden
behind heavy mental walls. The suppression worked subconsciously, even
when they actually wanted to communicate with another Controller.

But out here, there was nothing to fear on that score. Why should they,
who were already facing death, be afraid of anything now?

So they opened up--wide. And they knew each other as no group of human
beings had ever known each other. Every human being has little faults
and foibles that he may be ashamed of, that he wants to keep hidden from
others. But such things no longer mattered out here, where they had
nothing but imminent death and the emptiness of space--and each other.

Physically, they were miserable. To be chained in one position, with
very little room to move around, for three weeks, as Sonali had been,
was torture. Sonali had been there longer than the others--for three
days, there had been no one but herself out there in the loneliness of
space.

But now, even physical discomfort meant little; it was easy to forget
the body when the mind was free.

"What of the others?" Dorrine asked. "Where are the ones who were
sentenced before us?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Houston thought of Robert Harris. What had happened to the young
Englishman?

"Space is big," said Juan Pedro. "Perhaps they are too far away for our
thoughts to reach them--or perhaps they are already dead."

"Let's not talk of death." Sonali Siddhartha's thought was soft. "We
have so many things to do."

"We will have a language session," said Juan Pedro. "_Si?_"

Matsukuo chuckled. "Good! Houston, until you've tried to learn Spanish,
Hindustani, Arabic, Japanese, and French all at once, you don't know
what a language session is. We--"

The Hawaiian's thought was suddenly broken off by a shrieking burst of
mental static.

The effect was similar to someone dropping a handful of broken glass
into an electric meat grinder right in the middle of a Bach cantata.

It was Sager, coming out of his coma.

Almost automatically, the five contacted his mind to relax him as he
awoke. They touched his mind--and were repelled!

_Stay out of my mind!_

With almost savage fury, the still half-conscious Sager hurled thoughts
of hatred and fear at the five minds who had tried to help him. They
recoiled from the burst of insane emotion.

"Leave him alone," Houston thought sharply. "He's a tough fighter."

       *       *       *       *       *

At first, Sager was terrified when he learned what had happened to him.
Then the terror was mixed with a boiling, seething hatred. A hatred of
the Normals who had done this to him, and an even more terrible hatred
for Houston, the "traitor."

The very emptiness of space itself seemed to vibrate with the surging
violence of his hatred.

"I know," Houston told him, "you'd kill me if you could. But you can't,
so forget it."

Not even the power of that hatred could touch Houston, protected as he
was by the combined strength of the other four sane telepaths. He was
comparatively safe.

Sager snarled like a trapped animal. "You're all insane! Look at you!
The four of you, siding with a man who has betrayed us to the Normals!
He--"

What Sager thought of Houston couldn't be put into words, and if it
could no sane person would want to repeat the mad foulness in those
words.

"This is unbearable!" Sonali thought softly.

"That's not a mind," said Dorrine, "it's a sewer."

"I suggest," said Matsukuo, "that we do a little probing. Let's find out
what makes this thing tick."

"Stay out of my mind!" Sager screamed. "You have no right!"

"You seemed to think you had the right to probe into the helpless minds
of Normals," said Juan Pedro coldly. "We should show you how it feels."

"But they're just animals!" Sager retorted. "I am a Controller!"

"You're a madman," said Matsukuo. "And we must find out what makes you
mad."

Synchronizing perfectly, five minds began to probe at the walls that
Sager had built up around his personality. And as they probed, Sager
retreated behind ever thicker walls, howling in hatred and anguish.

On and on went the five, needling, pressing at every weak spot, trying
to break him down. Outnumbered and overpowered, it seemed as though
Sager had no chance.

But his insanity was stronger than they suspected. The barriers he built
were harder, more opaque, and more impenetrable than any they had ever
seen. The five pushed on, anyway, but their advance slowed tremendously.

Then, mentally, there was a sudden silence.

_Sager?_ they thought.

No answer.

"That's finished it," said Houston. "He's retreated so far behind those
mental barriers that he's cut himself off completely."

"He's not dead, is he?" Dorrine asked.

"Dead?" said Juan Pedro. "Not in the sense you mean. But I think he is
catatonic now; he has lost all touch with the outside. He is as though
he were still drugged; he is physically helpless, and mentally blanked
out."

"There's one difference," Matsukuo said analytically. "And that is that,
although he has cut himself off from us and from the rest of the
universe, he is still conscious in some little, walled-in compartment of
his mind. He has no one there but himself--and that, I think, is damned
poor company."

       *       *       *       *       *

They waited then. When Pederson awoke, they were ready for him. His
hatred took a slightly different form from Sager's, but the effect was
the same.

And so were the results when the five bore down on him.

Again they waited. Lasser was next.

At first, it looked as though Lasser would go the way of Sager and
Pederson, ending up as a hopelessly insane catatonic. Like his cohorts
before him, Lasser retreated under the full pressure of the
thought-probes of the five, building stronger and stronger walls.

But, quite suddenly, all his defenses crumbled. The mental barriers went
down, shattered and dissolving. Lasser's whole mind lay bare. Instead of
fighting and hating, Lasser was begging, pleading for help.

Lasser was not basically insane. His mind was twisted and warped, but
beneath the outer shell was a personality that had enough internal
strength to be able to admit that it was wrong and ask for help instead
of retreating into oblivion.

"This one--I think we can do something with," Matsukuo's thought
whispered.

       *       *       *       *       *

Eight bodies, uncomfortable and pain-wracked, floated in space, chained
to tiny asteroids that drifted slowly in their orbits under the constant
pull of the sun. Two of them contained minds that were locked
irrevocably within prisons of their own building, sealed off forever
from external stimuli, but their suffering was the greater for all that.

The other six, chained though their limbs might be, had minds that were
free--free, even, of any but the most necessary of internal limitations.

Eight bodies, chained to eight lumps of pitted rock, spun endlessly in
endless space.

And then the ship came.

The flare of its atomic rocket could be seen for over an hour before it
reached the Penal Cluster. The six eyed it speculatively. Although only
two of them were facing the proper direction to see it with their
physical eyes, the impressions of those two were easily transmitted to
the other four.

"Another load of captives," whispered Juan Pedro de Cadiz. "How many
this time, I wonder?"

"How long have we been here?" asked Houston, not expecting any answer.

"Who knows?" It was Lasser. "What we need out here is a clock to tell us
when we'll die."

"Our oxygen tanks are our clocks," said Sonali. "And they'll notify us
when the time comes."

"I do believe you morbid-minded people are developing a sense of humor,"
said Matsukuo, "but I'm not sure I care for the style too much."

The flare of the rocket grew brighter as the decelerating ship
approached the small cluster of rocks. At last the ship itself took
form, shining in the eternal blaze of the sun. When the whiteness of the
rocket blaze died suddenly, the ship was only a few dozen yards from
Houston's own asteroid.

And then a mental voice came into the minds of the six prisoners.

"How do you feel, Controllers?"

Only Houston recognized that thought-pattern, but his recognition was
transmitted instantly to the others.

"_Reinhardt!_"

Hermann Reinhardt, Division Chief of the Psychodeviant Police, the one
man most hated and feared by Controllers, was himself a telepath!

"Naturally," said Reinhardt. "Someone had to take control of the
situation. I was the only one who was in a position to do it."

His thoughts were neither hard nor cold; it was almost as if he were one
of them--except for one thing. Only the words of his thoughts came
through; there were none of the fringe thoughts that the six were used
to in each other.

"That's true," thought Reinhardt. "You see, we have been at this a good
deal longer than you." Then he directed his thoughts at members of the
crew of the spaceship, but they could still be heard by the six
prisoners. "All right, men, get those people off those rocks. We have to
make room for another batch."

The airlock in the side of the ship opened, and a dozen spacesuited men
leaped out. The propulsion units in their hands guided them toward the
prison asteroids.

"Give them all anaesthetic except Sager and Pederson," Reinhardt
ordered. "They won't need it." Then, with a note of apology, "I'm sorry
we'll have to anaesthetize you, but you've been in one position so long
that moving you will be rather painful. We have to get you to a hospital
quickly."

The minds of the six prisoners were frantically pounding questions at
the PD chief, but he gave them no answer. "No; wait until you're
better."

The spacesuited rescuers went to the "back" of each asteroid and
injected sleep-gas into the oxygen line that ran from the tank to the
spacesuit of the prisoner.

Houston could smell the sweetish, pungent odor in his helmet. Just
before he blacked out, he hurled one last accusing thought at Reinhardt.

"_You're_ the one who's been framing Controllers!"

"Naturally, Houston," came the answer. "How else could I get you out
here?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Houston woke up in a hospital bed. He was weak and hungry, but he felt
no pain. As he came up from unconsciousness, he felt a fully awake mind
guiding him out of the darkness.

It was Reinhardt.

"You're a tough man, Houston," he said mentally. "The others won't wake
up for a while yet."

He was sitting on a chair next to the bed, holding a smouldering
cigarette in one hand. He looked strange, somehow, and it took Houston a
moment to realize that there was a smile on that broad, normally
expressionless face.

Houston focussed his eyes on the man's face. "I want an explanation,
Reinhardt," he said aloud. "And it better be a damned good one."

"I give you free access to my mind," Reinhardt said. "See for yourself
if my method wasn't the best one."

       *       *       *       *       *

Houston probed. The explanation, if not the best, was better than any
Houston could have thought of.

When the hatred of the normal-minded people of Earth had been turned
against the Controllers because of the actions of a few megalomaniacs,
it had become obvious that legal steps had to be taken to prevent mob
violence.

It had been Reinhardt himself who had suggested the Penal method to the
UN government. At first, he had simply thought of it as a method to
keep the Controllers alive until he could think of something better. But
when he had discovered, by accident, what a small group of Controllers,
alone in space, could do, he had set up the present machinery.

As soon as a Controller was spotted, a careful frame-up was arranged.
Then, when several had been found, they were arrested in quick
succession and sent to the asteroids.

Always and invariably, they had done what Houston's group had done--the
sane or potentially sane ones had improved themselves tremendously,
while the megalomaniacs had lapsed into catatonia.

"Why couldn't it be done on Earth?" Houston asked.

"We tried it," Reinhardt said. "It didn't work. Safe, on Earth,
surrounded by Normals, a Controller still feels the hatred around him.
He can't open his mind completely. Only the certain knowledge of
impending death, and a complete freedom from the hatred of Normals can
free the mind.

"And that's why you couldn't be told beforehand; if you knew you were
going to be rescued, you wouldn't open up."

Houston nodded. It made sense. "Where are we now?" he asked.

"Antarctica," said Reinhardt. "We've built an outpost here--almost
self-sufficient. When you're in better shape physically, I'll show you
around."

"Do you mean that everyone who's been arrested is here, in Antarctica?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Reinhardt laughed. "No, not by a long shot. Most of us are back out in
civilization, searching for new, undiscovered Controllers, so that we
can frame them. And, of course, some of us--the insane ones--have died.
They will themselves to die when the going gets too tough."

"Searching for recruits? Then the Group that Dorrine was working for
was--"

Reinhardt shook his head. "No. They were going about it the wrong way,
just as you thought. We picked up the whole lot of them last week;
they're occupying the asteroids now."

"What do you do with the insane catatonics?"

"Put them under hibernene and keep them alive. We hope, someday, to
figure out a method of restoring their sanity. Until then, let them
sleep."

Houston narrowed his eyes. "How long have you known I was a Controller,
Reinhardt?"

The Prussian smiled. "Ever since you first tried to probe me.
Fortunately, my training enabled me to put up a shield that you couldn't
penetrate; I seemed like a Normal to you.

"I kept you on because I knew you'd be useful in cracking Lasser and his
gang when the time came. No one else could have done what you did that
night."

"Thanks," Houston said sincerely. "What's going to happen now? After I
get well, I mean."

"You'll do what the others have done. A little plastic surgery to change
your face a trifle, a little record-juggling to give you a new identity,
and you'll be ready to go back to work for the PD Police.

"If anyone recognizes you, it's easy to take over their minds just long
enough to make them forget. We allow that much Controlling."

"And then what?" Houston wanted to know. "What happens in the long run?"

"In a way," said Reinhardt, "your friend Sager was right. The
Controllers will eventually become the rulers of Earth. But not by force
or trickery. We must just bide our time. More and more of us are being
born all the time; the Normals are becoming fewer and fewer. Within a
century, we will outnumber them--we will be the Normals, not they.

"But they'll never know what's going on. The last Normal will die
without ever knowing that he is in a world of telepaths.

"By the time that comes about, we'll no longer need the Penal Cluster,
since Controllers will be born into a world where there is no fear of
non-telepaths."

"I wonder," Houston mused, "I wonder how this ability came about. Why is
the human race acquiring telepathy so suddenly?"

Reinhardt shrugged. "I can give you many explanations--atomic radiation,
cosmic rays, natural evolution. But none of them really explains it.
They just make it easier to live with.

"I think something similar must have happened a few hundred thousand
years ago, when Cro-Magnon man, our own ancestors, first developed true
intelligence instead of the pseudo-intelligence, the highly developed
instincts, of the Neanderthals and other para-men.

"Within a relatively short time, the para-men had died out, leaving the
Cro-Magnon, with his true intelligence, to rule Earth."

Reinhardt stood up. "Why is it happening? We don't know. Maybe we never
will know, any more than we know why Man developed intelligence." He
shrugged. "Perhaps the only explanation we'll ever have is to call it
the Will of God and let it go at that."

"Maybe that's the best explanation, after all," Houston said.

"Perhaps. Who knows?" Reinhardt crushed his cigarette out in a tray.
"I'll go now, and let you get some rest. And don't worry; I'll have you
notified as soon as Dorrine starts to come out of it."

"Thanks--Chief," Houston said as Reinhardt left the room.

David Houston lay back in his bed and closed his eyes.

For the first time in his life, he felt completely at peace--with
himself, and with the Universe.


THE END




Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from _Amazing Stories_ September 1957.
    Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed. Minor spelling and
    typographical errors have been corrected without note.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Penal Cluster, by 
Ivar Jorgensen (AKA Randall Garrett)

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PENAL CLUSTER ***

***** This file should be named 25061-8.txt or 25061-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/5/0/6/25061/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
