The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Hunted Heroes, by Robert Silverberg

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Hunted Heroes

Author: Robert Silverberg

Release Date: May 27, 2008 [EBook #25627]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HUNTED HEROES ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









 THE
 HUNTED
 HEROES

 By ROBERT SILVERBERG


         _The planet itself was tough enough--barren, desolate,
         forbidding; enough to stop the most adventurous and
         dedicated. But they had to run head-on against a mad
         genius who had a motto:_

                        _Death to all Terrans!_


"Let's keep moving," I told Val. "The surest way to die out here on Mars
is to give up." I reached over and turned up the pressure on her oxymask
to make things a little easier for her. Through the glassite of the
mask, I could see her face contorted in an agony of fatigue.

And she probably thought the failure of the sandcat was all my fault,
too. Val's usually about the best wife a guy could ask for, but when she
wants to be she can be a real flying bother.

It was beyond her to see that some grease monkey back at the Dome was at
fault--whoever it was who had failed to fasten down the engine hood.
Nothing but what had stopped us _could_ stop a sandcat: sand in the
delicate mechanism of the atomic engine.

But no; she blamed it all on me somehow: So we were out walking on the
spongy sand of the Martian desert. We'd been walking a good eight hours.

"Can't we turn back now, Ron?" Val pleaded. "Maybe there isn't any
uranium in this sector at all. I think we're crazy to keep on searching
out here!"

I started to tell her that the UranCo chief had assured me we'd hit
something out this way, but changed my mind. When Val's tired and
overwrought there's no sense in arguing with her.

I stared ahead at the bleak, desolate wastes of the Martian landscape.
Behind us somewhere was the comfort of the Dome, ahead nothing but the
mazes and gullies of this dead world.

[Illustration: He was a cripple in a wheelchair--helpless as a
rattlesnake.]

"Try to keep going, Val." My gloved hand reached out and clumsily
enfolded hers. "Come on, kid. Remember--we're doing this for Earth.
We're heroes."

She glared at me. "Heroes, hell!" she muttered. "That's the way it
looked back home, but, out there it doesn't seem so glorious. And
UranCo's pay is stinking."

"We didn't come out here for the pay, Val."

"I know, I know, but just the same--"

It must have been hell for her. We had wandered fruitlessly over the red
sands all day, both of us listening for the clicks of the counter. And
the geigers had been obstinately hushed all day, except for their
constant undercurrent of meaningless noises.

Even though the Martian gravity was only a fraction of Earth's, I was
starting to tire, and I knew it must have been really rough on Val with
her lovely but unrugged legs.

"Heroes," she said bitterly. "We're not heroes--we're suckers! Why did I
ever let you volunteer for the Geig Corps and drag me along?"

Which wasn't anywhere close to the truth. Now I knew she was at the
breaking point, because Val didn't lie unless she was so exhausted she
didn't know what she was doing. She had been just as much inflamed by
the idea of coming to Mars to help in the search for uranium as I was.
We knew the pay was poor, but we had felt it a sort of obligation,
something we could do as individuals to keep the industries of
radioactives-starved Earth going. And we'd always had a roving foot,
both of us.

No, we had decided together to come to Mars--the way we decided together
on everything. Now she was turning against me.

       *       *       *       *       *

I tried to jolly her. "Buck up, kid," I said. I didn't dare turn up her
oxy pressure any higher, but it was obvious she couldn't keep going. She
was almost sleep-walking now.

We pressed on over the barren terrain. The geiger kept up a fairly
steady click-pattern, but never broke into that sudden explosive tumult
that meant we had found pay-dirt. I started to feel tired myself,
terribly tired. I longed to lie down on the soft, spongy Martian sand
and bury myself.

I looked at Val. She was dragging along with her eyes half-shut. I felt
almost guilty for having dragged her out to Mars, until I recalled that
I hadn't. In fact, she had come up with the idea before I did. I wished
there was some way of turning the weary, bedraggled girl at my side back
into the Val who had so enthusiastically suggested we join the Geigs.

Twelve steps later, I decided this was about as far as we could go.

I stopped, slipped out of the geiger harness, and lowered myself
ponderously to the ground. "What'samatter, Ron?" Val asked sleepily.
"Something wrong?"

"No, baby," I said, putting out a hand and taking hers. "I think we
ought to rest a little before we go any further. It's been a long, hard
day."

It didn't take much to persuade her. She slid down beside me, curled up,
and in a moment she was fast asleep, sprawled out on the sands.

_Poor kid_, I thought. Maybe we shouldn't have come to Mars after all.
But, I reminded myself, _someone_ had to do the job.

A second thought appeared, but I squelched it:

Why the hell me?

I looked down at Valerie's sleeping form, and thought of our warm,
comfortable little home on Earth. It wasn't much, but people in love
don't need very fancy surroundings.

I watched her, sleeping peacefully, a wayward lock of her soft blonde
hair trailing down over one eyebrow, and it seemed hard to believe that
we'd exchanged Earth and all it held for us for the raw, untamed
struggle that was Mars. But I knew I'd do it again, if I had the chance.
It's because we wanted to keep what we had. Heroes? Hell, no. We just
liked our comforts, and wanted to keep them. Which took a little work.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Time to get moving._ But then Val stirred and rolled over in her sleep,
and I didn't have the heart to wake her. I sat there, holding her,
staring out over the desert, watching the wind whip the sand up into
weird shapes.

The Geig Corps preferred married couples, working in teams. That's what
had finally decided it for us--we were a good team. We had no ties on
Earth that couldn't be broken without much difficulty. So we
volunteered.

_And here we are._ Heroes. The wind blasted a mass of sand into my face,
and I felt it tinkle against the oxymask.

I glanced at the suit-chronometer. Getting late. I decided once again to
wake Val. But she was tired. And I was tired too, tired from our
wearying journey across the empty desert.

I started to shake Val. But I never finished. It would be _so_ nice just
to lean back and nuzzle up to her, down in the sand. So nice. I yawned,
and stretched back.

       *       *       *       *       *

I awoke with a sudden startled shiver, and realized angrily I had let
myself doze off. "Come on, Val," I said savagely, and started to rise to
my feet.

I couldn't.

I looked down. I was neatly bound in thin, tough, plastic tangle-cord,
swathed from chin to boot-bottoms, my arms imprisoned, my feet caught.
And tangle-cord is about as easy to get out of as a spider's web is for
a trapped fly.

It wasn't Martians that had done it. There weren't any Martians, hadn't
been for a million years. It was some Earthman who had bound us.

I rolled my eyes toward Val, and saw that she was similarly trussed in
the sticky stuff. The tangle-cord was still fresh, giving off a faint,
repugnant odor like that of drying fish. It had been spun on us only a
short time ago, I realized.

"Ron--"

"Don't try to move, baby. This stuff can break your neck if you twist it
wrong." She continued for a moment to struggle futilely, and I had to
snap, "Lie still, Val!"

"A very wise statement," said a brittle, harsh voice from above me. I
looked up and saw a helmeted figure above us. He wasn't wearing the
customary skin-tight pliable oxysuits we had. He wore an outmoded, bulky
spacesuit and a fishbowl helmet, all but the face area opaque. The
oxygen cannisters weren't attached to his back as expected, though. They
were strapped to the back of the wheelchair in which he sat.

Through the fishbowl I could see hard little eyes, a yellowed,
parchment-like face, a grim-set jaw. I didn't recognize him, and this
struck me odd. I thought I knew everyone on sparsely-settled Mars.
Somehow I'd missed him.

What shocked me most was that he had no legs. The spacesuit ended neatly
at the thighs.

He was holding in his left hand the tanglegun with which he had
entrapped us, and a very efficient-looking blaster was in his right.

"I didn't want to disturb your sleep," he said coldly. "So I've been
waiting here for you to wake up."

I could just see it. He might have been sitting there for hours,
complacently waiting to see how we'd wake up. That was when I realized
he must be totally insane. I could feel my stomach-muscles tighten, my
throat constrict painfully.

Then anger ripped through me, washing away the terror. "What's going
on?" I demanded, staring at the half of a man who confronted us from the
wheelchair. "Who are you?"

"You'll find out soon enough," he said. "Suppose now you come with me."
He reached for the tanglegun, flipped the little switch on its side to
MELT, and shot a stream of watery fluid over our legs, keeping the
blaster trained on us all the while. Our legs were free.

"You may get up now," he said. "Slowly, without trying to make trouble."
Val and I helped each other to our feet as best we could, considering
our arms were still tightly bound against the sides of our oxysuits.

"Walk," the stranger said, waving the tanglegun to indicate the
direction. "I'll be right behind you." He holstered the tanglegun.

I glimpsed the bulk of an outboard atomic rigging behind him, strapped
to the back of the wheelchair. He fingered a knob on the arm of the
chair and the two exhaust ducts behind the wheel-housings flamed for a
moment, and the chair began to roll.

Obediently, we started walking. You don't argue with a blaster, even if
the man pointing it is in a wheelchair.

       *       *       *       *       *

"What's going on, Ron?" Val asked in a low voice as we walked. Behind us
the wheelchair hissed steadily.

"I don't quite know, Val. I've never seen this guy before, and I thought
I knew everyone at the Dome."

"Quiet up there!" our captor called, and we stopped talking. We trudged
along together, with him following behind; I could hear the
_crunch-crunch_ of the wheelchair as its wheels chewed into the sand. I
wondered where we were going, and why. I wondered why we had ever left
Earth.

The answer to that came to me quick enough: we had to. Earth needed
radioactives, and the only way to get them was to get out and look. The
great atomic wars of the late 20th Century had used up much of the
supply, but the amount used to blow up half the great cities of the
world hardly compared with the amount we needed to put them back
together again.

In three centuries the shattered world had been completely rebuilt. The
wreckage of New York and Shanghai and London and all the other ruined
cities had been hidden by a shining new world of gleaming towers and
flying roadways. We had profited by our grandparents' mistakes. They had
used their atomics to make bombs. We used ours for fuel.

It was an atomic world. Everything: power drills, printing presses,
typewriters, can openers, ocean liners, powered by the inexhaustible
energy of the dividing atom.

But though the energy is inexhaustible, the supply of nuclei isn't.
After three centuries of heavy consumption, the supply failed. The
mighty machine that was Earth's industry had started to slow down.

And that started the chain of events that led Val and me to end up as a
madman's prisoners, on Mars. With every source of uranium mined dry on
Earth, we had tried other possibilities. All sorts of schemes came
forth. Project Sea-Dredge was trying to get uranium from the oceans. In
forty or fifty years, they'd get some results, we hoped. But there
wasn't forty or fifty years' worth of raw stuff to tide us over until
then. In a decade or so, our power would be just about gone. I could
picture the sort of dog-eat-dog world we'd revert back to. Millions of
starving, freezing humans tooth-and-clawing in it in the useless shell
of a great atomic civilization.

So, Mars. There's not much uranium on Mars, and it's not easy to find or
any cinch to mine. But what little is there, helps. It's a stopgap
effort, just to keep things moving until Project Sea-Dredge starts
functioning.

Enter the Geig Corps: volunteers out on the face of Mars, combing for
its uranium deposits.

And here we are, I thought.

       *       *       *       *       *

After we walked on a while, a Dome became visible up ahead. It slid up
over the crest of a hill, set back between two hummocks on the desert.
Just out of the way enough to escape observation.

For a puzzled moment I thought it was our Dome, the settlement where
all of UranCo's Geig Corps were located, but another look told me that
this was actually quite near us and fairly small. A one-man Dome, of all
things!

"Welcome to my home," he said. "The name is Gregory Ledman." He herded
us off to one side of the airlock, uttered a few words keyed to his
voice, and motioned us inside when the door slid up. When we were inside
he reached up, clumsily holding the blaster, and unscrewed the ancient
spacesuit fishbowl.

His face was a bitter, dried-up mask. He was a man who hated.

The place was spartanly furnished. No chairs, no tape-player, no
decoration of any sort. Hard bulkhead walls, rivet-studded, glared back
at us. He had an automatic chef, a bed, and a writing-desk, and no other
furniture.

Suddenly he drew the tanglegun and sprayed our legs again. We toppled
heavily to the floor. I looked up angrily.

       *       *       *       *       *

"I imagine you want to know the whole story," he said. "The others did,
too."

Valerie looked at me anxiously. Her pretty face was a dead white behind
her oxymask. "What others?"

"I never bothered to find out their names," Ledman said casually. "They
were other Geigs I caught unawares, like you, out on the desert. That's
the only sport I have left--Geig-hunting. Look out there."

He gestured through the translucent skin of the Dome, and I felt sick.
There was a little heap of bones lying there, looking oddly bright
against the redness of the sands. They were the dried, parched skeletons
of Earthmen. Bits of cloth and plastic, once oxymasks and suits, still
clung to them.

Suddenly I remembered. There had been a pattern there all the time. We
didn't much talk about it; we chalked it off as occupational hazards.
There had been a pattern of disappearances on the desert. I could think
of six, eight names now. None of them had been particularly close
friends. You don't get time to make close friends out here. But we'd
vowed it wouldn't happen to us.

It had.

"You've been hunting Geigs?" I asked. "_Why?_ What've they ever done to
you?"

He smiled, as calmly as if I'd just praised his house-keeping. "Because
I hate you," he said blandly. "I intend to wipe every last one of you
out, one by one."

I stared at him. I'd never seen a man like this before; I thought all
his kind had died at the time of the atomic wars.

I heard Val sob, "He's a madman!"

"No," Ledman said evenly. "I'm quite sane, believe me. But I'm
determined to drive the Geigs--and UranCo--off Mars. Eventually I'll
scare you all away."

"Just pick us off in the desert?"

"Exactly," replied Ledman. "And I have no fears of an armed attack. This
place is well fortified. I've devoted years to building it. And I'm back
against those hills. They couldn't pry me out." He let his pale hand run
up into his gnarled hair. "I've devoted years to this. Ever since--ever
since I landed here on Mars."

       *       *       *       *       *

"What are you going to do with us?" Val finally asked, after a long
silence.

He didn't smile this time. "Kill you," he told her. "Not your husband. I
want him as an envoy, to go back and tell the others to clear off." He
rocked back and forth in his wheelchair, toying with the gleaming,
deadly blaster in his hand.

We stared in horror. It was a nightmare--sitting there, placidly rocking
back and forth, a nightmare.

I found myself fervently wishing I was back out there on the infinitely
safer desert.

"Do I shock you?" he asked. "I shouldn't--not when you see my motives."

"We don't see them," I snapped.

"Well, let me show you. You're on Mars hunting uranium, right? To mine
and ship the radioactives back to Earth to keep the atomic engines
going. Right?"

I nodded over at our geiger counters.

"We volunteered to come to Mars," Val said irrelevantly.

"Ah--two young heroes," Ledman said acidly. "How sad. I could almost
feel sorry for you. Almost."

"Just what is it you're after?" I said, stalling, stalling.

"Atomics cost me my legs," he said. "You remember the Sadlerville
Blast?" he asked.

"Of course." And I did, too. I'd never forget it. No one would. How
could I forget that great accident--killing hundreds, injuring thousands
more, sterilizing forty miles of Mississippi land--when the Sadlerville
pile went up?

"I was there on business at the time," Ledman said. "I represented
Ledman Atomics. I was there to sign a new contract for my company. You
know who I am, now?"

I nodded.

"I was fairly well shielded when it happened. I never got the contract,
but I got a good dose of radiation instead. Not enough to kill me," he
said. "Just enough to necessitate the removal of--" he indicated the
empty space at his thighs. "So I got off lightly." He gestured at the
wheelchair blanket.

I still didn't understand. "But why kill us Geigs? _We_ had nothing to
do with it."

"You're just in this by accident," he said. "You see, after the
explosion and the amputation, my fellow-members on the board of Ledman
Atomics decided that a semi-basket case like myself was a poor risk as
Head of the Board, and they took my company away. All quite legal, I
assure you. They left me almost a pauper!" Then he snapped the punchline
at me.

"They renamed Ledman Atomics. Who did you say you worked for?"

I began, "Uran--"

"Don't bother. A more inventive title than Ledman Atomics, but not
quite as much heart, wouldn't you say?" He grinned. "I saved for years;
then I came to Mars, lost myself, built this Dome, and swore to get
even. There's not a great deal of uranium on this planet, but enough to
keep me in a style to which, unfortunately, I'm no longer accustomed."

       *       *       *       *       *

He consulted his wrist watch. "Time for my injection." He pulled out the
tanglegun and sprayed us again, just to make doubly certain. "That's
another little souvenir of Sadlerville. I'm short on red blood
corpuscles."

He rolled over to a wall table and fumbled in a container among a pile
of hypodermics. "There are other injections, too. Adrenalin, insulin.
Others. The Blast turned me into a walking pin-cushion. But I'll pay it
all back," he said. He plunged the needle into his arm.

My eyes widened. It was too nightmarish to be real. I wasn't seriously
worried about his threat to wipe out the entire Geig Corps, since it was
unlikely that one man in a wheelchair could pick us all off. No, it
wasn't the threat that disturbed me, so much as the whole concept, so
strange to me, that the human mind could be as warped and twisted as
Ledman's.

I saw the horror on Val's face, and I knew she felt the same way I did.

"Do you really think you can succeed?" I taunted him. "Really think you
can kill every Earthman on Mars? Of all the insane, cockeyed--"

Val's quick, worried head-shake cut me off. But Ledman had felt my
words, all right.

"Yes! I'll get even with every one of you for taking away my legs! If we
hadn't meddled with the atom in the first place, I'd be as tall and
powerful as you, today--instead of a useless cripple in a wheelchair."

"You're sick, Gregory Ledman," Val said quietly. "You've conceived an
impossible scheme of revenge and now you're taking it out on innocent
people who've done nothing, nothing at all to you. That's not sane!"

His eyes blazed. "Who are you to talk of sanity?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Uneasily I caught Val's glance from a corner of my eye. Sweat was
rolling down her smooth forehead faster than the auto-wiper could swab
it away.

"Why don't you do something? What are you waiting for, Ron?"

"Easy, baby," I said. I knew what our ace in the hole was. But I had to
get Ledman within reach of me first.

"Enough," he said. "I'm going to turn you loose outside, right after--"

"_Get sick!_" I hissed to Val, low. She began immediately to cough
violently, emitting harsh, choking sobs. "Can't breathe!" She began to
yell, writhing in her bonds.

That did it. Ledman hadn't much humanity left in him, but there was a
little. He lowered the blaster a bit and wheeled one-hand over to see
what was wrong with Val. She continued to retch and moan most horribly.
It almost convinced me. I saw Val's pale, frightened face turn to me.

He approached and peered down at her. He opened his mouth to say
something, and at that moment I snapped my leg up hard, tearing the
tangle-cord with a snicking rasp, and kicked his wheelchair over.

The blaster went off, burning a hole through the Dome roof. The
automatic sealers glued-in instantly. Ledman went sprawling helplessly
out into the middle of the floor, the wheelchair upended next to him,
its wheels slowly revolving in the air. The blaster flew from his hands
at the impact of landing and spun out near me. In one quick motion I
rolled over and covered it with my body.

       *       *       *       *       *

Ledman clawed his way to me with tremendous effort and tried wildly to
pry the blaster out from under me, but without success. I twisted a bit,
reached out with my free leg, and booted him across the floor. He
fetched up against the wall of the Dome and lay there.

Val rolled over to me.

"Now if I could get free of this stuff," I said, "I could get him
covered before he comes to. But how?"

"Teamwork," Val said. She swivelled around on the floor until her head
was near my boot. "Push my oxymask off with your foot, if you can."

I searched for the clamp and tried to flip it. No luck, with my heavy,
clumsy boot. I tried again, and this time it snapped open. I got the tip
of my boot in and pried upward. The oxymask came off, slowly, scraping a
jagged red scratch up the side of Val's neck as it came.

"There," she breathed. "That's that."

I looked uneasily at Ledman. He was groaning and beginning to stir.

Val rolled on the floor and her face lay near my right arm. I saw what
she had in mind. She began to nibble the vile-tasting tangle-cord,
running her teeth up and down it until it started to give. She continued
unfailingly.

Finally one strand snapped. Then another. At last I had enough use of my
hand to reach out and grasp the blaster. Then I pulled myself across the
floor to Ledman, removed the tanglegun, and melted the remaining
tangle-cord off.

My muscles were stiff and bunched, and rising made me wince. I turned
and freed Val. Then I turned and faced Ledman.

"I suppose you'll kill me now," he said.

"No. That's the difference between sane people and insane," I told him.
"I'm not going to kill you at all. I'm going to see to it that you're
sent back to Earth."

"_No!_" he shouted. "No! Anything but back there. I don't want to face
them again--not after what they did to me--"

"Not so loud," I broke in. "They'll help you on Earth. They'll take all
the hatred and sickness out of you, and turn you into a useful member of
society again."

"I hate Earthmen," he spat out. "I hate all of them."

"I know," I said sarcastically. "You're just all full of hate. You hated
us so much that you couldn't bear to hang around on Earth for as much as
a year after the Sadlerville Blast. You had to take right off for Mars
without a moment's delay, didn't you? You hated Earth so much you _had_
to leave."

"Why are you telling all this to me?"

"Because if you'd stayed long enough, you'd have used some of your
pension money to buy yourself a pair of prosthetic legs, and then you
wouldn't need this wheelchair."

Ledman scowled, and then his face went belligerent again. "They told me
I was paralyzed below the waist. That I'd never walk again, even with
prosthetic legs, because I had no muscles to fit them to."

"You left Earth too quickly," Val said.

"It was the only way," he protested. "I had to get off--"

"She's right," I told him. "The atom can take away, but it can give as
well. Soon after you left they developed _atomic-powered_
prosthetics--amazing things, virtually robot legs. All the survivors of
the Sadlerville Blast were given the necessary replacement limbs free of
charge. All except you. You were so sick you had to get away from the
world you despised and come here."

"You're lying," he said. "It's not true!"

"Oh, but it is," Val smiled.

I saw him wilt visibly, and for a moment I almost felt sorry for him, a
pathetic legless figure propped up against the wall of the Dome at
blaster-point. But then I remembered he'd killed twelve Geigs--or
more--and would have added Val to the number had he had the chance.

       *       *       *       *       *

"You're a very sick man, Ledman," I said. "All this time you could have
been happy, useful on Earth, instead of being holed up here nursing your
hatred. You might have been useful, on Earth. But you decided to channel
everything out as revenge."

"I still don't believe it--those legs. I might have walked again.
No--no, it's all a lie. They told me I'd never walk," he said, weakly
but stubbornly still.

I could see his whole structure of hate starting to topple, and I
decided to give it the final push.

"Haven't you wondered how I managed to break the tangle-cord when I
kicked you over?"

"Yes--human legs aren't strong enough to break tangle-cord that way."

"Of course not," I said. I gave Val the blaster and slipped out of my
oxysuit. "Look," I said. I pointed to my smooth, gleaming metal legs.
The almost soundless purr of their motors was the only noise in the
room. "I was in the Sadlerville Blast, too," I said. "But I didn't go
crazy with hate when I lost _my_ legs."

Ledman was sobbing.

"Okay, Ledman," I said. Val got him into his suit, and brought him the
fishbowl helmet. "Get your helmet on and let's go. Between the psychs
and the prosthetics men, you'll be a new man inside of a year."

"But I'm a murderer!"

"That's right. And you'll be sentenced to psych adjustment. When they're
finished, Gregory Ledman the killer will be as dead as if they'd
electrocuted you, but there'll be a new--and sane--Gregory Ledman." I
turned to Val.

"Got the geigers, honey?"

For the first time since Ledman had caught us, I remembered how tired
Val had been out on the desert. I realized now that I had been driving
her mercilessly--me, with my chromium legs and atomic-powered muscles.
No wonder she was ready to fold! And I'd been too dense to see how
unfair I had been.

She lifted the geiger harnesses, and I put Ledman back in his
wheelchair.

Val slipped her oxymask back on and fastened it shut.

"Let's get back to the Dome in a hurry," I said. "We'll turn Ledman over
to the authorities. Then we can catch the next ship for Earth."

"Go back? _Go back?_ If you think I'm backing down now and quitting you
can find yourself another wife! After we dump this guy I'm sacking in
for twenty hours, and then we're going back out there to finish that
search-pattern. Earth needs uranium, honey, and I know you'd never be
happy quitting in the middle like that." She smiled. "I can't wait to
get out there and start listening for those tell-tale clicks."

I gave a joyful whoop and swung her around. When I put her down, she
squeezed my hand, hard.

"Let's get moving, fellow hero," she said.

I pressed the stud for the airlock, smiling.


THE END




Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from _Amazing Stories_ September 1956.
    Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed. Minor spelling and
    typographical errors have been corrected without note.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Hunted Heroes, by Robert Silverberg

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HUNTED HEROES ***

***** This file should be named 25627.txt or 25627.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/5/6/2/25627/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
