The Project Gutenberg EBook of Valley of the Croen, by Lee Tarbell

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Valley of the Croen

Author: Lee Tarbell

Release Date: July 8, 2008 [EBook #26010]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK VALLEY OF THE CROEN ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, V. L. Simpson and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net





    [Transcriber's Notes:
        This etext was produced from Amazing Stories April 1949.
        Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the
        U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.

        Misspellings have been corrected.]



[Illustration]


VALLEY of the CROEN

By LEE TARBELL


    There was a mysterious golden statue that always pointed one
    way--and it led to sudden death in the valley where flying disks
    landed.


[Illustration: Like a lodestone drawn to a magnet, the tiny golden
statue leaped from his hand and darted toward its huge counterpart.]


They say cross-eyed men are bad luck. He stood there, in my doorway,
eyeing me up and down with those in-focused black eyes.

His face was hideous even if the eyes had been normal. He was slashed
with a wide cicatrice of livid scar tissue from one cheekbone across his
nose and down to the button of his jaw on the other side.

He was big, and he looked like bad news to me. I inadvertently moved the
door as if to close it, then he spoke:

"You Keele, the mining man?"

I nodded, wondering at the mild voice from the huge battered figure.

"Been looking for you. I've run across something I wouldn't tell just
anyone. But I've heard of you, that you are on the level. Here in
Korea, you're known already."

I still didn't step back and swing the door wide. But he had aroused my
curiosity as well as my natural desire to acquire things. I had made two
fortunes and lost both in mining ventures. My present not small income
came from an emerald mine in the Andes. It had been a very dirty and
very sick Indio who had led me to that emerald mine. You never know!

"I'm pretty busy, could you give me some idea...." I hedged. It doesn't
do to seem too anxious or eager in any business deal. Too, the sight of
his burly figure, even without the nightmare face, was not exactly
reassuring. That bulge under the native quilted coat, I knew was nothing
but a gun too big for even his bulges to conceal completely. But a man
needed a gun, here. Especially if he had something valuable, such as the
whereabouts of gold.

He grinned, and the white, even teeth, and the wrinkles around his eyes
took away the sense of impending catastrophe brought by those crossed
eyes. I stepped back then, and he walked in. I sat down at my desk. He
sat down across from me, and fumbled in one pocket. He lay on the desk
an object in wrappings of dirty rags. These he peeled off slowly, his
eyes seeming to dart here and there, never looking where they should. As
he peeled, he talked:

"I just landed off a ship from Fusan, up-coast. Y' ever been in Fusan?"

I shook my head, watching his fingers work at the knots of the strings
around his mysterious object.

"Korea is a funny place. As long as people have been living here, you'd
think it would be settled. But it isn't! There're immense forests, great
mountains, where no man has gone, places no one enters. They're so dumb
they don't even have compasses; they get lost! Think my compass is
magic, wonder how I know where to go next, and not get lost.
Superstitious, scared to go into the great, dark, damp forests. Scared
of the mountains no one has ever climbed. That kind of country is a
prospector's meat!"

I nodded. He had the wrappings off, and I leaned forward, a little
breathless at the beauty of the thing in his hand. A curiously wrought
little statuette about eight inches high, of gold. It was set with real
emeralds, for eyes. About the neck and waist of the exquisite female
figure were inset jewels, simulating girdle and necklace. A little
golden woman goddess! It was very finely wrought, and what surprised me,
it was not oriental, not any style of art I could place. Yet it was
alien and ancient. I reached for it. He let me take it in my hands, and
as I touched it, an electric tingle of surprise, a thrill of utter
delight, ran up my arm, as if the image contained a strong little soul
intent upon enslaving me with admiration.

"Potent little female, isn't she?"


His crossed eyes were on mine with that queer stare of the cross-eyed. I
could make nothing of the facial expressions of this man. He would have
been disturbing to play poker against. I would have said he was afraid
of that little figure! Afraid, yet very much attached to it. I set it
down and he wrapped it up again.

"Strange thing! Tell me about it."

"You know we split Korea with Russia, after the war. I thought I'd take
a look around. I have done quite a bit of that. It wasn't hard. Up near
the Russian line I found something."

He stopped, looked at me. Whether, he was trying to gauge my credulity
or my depth, I don't know.

"You're young. You're not yet thirty, Keele; you've got time left to
enjoy a fortune such as I'm letting you in on. And I saw such women
among these unknown people as no man would believe. I spent a lot of
time spying on them."

I figured he was lying about the women to get me to help him finance the
trip. But just the same, the hint of unknown and unspoiled beauty of
some hidden, weirdly alien tribe of people aroused my curiosity--the old
lure of the Savage Princess from kid days, I guess. I hadn't had a real
vacation in years--and what would I enjoy more than a jaunt through
untouched forests? Toward what didn't matter as long as the hunting was
good. And it sounded good!

"Unknown people, virgin forest, beautiful women and plenty of gold.
Sounds too good to be true!"

He squinted at me, bared his fine teeth. He leaned forward, almost
whispered trying to impress me:

"The people who made that statue are still there. It isn't ancient--they
still make them!"

Now I knew he was lying, but still I was hooked. I had to know! For that
statue was an infinite evidence of a refinement of art culture rare on
earth! If such a race still remained untouched by white man's modern
rot--I could pick up a fortune in art objects. I wasn't too dumb to know
what they'd bring in New York. I nodded, and he went on.

"I found a cache of valuable gold, jewels, and other things. Things I
can't understand. I could be better educated, Mr. Keele. That's why I've
come to you. I want some help."

I leaned back. If he found gold, he should have the wherewithal to get
in there and back without my help. So he was lying. I determined to find
out why, and just what the lie was.

"Go ahead," was all I said. Give a liar enough rope and he'll trip
himself.

But he didn't! He didn't ask for money! He only wanted me for advice,
for the names of experienced men of the kind he needed, to help him go
back there. Men willing to fight if needed. Or else he was too clever.
At the end he had me. I was committed to supervising and accompanying
that expedition. Or was it the wise emerald eyes of the little golden
Goddess that trapped me? I didn't know, then.

Finally I got it out of him. He hadn't brought back the gold. He had to
cross bandit territory, and he didn't have to tell me why he didn't
carry his fortune with only his own rifle to guard it.

I picked two well-known men who were available just then. Hank Polter
had led more than one hunting party through country I wouldn't have
picked--and come out safe. He knew what a gun was for, and when to use
it. And that's the most important part of handling a gun, knowing _when_
you have to shoot, and then doing it first. The man that shoots before
he has to is going to get you into more trouble than he can get you out
of.

Lean and tough, he knew the ropes. Around thirty, just under six feet,
not bad looking, he was making the most of Seoul's wide-open hot spots.
Nearly broke, he jumped at our offer.

Seoul is the capital of Korea, in case you don't know. Everyone did
pretty much as they pleased, for there were few restrictions from the
so-recently installed government. There are a number of gold mines
around Seoul, which was why I was there. Like the cross-eyed Jake Barto,
I knew that something would turn up worth owning where governments have
changed three times in as many years.

Frans Nolti, the other hunter we hired, was more of a fortune hunter,
by appearance, than one who knew his way in the jungles of the world.
Handsome in his Italian way, he was suave, apparently well educated,
very quick in his movements. He gave the impression of extreme
cleverness, of intellect held in reserve behind a facade of worldliness,
of light clever talk.

Both of them knew their Orient, far better than I. Which was one reason
I wanted them.


Barto had at first wanted a large party, at least a score of "white" men
of the western school, able to fight and smart enough to know how. But I
had talked him out of it.

"You see, Jake, with two like these, we can travel fast. If there's
treachery, if they aren't satisfied with the cut we're offering, why
it's two against two--you and I have an even chance. With a larger
party, we might pick up some scoundrels who will try to murder us and
make off with the treasure. Providing we _get_ the treasure!"

Jake eyed me, in that maddeningly unreadable cross-eyed expression of
cold ferocity which the scars gave his ugly face. We had agreed on
one-third each, the other two to split the other third between them. I
was footing the bills, Jake was nearly broke. He had found the stuff,
and tried to hold out for half, me a quarter, the other two to split a
quarter. I said nothing doing.

"No, Jake, this first trip, it's got to be this way. If it's like you
say it is, there'll be more. What we can carry won't be all the value.
There'll be more to be gotten out of that ruin than the stuff you found.
You'll have the money to do it, after this, and it's your find. We'll be
out, after this one trip."

We sailed up the east coast of Korea from Fusan to the village of
Leshin. By native cart from there to the ancient half-ruined city of
Musan. That's close to the Manchurian border. There we hired eight
diminutive Korean ponies and four men to "go along" as Barto put it, for
they didn't want to go, and didn't appear like men of much use for
anything but guides. And Barto knew the way. But I didn't want to be
wandering around without any native interpreters, without contact of any
kind possible with the people we might encounter. None of them had been
more than a few miles into the wilderness. They were sad looking men
when we started northward. But Koreans manage to look pretty sad much of
the time. With their history, that's easy to understand.

Something about the burly, ugly Barto's behavior began to worry me. He
didn't know where he was going. He had told a lie, but just what the lie
was I couldn't figure out. I watched him covertly. Whenever we came to
the end of a march, instead of sighting his landmarks, making sure of
his bearings--he would go off by himself. Next day, he would know
exactly where he wanted to go--but sometimes the "way" would be across
an impassable gorge, a rapids, or straight into a cliff.

One night, the fourth day and well into the wilderness, we were moving
up a broad valley through a forest of larch. I sighted a deer, and
called a halt while I stalked it. I got it, and came back ahead of the
rest, who were cutting up the deer. I moved quietly in the woods--it's a
good habit. I came upon Barto, and he was oblivious of me. He had the
little golden girl in his hands, talking to it.

"Now, tell me the way, girl, tell me the way." Then he held the girl
loosely in his hand, as I watched, it gave me an eerie feeling to see
the little figure turn, its outstretched hand pointing northward like a
compass. Was Jake Barto a madman? Or _did_ the little figure act as a
compass? If so, why did Barto have to rely on the pointing figure's hand
for directions? If he didn't get that figure from the place we were
heading, where did he get it? How did he know there was anything of
value in the place we were headed for?

These questions tormented me, for I could not ask them without revealing
to Jake that I knew he was lying. And that meant a showdown. I might
have to kill him. Still, I had to get the truth out of him, or let a
madman lead us on and on into an untracked wilderness, if that is what
he was.


For several days we did not see a sign of life, after that deer.

The forest became denser at every mile, with more and more swamps and
surface water. Time after time our ponies mired and had to be lifted out
of the mud. Lush ferns and rank grass made walking dangerous. The trees
were interlaced with draping festoons of gray "Spanish moss," forming a
canopy overhead which let through only a gloomy half-light. No sounds
broke the stillness except the half-awed calls of the men. No birds, not
even a squirrel. Then it began to rain.

That drizzle continued for a week! The men became frightened at the
gloomy stillness and exhausted by the strenuous work of keeping the
ponies moving.

Then in the night my four Koreans deserted. They didn't take any ponies,
just what grub they could pack. We all felt better off without them, but
I often wonder if they ever found their way out of that morass.

The next day there came a break. We sighted a majestic mountain about
two days' march ahead. It looked like a gloomy cloud that had settled to
earth for a moment's rest. But no cloud ever managed to look so rocky,
so windswept, or so welcome. And no patch of blue sky ever looked so
good as that sky above the mountain, swept clean of the rain curtain by
the updraft.

Jake seemed to recognize that mountain, gave an audible sigh of relief
when we sighted it. My suspicions quieted.

We went hunting that day. It was the first dry camp in a long time, the
first signs of game; we needed a rest. As usual, Barto stayed at camp to
guard the ponies and camp equipment.

We were on the trail of a bear when we saw a strange object in the sky.
It looked like a doughnut or a saucer, and it settled to the earth on
the far side of the great white mountain at whose foot we had made camp.
It seemed only an hour's walk to a point where we could overlook the
landing place of the strange object, and Hank and Frans pushed ahead,
curious and a little frightened. I had read in the American newspapers
the accounts of "disk ships" and knew they would not be able to get
close to it, and I wanted to watch Hank. I let them get out of sight,
then turned back to camp. Quietly, I was nearing our camp, when the
scream of a woman in pain came to me!

It was the answer to all my apprehensions about the ugly Barto, a sudden
materialization of the vague distrust I had felt all along! I broke into
a run, crashing through the young, white birches and larches, to the
clearing.

A chuckle reached me, a gloating heavy laugh of triumph.

Barto had the girl prone, one arm bent near to breaking, her knees
caught beneath his weight. I caught him by the shoulders, heaved
backward, sent him sprawling across the young grass. He sat up, glared
for an instant, then went for his gun. Before it came out of the
holster, my foot caught him beside the jaw. He was too big for any
other method I might have chosen to be effective. The kick stretched him
unconscious; my heel had struck the button.

I turned, to see the girl disappearing among the brush. She had darted
away instantly she was free. That she would bring her people down on us
I had no doubt. I did doubt their ability to hurt us. Unless she
belonged to a band of Manchurian bandits hanging out here in the
wilderness, they would not have arms. In the case she was of the
bandits, we might be wiped out in our sleep.

I bent over Jake, hoping I had not broken his neck. He looked as though
he would be out for some time. I picked up his heavy .45, shoved it in
my belt. I wished Hank and Frans would return soon. The four of us might
be able to handle her people.

I turned--and _she_ stood there, looking at me!

       *       *       *

That such as she existed among the usually ugly Koreans and Manchurians
was impossible! I gasped a little in unbelief. Her clothing was like
nothing on this earth.

Soft green leather was clasped low on her hips with a narrow gold band,
set with jewels. It was a skirt, I suppose, but it hung with a diagonal
hem-line running from hip to knee, it was beaded in an intricate
pattern, not Oriental, somehow reminding me of American Indian bead
work.

On her feet leather sandals, laced like the ancient Greek sandal nearly
to the knee. In her hand a bow of horn, small and powerful. Around her
shoulders a short leather cape similarly beaded and fringed. Around her
brows a jeweled circlet set like a diadem, and it crowned a young queen,
proud and knowing very well her beauty and its power.

Her features were neither Caucasian nor Oriental, certainly not the
heavy-boned native stock. I couldn't pin them down to any race. Her nose
was straight, the nostrils neither wide nor narrow, but strong and firm.
Her eyes were too wide-set and heavy-lidded to be Aryan, but they were
not tilted; they were level. Her hair was not black, but chestnut and
curled or naturally very wavy. Her glance was tawny and aflame with
anger and excitement, furious upon the prostrate Barto. They were very
light-colored eyes, and they caught the sun in a blaze that made them
seem yellow.

Striking, she was a figure not of any ordinary kind. Her every aspect
told that she came of a culture unknown to me. She was evidently not
ignorant, but of a different way of life.

Looking into her eyes, appraising her interest in myself that had
brought her back, drinking in the immense appeal of her strangeness and
her evident gentility--the evidences of a past of cultivated living as
strange as her attire--I forgot the unconscious man at my feet.

Her skin was whiter than my own! Her arms were bruised purple where
Barto had clutched her. Then she spoke, in halting Korean:

"Is he dead?"

"No," I answered.

"Then he will live to meet a far worse fate! I know why you are here,
stranger, and I warn you! You are on a fool's errand! The Golden Goddess
is death for such as you!"

I was bewildered.

"What Golden Goddess?"

"The Golden Goddess whose symbol led him here. He does not know what it
is. He stole it by murdering one of our own messengers for it. He did
not _know_ at all; he only heard the tales that some relate about her.
They are false tales."

"Did he tell you how he got it?"

"He was boasting to me, trying to get me to tell what I knew about her
dwelling-place. I would not, that is why he hurt me."

"Why did you come back, whatever-your-name?"

"My name is Nokomee, and I came back to tell you something you need to
know. Leave these others, and you will live! Stay with them, you will be
slain with them. We do not allow such as he to come among us, golden
girl or no."

"I cannot leave my comrades because of danger. What kind of man do you
think me?"

"I do not care! I can only tell you. This is a secret place, where we
remain hidden from the men of earth. I know what happens to those who
stray upon our secrets! Go, and think no more to pry into treasure tales
of this mountain land. It is not for such as you. Go, before it is too
late. I cannot hold back the death from you."

I laughed. I thought of the Koreans who had deserted, of their talk
about the fires at night, of demons and haunted mountains ahead.

"We came a long way on the track of Barto's tale of treasure from which
he brought the golden girl. It will take more than words to frighten us
away."

"Do not laugh! I try to save you from something even worse than death
that can come to you. I want to return to you the favor that you did me.
If you do not listen to me, how can I help you?" Her voice took on a
plaintive, charming note; she smiled a half-smile of complete witchery.

A high, keening cry came suddenly from the slopes above us, and she
raised on her toes as if to spring away.

"They come, my friends! I must leave you. I can only tell you to stay
close by your fire at night. I cannot say what fate will strike you. I
cannot help you. Go back, friend who would live, go back!"


She turned and sprang lightly up the slope toward the sound of the cry,
half human, half beast-like, that she had called "her friends." It had
sounded to me like the cry of a wolf, or a cat-man, anything but human.
But people can make odd sounds, and imitate beasts. Still it had been an
eerie sound that gave me a foreboding, added to her warning words. What
kind of people were these, who wore leather and jewels and used bows
that might have come off an Assyrian wall painting?

Came a tumult above, the high clear blast of some horn, a dozen eerie
cries hardly human--a rush and a pounding in the earth as though a party
had ridden off on heavy, full-size horses. No Manchurian pony ever made
such a sound on soft ground!

Polter and Noldi came back about an hour later. I had dragged the big
Barto into a tent and made him comfortable. He was snoring peacefully.
Polter squatted down beside me, folding his long form like a jackknife.

"That thing _was_ a ship, Keele," he said. There was a husky excitement,
repressed but still obvious about him. I grunted.

"It landed among some big timber on the south end of the mountain. We
got pretty close, enough to see the sides of the thing. Men busy around
it, we couldn't get too close, afraid they'd see us."

I started, a pulse of unreasoning fear, of terrific interest, ran
through me. I asked in a voice I couldn't keep calm, "What kind of men,
Hank? I saw reports of such ships in the papers, no one got close enough
to see _that_ much. Newspapers called them illusions!"

"They're not our kind of men; they are something very different. I don't
know just how to tell you, besides I couldn't be sure. But they seem to
be a people--" He stopped. "I'd rather you'd see it yourself. You
wouldn't believe me."

Noldi came out of the tent where Barto was still snoring. He came over
and squatted across the fire, eyeing me strangely.

"What happened to the big jerk, Carl?" he asked, a little tremor of
anger in his voice.

"I've got to tell you fellows we're in trouble," I began. I did not
believe that the girl's people would ignore Jake's attack upon her.

Hank looked at the slender man from New York's East Side. "What's the
matter with Barto?"

"S'got a bruise on his jaw the size of a goose-egg. Like a mule kicked
him. Scratched up quite a bit. I just wondered. He's unconscious, too; I
couldn't wake him up."

"We may be in for it," I went on. "When I got back to camp, Hank had a
girl. He'd thrown her down, was struggling with her. I had to put him
asleep to stop it. Didn't want trouble with her people."

Noldi glanced at the torn place in the soft sod where the scuffle had
taken place. I had unconsciously nodded toward it. He got up, walked
over, picked something out of the grass.

"Some girl, wearing this kind of stuff!"

He handed the glittering bauble to Polter. It was a necklace of
emeralds, with a pendant of gold in which was set a big blue stone that
I couldn't recognize, maybe a diamond, maybe something else. It looked
almighty valuable, each stone was as big as a man's thumbnail. It had
snapped, lain there unnoticed by either of us.


Noldi looked at me a little venomously.

"Looks as if you were a little premature, letting her go. We should have
found out where she gets this kind of sparkle first!"

"Seemed the safest thing to do. We are only four, how could we handle
her friends?"

"Bah, they wouldn't have known where she was. We could have kept her
till we were good and ready to let her go."

I stood up, took out my pipe and filled it.

"What about this ship you saw, and the people around it. That's
important, not this girl and her jewelry."

"We couldn't see much except that it was a ship and that it landed in
the trees where it couldn't be seen from the sky. It's pretty big, and
there are men moving around it. That's all."

"That's plenty! If we run into them, there is no knowing what they'll
do. That ship was never built on this planet."

Noldi didn't smile or laugh. He just looked at me. Serious, puzzled, and
a little scared.

"You think it's a space ship, eh, Keele?"

I nodded.

"What else could it be?"

"What's it doin' out here in no man's land?" Polter asked. "You'd think
strangers like that would land near a city, try to make some kind of
official contact."

"If you were landing on a strange world, would you land near a city?" I
asked.

Polter laughed.

"I guess you hit it. They don't know whether they'd be welcome or not.
Scared, eh?"

"Just careful, I'd say. We don't know anything about them. But ships
like that have been reported off and on for hundreds of years. Don't be
surprised if you never see a trace of it again, and if no one else but
me ever believes you when you mention it. I don't think we'll have to
worry about the flying saucer."

"What the hell do they want, then?" Noldi didn't know what I meant,
exactly.

"Nobody knows, Frans. Nobody ever saw them as close as you just did
today."

       *       *       *

Watching Jake Barto next morning, I saw that the little image in his
hand pointed right across the center of that cloud-topping mountain.
That meant we had to go around it, for we were not equipped for such
climbing, nor would there have been any sense in it. Jake figured on
circling to the left, and I was glad, for I for one wanted no parts of
that disk ship that Polter and Noldi had seen in the other direction.
Jake ignored me. He was unpredictable!

It was a long mountain, and we traveled along one side, toward the
north, figuring on crossing to the east wherever a pass appeared. After
a time a faint trail showed, and we followed it. It drew us higher,
until we were moving perilously along a ledge of rock, with precipitous
walls above and a sharp drop below. Higher and higher, above the
tree-line now, the path went on, and there were signs of travel along it
that worried me.

Polter was in the lead, and as we rounded a shoulder of rock, gave a cry
of wonder. We hurried after, to see the trail breaking over a low crest
of the mountain, and leading now downward. This shoulder of rock
outthrust here marked the place where the trail we were following
crossed the ridge of the mountain crest at its lowest point. But it also
marked something else, which was what had caused Polter's cry.

A line of dust across the trail and along the near-bare rocks stirred
and lifted and fell fitfully, as if the air was barred passage by some
invisible wall, and there were the skeletons of birds that had flung
themselves against the invisible wall and died, falling there. There was
the skeleton of a goat half across the trail; and at one side, what had
once been a man! All these dead--and the bones could be seen here and
there along the far line of the dust--had gone so far and no farther.
Polter had stopped fearfully ten feet from the clearly marked line--and
I for one had no desire to add my skeleton to the others.

For a few minutes none of us had anything to say, then reason reasserted
itself, and I pressed past Polter, knowing that the thing was an
illusion born of coincidence and wind currents. Some baffling current of
wind around the mountain formed here a wall of air cleavage, and the
skeletons were merely coincidence. I pushed up to the strange line of
lifting and falling dust, a little roll showing the magic of invisible
force, and pressed on, as if to cross.

Behind me a cry gave me pause. I turned, looking for that cry's source,
for it seemed to me the cry was the girl I had rescued from Barto. That
saved me, for the little horse behind me pressed on across the strange
line--and faltered, gave a horse-scream of terror, fell dead before me.

We stopped, terror of the unknown in our breasts, wondering--afraid to
put the wonder into words. We did not look at each other or discuss the
thing, we just accepted it, and stared dumbly at it like animals. I
tossed a rock across the body of the now quite motionless pack animal,
the rock reached the wall beneath which my animal lay dead--slowed,
curved sharply to the ground, did not roll, but lay as if imprisoned in
invisible jelly!

There was a wall of invisible and deadly force there, and there was no
known explanation for it!

I growled at Barto, all the suspicion and distrust that had been
building up in me toward him in my voice.

"What does your golden girl tell you now, Jake?"


Jake surprised me. He walked ahead toward that frightening manifestation
of the unknown, holding the little statuette before him like a sword,
his ugly face rapt in some listening beyond me. As the little statue
crossed the line, he sang out:

"Listen, Goddess of the Golden forces, listen and heed! We come from
afar to pay our worship, to give to you our devotion, and we are met
with this wall of death! Is that the way you greet your friends?"

Jake waved the statuette in a circular motion, then crossed the circle
twice with the waving gold. He stood there, his crossed eyes darting
here and there along the line of force, and after a long minute, after a
time that seemed filled with a distant chuckling, like thunder too far
off to be heard clearly--the lift and fall of the dust on the baffled
wind stopped, the strict line of the wind's stoppage began to disappear,
the line of demarcation was gone!

Jake reached out an arm, feeling cautiously for the invisible wall, and
after a minute, his face lightened from its habitual gloom, he stepped
across the line, and did not stagger and fall as had the horse. The wall
was gone! Jake turned, said calmly:

"Come on, our friends have decided to let us in."

My mind in a whirl at the unexpected display of knowledge beyond me, of
forces beyond the power of any rifle bullet to overcome, of strange
hidden things here--I stepped across the line, keeping close to the
tracks left by Jake's big feet. Polter and Noldi followed and the horses
plodded after. We trudged on, but not the same. We were afraid, and we
were conscious of a vast ignorance, of a fear that we did not belong
here, that the only wise thing for us to do was to turn back and give up
this Jake Barto and his cross eyes and his mumbo jumbo statue to his own
doom.

At least that's the way I felt, but something stronger than curiosity
drew me on. I wanted to know why I was so drawn when reason kept
demanding I give up this quest. I wanted to know why a golden statue
pointed always to one point on the horizon, and why that wall of force
had obeyed Jake's injunction to go away. Or was I unable to think,
really? Was I shocked out of my ability to reason and act on my reason's
dictates?

Ahead, as the trail dipped low, a vast panorama of valley and hill and
hollow, of eerie rocky spires, lay outspread. Here and there were
cultivated fields, and figures at work on the fields. In the distance
shone a stream. It flowed meandering into a wide lake. There were two
villages, not clear in the haze. At the distant lake, some kind of
larger structure lifted tall towers, shining with prismatic glitter, a
city of strange appearance.

We had crossed a barrier, and we had entered a land of the living--but
it was unclear before us. The drifting mountain mists, the sun-glitter
and the haze of noon kept the scene from striking through to our brains
with its true significance. For there was an eerie _difference_ about
the scene; it was not a land below us such as any of us had ever seen.
I felt that and yet I could not think clearly about it. We moved along
like zombies, not thinking--just accepting the unusual and the unknown
as casually as if we were travelers who could not be astounded. But
inside, my mind was busily turning the significance and the meaning of
this wall of force. I had heard of such walls before--upon Shasta in
California, and in Tibet, and in ancient times in Ireland, and there
were other instances of a similar wall in the past, and in the present
in other places. But what it could really mean, that was what I did not
know.

After crossing that invisible barrier, things began to happen in a
sequence, of a strangeness and with a rapidity such that I was unable to
analyze or to rationalize. From there on I was like a man on a
tightrope, hounded by invisible tormentors trying to shake me off. I had
not time to wonder whether it was true that spirits existed. What I did
think was that some of these Korean primitives had a Devil Doctor who
surpassed all others in trickiness, and was amusing himself at our
expense. But I did not _think_ it, I _clung_ to the idea to save my
reason from tottering over the brink.

The first thing after the wall that could not exist but did--after we
had passed on over the ridge and half way down the mountain side--was a
gully along the mountain side, up which Barto turned. I assumed he was
still following the pointing of the magnetic statuette, but I was
vaguely conscious that none of us were _really_ conscious--were under a
kind of spell in which our actions and our thoughts were
predetermined--inevitable! I knew it, but I could not shake it off, nor
put my finger on any reason why I should shake it off and call a halt to
the strange, wordless, silent following of Jake and his eerie talisman.


The faint trail led along the bottom of the gully, and after twenty
minutes of downward progress, led into a dark overhang of rock, the sky
hardly visible where the rocks almost met overhead. Down the semi-cavern
we went; still silent, zombie-like; and I felt ever more strongly the
compulsion that made us so move and so unable to do otherwise.

Jake was striding rapidly now, his dark ugly face aflame with weird
eagerness, my own heart pounding with alarm at the strangeness and the
irrationality of the whole proceeding. He held the statuette out
stiffly, it seemed fairly to leap in his hands, as if tugging with an
ecstatic longing to reach the dark place ahead. The rocks closed
completely overhead; the dimness changed to stygian darkness. I got out
my flashlight, sent the beam ahead. But Jake was pressing on through the
darkness, directly in the center of the trail.

Quite suddenly the cavern turned, opened ahead, wider and wider--and
before us lay a room of jeweled splendor, the temple of some
forgotten--_or was it forgotten?_--cult of worship.

The golden statue in the center of the big round chamber drew our eyes
from the splendor of the peculiarly decorated walls, from the strange
crystal pillar on the tall dais at the far wall, from the weird
assemblages of crystals and metals that had an eerie resemblance to
machines--to a science entirely unknown to modern men. All these details
of that chamber I remember now, looking back, but then--my attention and
that of the others was entirely drawn to the beauty of the tall, golden
woman who stood in frozen metallic wonder at the center of the forgotten
crypt.

Jake, his ugly face in a transport, had fallen to his knees, was
crawling forward to the statue abjectly, mouthing phrases of worship
and self-abnegation. Close on his heels came Polter and Noldi, eyes
rapt, movements mechanical. I stopped, some last remnant of sense
remaining in my head, and by a strong effort of will held my limbs
motionless.

As Jake reached the statue, the little golden replica of the life-sized
woman of gold seemed to leap out of his reaching hands, and clung
against the metallic waist of the golden woman as a lodestone to the
mother lode.

Even as Barto's hands touched the statue, he slumped, lay there
outstretched, his fingertips touching the metal hem of the golden skirt;
and whether he was unconscious from unsupportable ecstasy or for what
mad reason, I did not know, but I did not _want_ to know.

Undeterred by Jake's condition, the two men following in his steps also
reached out hands to touch the golden metal--and fell flat on their
faces beside Jake Barto, unconscious, or dead!

I stood, numb and with a terrific compulsion running through my nerves,
which I resisted with all my will. I drew my eyes from the strangely
pleasant magnetic lure of the metal woman with an effort and examined
that strange chamber.

The walls were covered with a crystalline glittering substance, like
molten glass sprayed on and allowed to harden. Behind this glasseous
protective surface, paintings and carvings spread a fantasy of strange
form and color, but the light was too dim to make much of it, except
that it was alien to my experience, and exceedingly well done, speaking
of a culture second to none.

Beyond the central form of the strange golden statue, was the dais which
I had noticed at once, and now my eyes picked out the fact that on it
was also a glasseous protective sheath about a form--another statue, I
thought.


Thoughtfully I prowled along the rim of the room, examining the wall
frescoes foot by foot, seeing on them a strange depiction of semi-human
forms, of crab-men and crab-women, of snake-men and snake-women, of men
half-goat and half-man, of creatures hardly human with great jaws that
looked like rock-cutters, with hands like moles on short powerful arms,
fish people with finned legs and arms, their hands engaged in catching
great fish and placing them in nets, a nightmare of weird half-human
shapes that gradually brought to me a message that I could not accept.

If that rock painting was telling a true story and not some allegorical
fantasy--these people who had built this place had been a race who knew
the secrets of life so intimately they could manipulate the unborn child
into shapes intended to give it powers and physical attributes fitting
it for amphibious life, for the underground boring life of a mole, for
the tending of flocks in the goat-legged men--the whole gamut of these
monstrous diversions from the normal human seemed to me
designed--purposely--to build a race which, like ants, has a shape
fitted to its trade.

I threw off the illusion of a deformed past race the wall art gave me,
and passed on to examine the crystalline pillar on the dais. I stood a
long time, before the dais, drinking in the beauty of the form locked
within the prisoning glass.

No human, no earth woman--she was different from anything I had ever
even imagined.

Female, vaguely human in form she was, with an unearthly beauty; but
four-armed, with a forehead that went up and up and ended in a single
tall horn, as on the fabled unicorn.

Her eyes were closed, if she had eyes beneath the heavy purple-veined
lids, so like the petals of some night-flower, pungent with perfume.

Naked the figure was, except for a belt of what looked iron chain around
the waist, black and corroded with time, holding her with a great bolt
and link to the side of that crystalline prison.

Her hair, black as night, was pressed tight to the skull by the pressure
of the crystal, which must have been poured about her in a molten or
liquid state.

As I stood there agaze at the strangeness and wonder of her, a voice at
my shoulder made me whirl in surprise. A soft, silky familiar voice:

"Do you find the dead Goddess so fascinating, stranger from the world of
men?"

It was the girl of the forest, no longer in hunting garb, but dressed in
Turkish trousers, vest and slippers with upturned toes. Jewels glittered
about her waist and neck and arms, her wrists jangled with heavy
bangles, in her ears two great pendants swayed--her eyelids were
darkened and her lips reddened. She was a ravishing houri of the harem,
and I gasped a little at the change.

"Have you put on such clothes for my benefit?" I asked, for I really
thought perhaps she had.

She frowned and stamped her foot in sudden anger.

"I come here to save you from what has happened to your friends, and you
insult me. Don't you want to live? Do you want to become what they are
going to become?" She pointed to the bodies of Jake and Noldi and
Polter.


I turned where she pointed, to see a thing that very nearly made me
scream out in revulsion.

I shuddered, shrank back; for several creatures were bending over the
three, lifting them, bearing them away.

It was the strange, revolting difference from men in them that caused my
fear. Once they may have been men, their far-off ancestors, perhaps--or
in some other more recent way their bodies had been transformed, made
over into creatures not human, not beast, not ghoul. What they were was
not thinkable or acceptable by me. I turned my face away, shuddering.

They were men such as the wall-paintings pictured, something that had
been made from the main stock of mankind, changed unthinkably into a
creature who bore his tools of his trade in his own bone and flesh.
Mole-men, men with short heavy arms and wide-clawed hands, made for
digging through hard earth. They bore my friends away on their
hairy-naked shoulders, and I stood too shocked to say a word. Three
mole-men, accompanied by three tall, pale-white figures, figures
inexpressibly alien--even through the heavy white robes--that moved with
an odd hopping step that no human limb could manage, turned their
paper-white, long, expressionless faces toward me for an instant, then
were gone, on the trail of the mole-man. Beneath those robes must have
been a body as attenuated as a skeleton, as different as an insect's
from man's. Within those odd egg-shaped heads must have been a mind as
alien to mine as an ant's mind.

"Why do your people take my companions?" I managed, when I had regained
my composure.

"They are not my people; they are of the enemies of the Dead Goddess."
The girl gestured to the figure in the crystal pillar. "My people have
no time for them, but neither have we power over them. They go their
way, and we go ours. Once, long ago, it was different, but time has
made us a people divided."

"What will become of the three men?"

"They will become workmen of one kind or another. Everyone works, in
_their_ life-way. But it is not _our_ way! They guard our land from such
intruders; we let them. It is an ancient pact we have with them."

"Why did they not seize me, I am an intruder as much as the others?"

"Because I signed to them to let you stay. You did not see,
whatever-your-name-is...."

"Call me Carlin Keele, Carl for short. What is your name, and what is
your race, and why are you so different from people as I know them?"

"My name is Nokomee, as I told you before. You are still confused from
the magic that led you here. I have saved you once, and _now we are
even_; my debt to you is paid. You will never see your friends again,
and if you do, you will be sorry that you saw them, for they will have
become beasts of burden. Now go, before it is too late. This is not your
kind of country."

Something in her eyes, something in the sharp peremptory tone she used,
told me the truth.

"You don't really want me to go, Nokomee. I don't want to go. Many
things make me want to stay--your beauty is not the least attraction. I
could learn so much that my people do not know, that yours seem to
know."

"I would not want my beauty to lead you to your death." Nokomee did not
smile, she only looked at me, and I saw there a deep loneliness, a
tender need for companionship and sympathy that had never been filled in
her life. She looked at me, and her lower lip trembled a little, her
eyes suddenly averted from mine.

"Nokomee, there is so much we would have to tell each other, you of your
life, and I of the great country of which you have never heard. Would
you not like to see the great cities of my country?"

She shook her head, turned on me with sudden fierce words:

"When you came and struck down that hideous cross-eyed man, my heart
went out to you in gratitude. Go, while my heart remains soft, it is not
so often that the heart of a _Zerv_ is soft toward any outlander. Go, I
cannot protect you from this place."

"I will stay," I said.

"Stubborn fool!" She stamped her foot prettily, imperiously, vexed at my
refusal to go out of that weird place the way I had entered. "Stay then,
but do not expect me to keep off the slaves of the Goddess. This place
can be most evil to those who do not know what it is, nor why it is
secret."


She turned, walked behind the great dais of the crystal sarcophagus, and
I followed just in time to see her disappear behind a hanging curtain of
leather. I hastened after, my hand on my gun, for I had no wish to be
left alone where I had seen my three companions stricken down with no
enemy in sight.

Behind the curtain a passage led, along the passage were several doors.
She sped past these lightly, almost running. I followed, she must have
heard me, but she did not look back. The doors along the passage were
curtained. Through the gaps of the curtain I could see they were empty
of life. The curtains were rotted as if long unused, dirty and blotched
with mould staining the leather.

Though she had spoken to me in Korean, and I had answered in the same
tongue, I knew she was no native, for she spoke it differently, perhaps
no better than myself. I was no judge; what she used may have been a
dialect different from that I had heard previously.

I followed as she emerged from the long tunnel into the blaze of
sunlight. She stood for a moment letting her eyes adjust to the glare. I
stumbled to her side, half-blinded, stood looking down at the scene
which seemed to engross her.

Gradually it came clear, like a television screen coming into perfect
tune--the immense inner valley that the mountain of cloud-like snow
enclosed. In the center of the encircled valley a lake shimmered blue as
the sky, and about that lake was a city.

My eyes refused, at first, to accept what they were seeing. My mind
rebelled, but after a minute of staring and making sure--I gasped.

Alien to this earth it was, but beautiful! Towers, and round-based
dwellings braced together in one single unit of structural strength, a
designed whole such as our architects dream of and never achieve. Walled
with white marble, the city was a fortress, but a lovely fortress. Yet
there was a coldness, an angularity, that told me these Zervs, as
Nokomee had called her race, lacked true sympathy for life forms, lacked
emotion as we know it in art. Yet it was beautiful, if repellent because
so alien, so pure in design, so lacking in the sympathetic understanding
of man's nature. This was a city no earthman could ever call home. It
lacked something. There were no dogs, no strolling women or running
children, it lay silent and waiting--for what?

Nokomee waved a hand.

"Titanis, our first earth colony. But it is no longer ours. The Schrees
have taken it from us. That is why it is silent."

I did not understand. There were plodding lines of people, disciplined,
carrying burdens, no bigger than ants at this distance. There was an
ominous horror about the quiet beauty of the place. It was somehow like
a beautiful woman lying just slain. Yet I could see no wounds of war, no
reason for the feeling that I had, like the sudden shrinking one might
have at sight of the stump of a man's arm just amputated.

I looked into Nokomee's face, and there were tears in her eyes. My heart
sank. I felt a vast sympathy for her sorrow, though I could not
understand.

"We planned so much with our new freedom here in your wilderness. Then
came the raiders, to freeze our Queen in her sleep, to drive us into
your forests, to make of us that remained mindless slaves and maimed
horrors. I cannot bear it, stranger. I cannot...."

She turned and wept, her head on my chest. I patted her head, feeling
entirely incompetent to console her for what injuries I could not
imagine.

"What raiders, Nokomee? Tell me. Perhaps there is a way I can help. Who
knows?"

"We are so few now, who were so many and so strong--and every day fewer.
There is no hope. Do not try to wake it in me. It would be madness."

"Tell me. Perhaps that alone would help you."

"How can I tell you the long history of my home world, the immortal
wisdom of our Queen, the strange science her immortal family gave her,
of how we fought to protect her from our own tyrants and at last fled
into space with her? How can I tell you of what she is? How could you
understand the ages of struggle on our own world that reduced her kind
to but a dozen, and left our kind, the mortals, at the mercy of the
Schrees? You ask, but it is impossible for you to believe things you do
not know about."

"Perhaps if I told you of my people and their life, you would understand
that I could understand what you think is impossible for me. I am not
ignorant as the others of earth people you have met. And my nation is
numerous, the greatest of this earth."

"Our ways are too strange to you. But I will try. You need not try to
tell me of your people; we examined your earth carefully before we chose
this valley for our retreat. Here we built and raised the force wall to
keep out inquiring interlopers like yourself who might bring the powers
of your nation in ignorant war against us. But from our home world the
Schrees were sent on our trail, and they found us. They were too many.
Our only hope was in safe hiding, and they found us out. We did not know
they could find us, or we would never have built. We thought pursuit had
long been abandoned, but they are driven by single-minded hate, not by
logic. It has been a lifetime of wandering they have followed us. It has
been all my lifetime, making this home here, thinking ourselves
safe--and then they came and destroyed all our work."


As she talked, she had quieted. We had resumed walking along the ledge
of the mountainside. Suddenly from ahead a man leaped out, his strange
weapon trained on my breast. I stood, not daring to move, while Nokomee
shouted a string of shrill alien syllables at him. He thrust the weapon
back in his belt, and fell in behind us as we passed. I could not help
staring at him, and at the thing he had pointed at me.

It was a tapering tube about a foot long, triggered on the thumb side
with a projecting stud, with a hand-grip shaped with finger grooves. I
knew it was a weapon with a long history of development behind it by the
simplicity of the lines, the entire efficiency of its appearance. The
small end was a half-inch, perhaps, in bore, the big end perhaps three
inches or less. He handled it as though it weighed but a trifle. I did
not ask what it was.

The man himself was no taller than Nokomee, though much more solidly
built, with thick, slightly bowed legs and heavy black brows on bulging
bone structure, his eyes deep-set beneath. His ears, like Nokomee's,
were high and too small to be natural. His teeth were larger than normal
on earth, and the incisors smaller and more pointed, the canines heavier
and longer. There was a point to his chin, heavy-angled and thick-boned
as it was, it was not an earthman's chin. His neck was long, more supple
and active, he kept moving his head in an unnatural watchfulness like a
wild animal's. I wondered what other differences, small in themselves,
but adding up to complete strangeness of aspect, I would find in time.

"That is Holaf," murmured Nokomee in Korean to me. "He is a chief among
us now, since the fall of our strength. He is good, but young and always
too impetuous. He needs long experience, and it looks as if he would get
it, now."

"You have more than one leader?" I asked.

"We have three chiefs left to us, who rule their families--their clans.
We have but one real leader. He is an old wise man left us by good
fortune. He is our lone scientist. The chiefs of the clans listen to the
leader, but they argue. Things look bad for us all."

"You are too few to reconquer the city?"

"Too few, yes. And time plays against us, for with the coming of the
ships from our home planet--that I should call that tyrant's nest
home!--there will be even more of the Schrees, then. We are a lost
people now. There is no hope, eventually we will be hunted down as you
earthmen will be hunted down, like animals. Made into slaves--and worse
than slaves. You will learn what I mean when next you see your three
friends."

It was too much for me. I asked:

"Why don't you leave this place, and go on to another?"

"On your little world? It is not big enough to hide ourselves from them.
And we have lost our ships, we cannot get others."

"You think that they mean to conquer our whole planet?"

"In time they will do so. Not yet, but when they are many, they will
spread, slaughter all who fight them, and enslave all who do not. They
are very terrible creatures, not men at all, you know."

"Not like you and I?"

"Not at all. You will see, soon. Hurry, it is late, and we have council
to attend."

There was a deep passion in her words, quick and sharp and strange on
her lips as they were, a passion of anger and hopeless effort that
somehow roused me into desire to help her and these strange people of
hers. Too, if what she said was true, these raiders who had despoiled
her people would in time engulf the world with a war of conquest, even
if they were less able to defeat us than she estimated. I resolved to
make the most of this opportunity to learn the worst of this hidden
threat to men everywhere. I felt a kinship with Nokomee and her friend,
silent and alert beside me, and I realized it could well be that I had
in my hands the future of mankind, and that it behooved me not to let it
fall through carelessness.


Lapsed now into silence, we reached the end of the trail along the
ledge. We came out upon a broad shelf, with several cave mouths opening
along its cliff-side. Gathered here in the twilight were some two-score
men and women, bearing weapons; some the short powerful bow I had seen
in Nokomee's hands; others weapons like Holaf's tapered tube; still
others bearing small, round metal shields embossed with weird designs
that meant nothing to me. Squatted here, without fire, they fell silent
at our approach, eyeing me with curiosity and the beginnings of anger at
my intrusion. Nokomee began to talk swiftly in that rattling,
high-pitched tongue of theirs. I squatted down on my heels, took out my
pipe, lit it. At the flare of my match Holaf struck it from my hand. I
realized it had been a blunder, even a spark might attract attention to
their presence on the hillside. Still, the incident told me Nokomee had
not been lying to me.

Holaf pointed at the city far below, now glowing here and there with
lights, and at the match on the ground. Then he motioned to a cave
mouth, and I followed him. Inside there was a fire burning, furs strewn
about the floor, metal urns and even mirrors hung on the rough stone
walls. I sat on a rude wooden bench of newly-hewed wood, lit my pipe
again without interference. But I was sorry to miss that conference
outside in the open air. I wanted to hear, even if I could not
understand. Holaf still remained by my side, and his hand did not leave
the oddly-carved butt of the tapered tube-gun.

I sat there, feeling very much alone, with Holaf watching me somberly,
the only light a flickering amber from the fire. I started to my feet as
a musically pitched, almost singing voice questioned Holaf in their
tongue. I looked about for the source, then saw her moving toward me in
the half-light, and I stepped back in a kind of awe and embarrassment,
for this was new.

She was as tall as myself, shaped with slender Amazonian strength, but
curved and soft and subtly aware of her feminine allure, strongly
interested and pleased at the awe and pleasure in my face. Her, rounded,
fully adult body was sketched over with a web of silkily gleaming black
net, light and unsubstantial as a dream, clinging and wholly revealing.
Her eyes were dark-lidded and wide-set, her brow high and proud, and
about her neck hung a web of emeralds set in a golden mesh of yielding
links.

She came on, moving on shoes like Japanese water shoes, completely
mystifying as to how she balanced on the stilt-like soles. Stepping thus
in little balancing steps like a dancer, she moved very close, peering
into my eyes, so that I blushed deeply at the nearness and the nudity of
her, and she laughed, amusedly, as at a child. Her long, gemmed hand
reached out and touched me, and she talked to Holaf excitedly, her face
all smiles and interest; I was a wholly fascinating new toy he had
brought her, it seemed. Then she sank to the bench, crossing her lovely
knees over her hands, clasped together as if to make sure they behaved.
To me she was wholly cultured and I some strange boor who had never been
in a drawing room. I felt the impact of that culture in her interested
eyes and in the sleek, smart bearing of her utterly relaxed body. She
stretched a hand to gesture me to be seated, and I tried Korean on her.

"It is a pleasure to meet you, lady. If I but knew who you were, and how
to speak properly, there is much we could find of interest to discuss."

"I am sure of it, stranger. First you must tell me of yourself, and then
later we will talk of what is familiar to me. I cannot put off the
curiosity which burns me. Please tell me all about your people and
yourself!" Her voice was hard to follow, she handled the clumsy Korean
with a bird-like quickness and an utter disregard for the nature of the
language. Her eyes burned into my own, and I sat embarrassed beside her,
tongue-tied, while Holaf smiled quietly and kept his hand on his weapon.

So I talked about New York, about my home town in Indiana, about my mine
in South America, about anything and everything, and she listened, rapt
eyes encouraging me, hanging on every stumbling, mispronounced,
difficult word. I would have given an arm to have been able to talk
expertly in her own tongue.

Thus engaged, and engrossed by her, I glanced up absently to note
Nokomee's eyes blazing into my own in fury, and spaced about the room in
a listening circle, a score of others. I stopped abruptly, and Nokomee
lashed out at the woman beside me with a string of alien expletives that
made her face flame with an anger as great as Nokomee's own. I wondered
vaguely what I had done....

Their strange, grim faces, all watching me, seeming to peer inside me,
trying to gauge me as an enemy or a friend. I stood up, for the exciting
near-nude body of the woman who had caused Nokomee's outburst was too
close, too intimately relaxed.

Abruptly Nokomee took me by the hand, led me out and along the ledge on
the cliff. Into another cavern entrance she led me, to a smaller
chamber, where another fire burned, and another bench invited to its
warmth. She half pushed me to a seat, and busied herself in the next
adjoining chamber, rattling dishware, and now and again giving a sharp
exclamation as of extreme disgust.


I gathered I had been guilty of falling for the Zerv equivalent of a
vamp. How wrong I was in this deduction I was to learn. It was not the
woman's beauty that Nokomee feared, but something vastly more dangerous.
I was very ignorant then. The Zervs were an ancient people and their
ways were strange entirely. For the net-clad beauty had been a "Zoorph."
I asked Nokomee, as she repeated the word again.

"What is a Zoorph, that makes you so angry? I thought she was very
charming. I saw no harm in talking to her!"

Nokomee thrust her head out of the curtained doorway, from which the
smell of food told me I had not eaten since morning.

"A Zoorph dear _child_ of earth, is a creature not good for man or
beast! Only a Zerv would be fool enough to keep so dangerous an animal
about! If I told you, you would not believe it."

"Tell me anyway, Nokomee."

The girl came, bearing food on a tray. She squatted at my feet, putting
the tray on the bench, and holding a large graceful urn of some liquid
to replenish my cup. Very prettily she did this, yet I gathered that it
was something which would have overwhelmed me with the honor if I had
understood. I did appreciate her service, and I tried to say so, but she
silenced me.

"Never mind, one day you will understand how proud we are, that in our
own world and in our own society _you_ would be less than a worm. Yet I
serve you, who am more above you than a princess would be in your world.
Thus does the world change about one, and one adjusts. But do not think
of it. It must be, or some terrible thing like the Zoorph would seize
upon you here among us."

I laughed a little, for I was sure she was telling a lie, to warn me
against the "vamp" in the only words she could think of in the alien
tongue.

Her face flushed deep red at my laughter, and she half rose as if to
leave, but restrained her anger.

"A Zoorph is worse than a disease, it has enervated my people until they
have lost everything, and still they are among us. They are children
raised by a secret cult on my own world, trained into strange practices.
It is somewhat like a witch or sorcerer would be to you, but much, much
different. You could not understand unless you were raised among us.
When men are tired of life, they go to a Zoorph. It is not nice to speak
of, what they are and what they do. To us, it is like death, only worse.
Yet we have them, as ants have pets, as dogs have lice, as your people
have disease. It is a custom. It is a kind of escape from life and
life's dullness--but it is escape into madness, for the Zoorph has an
art that is utter degradation, and few realize how bad they are for us.
You must never go near her again!"


Days passed into weeks, and every day I learned a few words of the Zerv
language, every day I picked up a little more insight into their utterly
different ways and customs and standards--their scale of values. It was
a process replete with surprises, with revelations, with new
understanding of nature itself as seen through the alien eyes.

I remained as a kind of semi-prisoner, tolerated because of Nokomee's
position and her affection for me. Nokomee, I learned, was "of the
blood," though there were few surviving of her family to carry on the
power and prestige she would have inherited. Yet, she was "of the blood"
and entitled to all the respect and obedience the Zervs gave even to
their old ruler.

He was an attenuated skeleton of a man, with weary eyes and trembling
hands, and I grew more and more sure that the inactivity against their
usurpers visible in the valley beneath was due more to his age and
timorous nature than to any inability to turn the tables. They seemed to
hold the "Schrees" in contempt, yet never took any action against them,
so that I wondered if the contempt were justified or was an inherited,
sublimated hatred.

The supplies, rifles and ammunition which had been left on our horses
when we entered the cavern of the golden image, had been brought to
Nokomee's cavern and locked in a small chamber before my eyes. It was
all there. As the time dragged on, I chafed at the inactivity, fought
against the barriers of language and alien custom that separated me from
these people, struggled to overcome their indifference and their, to me,
impossible waiting for _what_ I did not understand.

Finally I could wait no longer. In the night, I burst the lock of the
closet with a bar, took out a rifle and .45 and two belts of cartridges.
I slid over the lip of the ledge that hid us from the city's eyes. I was
going to see for myself what we were hiding from, what we were waiting
for, was going to take my chances with the dangers in that place they
had built and from which they now hid. I had pressed Nokomee for
explanations and promises of future participation in their life and
activities, and I had been refused for the last time! Like a runaway, I
slid down the steep cliff face, putting as much space between the Zervs
and myself as rapidly as I could.

The night was dark as pitch. I had left Nokomee asleep in her chamber. I
had avoided Holaf, who still kept a kind of amused watch over my
activities, and I was free. Free to explore that weird city of plodding
lives, of strange unexplained sounds, of ominously hidden activity!

Scrambling, sliding, worrying in the dimness, I finally reached the less
precipitous slopes of the base of the cliff. As I stopped to get a
bearing on the direction of the city, above me came a slithering, a soft
feminine exclamation, and down upon me came a perfumed weight, knocking
me sprawling in the grass.

My eyes quickly adjusted, I crawled to the dim shape struggling to her
feet. Her face was not Nokomee's, as I had at first thought. Those
enormous shadowed eyes, that thin lovely nose, the flower-fragile lips,
the mysterious allure--were the woman whom Nokomee had described as a
"Zoorph" and whom she had both feared and despised. I spoke sharply in
the tongue of the Zervs. I had learned enough under Nokomee's tutelage
to carry on a conversation.

"Why do you follow me, Zoorph?"

"Because I am weary of being cooped up with those who do not trust me,
just as you. I want to find a new, exciting thing; just as do you. Even
if it is death or worse, I want it. I am alive, as are you."

I put down the dislike and distrust the girl Nokomee had aroused in me
against her. Perhaps she _had_ been merely jealous of her.

"Don't you _know_ what could happen in the city?" To me it was curious
that she should want to go where the others feared to go.

"I know no better than you what awaits there, and I do not believe what
they have told me of the Schrees. They are not wholly human, but neither
are they evil wholly, as the Zervs suppose."

"Why do the Zervs wait, instead of trying to do something for
themselves? They speak of the threat of these raiders, yet they do not
try to help me bring others of my people here to stop the threat they
speak of so fearfully. I do not understand."

"The old ruler thinks the ships will come and drive them off from his
city. But he is wrong, they will never come. It is like waiting for the
moon to fall. The raiders' ships will return, and they will be stronger
than ever. But not a ship of the Zervs remains in neighboring space to
succor us. Yet he hopes, and his followers wait. It is foolish, and he
cannot trust you or men like you to get help for him. He is too old to
meet new conditions and to understand."


Few of the Zervs had shown the rapt interest in me and my people that
this Zoorph had made so plain. I thought backward on how carefully she
and I had been kept apart since our first meeting, and I realized there
was more to it than Nokomee's words of anger.

"What is a Zoorph, and what is your name? Why did Nokomee warn me
against all Zoorphs?"

"A Zoorph is a member of a cult; a student of mysteries not understood
by the many. The others have a superstition about us, that we destroy
souls and make others slaves to our will. It is stupid, but it is like
all superstitions--hard to disprove because so vague in nature." She
flickered impossible eyelashes at me languishingly, in perfect coquetry.
"You don't think me dangerous to your soul, do you?"

I didn't. I thought her a very charming and talented woman, whom I
wanted to know much better. I said so, and she laughed.

"You are wiser than I thought, to see through their lies. They are good
people, but like all people everywhere, they have their little
insanities, their beliefs and their intolerances."

Yet within me there was a little warning shudder borne of the strange
power of her eyes on my own, of the chill of the night, of many little
past-observed strangenesses in her ways, in the fear the Zervs bore for
her ... I reserved something of caution. She saw this in my eyes and
smiled sadly, and that sad and understanding smile was perfectly
calculated to dispel my last doubt of her. I slid closer across the
grass, to lie beside her.

"What could I gain by a knowledge of what lies in the city, Zoorph?" I
asked.

"My name is _Carna_, stranger. In that city you can learn whether there
is danger for your people in what the Schrees plan on earth. We could
not tell that, for we do not know enough about your own race's
abilities. You could steal a vehicle to take you to your own rich
cities. And as for me, I could go with you, to practice my arts in your
cities and become rich and famous."

"What are your arts, Carna?"

"Nothing you would call spectacular, perhaps. I can read thought, I can
foretell the future, and I can sometimes make things happen fortunately,
if I try very hard. Such things, very unsubstantial arts, not like your
gun which kills. Subtle things, like making men fall in love with me,
perhaps."

She laughed into my eyes and I got abruptly to my feet. She was telling
the truth in the last sentence, and I did not blame Nokomee for fearing
her power.

"Let us see, then, Carna, what the night can give us. I cannot wait
forever for chance to bring me freedom. Come," I bent and helped her to
her feet, very pleasant and clinging her grasp on my arm, very soft and
utterly smooth the flesh of her arm in my hand, very graceful and lovely
her swift movement to rise. My heart was beating wildly, she was a kind
I understood, but could not resist any the better for knowing. Or was I
unkind, and she but starved for kindness and human sympathy, so long
among a people who disliked and feared her?

We walked along in the darkness, the distant moving lights of that city
closer each step, and a dread in my breast at what I would find there, a
dread that grew. Beside me Carna was silent, her face lovely and glowing
in the night, her step graceful as a deer's.

We circled the high wall of white marble keeping some twenty feet away,
where the grass gave knee-high cover we could drop into instantly. We
came around to the far side from the cliff, and stopped where a paved
highway ran smooth, like pebbled glass, straight across the valley. I
glanced at Carna, she gestured toward the open gate in the wall, and
smiled a daring word.

"In...?"

"In!" I answered, and like two kids, hand in hand, we stole through the
shadowed gateway, sliding quickly out of the light, standing with our
backs to the wall, looking up the long, dim-lit way along which a myriad
dark doorways told of life. But it was seemingly deserted. Carna
whispered softly:

"When it was ours, the night was gay with life and love, now--_it is
death!_"

"Death or taxes, we're going to take a look."

We stole along the shadowed side of the street, the moon was up,
shedding much too bright a light now for comfort. Perhaps a hundred
yards along that strange street we went, I letting the Zoorph lead the
way, for I had an idea she must know the city and have some plan, or she
would not be here. If she meant to use me to escape into my world, I was
all for her.


Then, from ahead, came the sound of feet, many of them in unison. We
darted into a doorway, crouched behind a balustrade. Nearer came the
feet, and I peered between the interstices of the screening balustrade.
The feet came on; slow, rhythmic, marching without zest or pause or
break, perfection without snap. As the first marching figure came into
sight in the moonlight, I shuddered to the core with something worse
than fear.

For they were men who were no longer men! When Barto and Polter and
Noldi had been carried off unconscious, Nokomee had told me:

"They are not my people. They go their way and we go ours. Time has made
us a people divided. Time, _and a cruel science_."

These were the mole-men, the crab-men, the creatures built for specific
purposes as tools are built. Each _thing_ bore on his back a bale of
goods, or a bar of metal, a burden sizeable enough for two ordinary men.
They were strong, and they were silent and smooth-moving as machines. I
realized they _were_ machines--made out of flesh.

"Are these slaves, or what?" I asked Carna.

"These were once the slaves, or workmen of the race of Zervs. They now
serve the Schrees, for they are mindless, in a way. They are not
important. It is those who guard and guide them I wait to see. I have
not yet seen a Schree, but only heard the Zervs describe them."

The nightmare procession went on for minutes, long minutes that were to
me a nightmare. Yet I realized that if I had been raised to the idea of
humankind made into machines, it would not be revolting--not after they
had been hereditarily moulded for centuries into what they were. Yet
what a crime it was, what they might have been if left to develop as
nature intended, rather than as man cruelly mal-intended. They must have
been once specially selected for strength as well as beauty, for about
them was a sad and terrible grace, a remainder of noble chiseling of
brow and nostril, distorted as by a fiend into the horror that it
was--these had once been a noble race!

"Do you feel the terrible horror of this sight?" I asked Carna.

"Always I have felt the horror that was done to them in the past. It is
_still_ done to man. Look, there are the three who came with you, and
fell into the hands _of the priests_. They are the thing that the Zervs
_really fear_, yet they live with it, and have done so for centuries.
They can despise the Schrees, but they are as bad themselves--look!"

I followed with my eye her pointing finger. Yes, that figure _was_
hulking Barto, and I almost yelled "Jake, snap out of it!" before I
remembered my own peril.

Then he came into the full light, and passed not twenty feet away. I
leaned against the railing of stone, sick as a dog and retching. They
had made him over, with some unknown aborted science of an evil world!
Jake was clubfooted, lumbering, with his jaws grown into great jowls of
bone, his arms elongated and ending in hooks. Two of the fingers, or the
thumb and finger had been enlarged or grafted into a bone-like semblance
of a crab's claw. What he was going to be when they got through, I
didn't know, but neither did Jake. He didn't know anything! He clumped
along, his crossed eyes unmoving, his back bent with a weight heavy for
even his broad shoulders--a man no longer, but a mindless zombie. A
cross-eyed zombie!

I cursed silently, tearing my hands against the stone as I resisted the
impulse to fire and fire again upon those hopping, thin, white things
that came after.

"Just _what_ are those hopping things?"

"They are a separate race, who have lived with both Zervs and with
Schrees. They are a part of our life. You have dogs, horses, machines.
We have _Jivros_--that is, priests--and we have the workmen we call
Shinros, and too, we have the Zoorphs!" She laughed a little as I stared
at her. "Do not worry, the Zoorphs are not really so different. But the
Schrees and Shinros _are_ different."

"Damned, beastly, demoniac life it must be."

"To you, who expect things to be like your knowledge tells you it must
be. To us, it is our way. For a Zerv, or for a Schree, it is a good way.
The Jivros do the supervisory work, the Shinros do the hard work, and
the Schrees take it easy and enjoy life. Why do you have machines?"

"Machines are not alive. That is different."

"Neither are the Shinros alive, they only seem so. They do not know what
they have lost--it is much as if they had died.

"But come, I must show you where we can get a ship to take us away from
this and into your world. I have a life to live, I want to _live_ it!
You--have a message to deliver to your people, or they will become the
Shinros of the whole race of Schrees. I do not like to think what can
happen to your world!"


I followed her again on our furtive way among the shadows. She was
swift and sure, and made good time. She knew where she was going. It was
a broad open space deep within the city. On three sides were wide closed
doors like hangar doors. The fourth was a massive structure of rose
granite, beetling above us, a monstrous shape in the dimness, throwing a
shadow half across the paved space. We raced across the shadow toward
the nearest doorway, flattened against it, listening for life inside.
Carna worked on the catch of the door, after a second slid the door
aside slowly, carefully. Inside I could see a shimmering smoothness,
round, higher than my head, a top-shaped object. I guessed that this was
the ship she meant to steal from the Schrees. Suddenly the door she was
sliding open scraped, and emitted a shrill, high-pitched sound. I did
not know if it was an alarm activated by the opening door or just rust
on the rails and wheels of the door mechanism. Carna cried:

"Hurry, get into the ship, we must take off at once. They will come;
they must have heard that sound!"

I ducked into the darkness, circled the bulging shape, looking for an
opening. Smooth, there seemed no way I could find.

"Here it is, help me open it," Carna panted behind me.

I leaped to her side. She was twisting at an inset handle around which
faint lines indicated the door edge. I pulled her aside, took hold of
the handle, twisted hard. It bent, then gave, and the door swung easily
open in my hands. We tumbled in. Carna raced through the first chamber,
and even as I got the door closed, the floor lifted under my feet
easily, drifted out of the wide doorway, shot upward so quickly I was
thrown to the floor. I lay there, the increasing acceleration pressing
me hard against the cool metal. After a time I struggled up, made my way
to the woman's side.

Ahead was the moonlit range of mountains. Carna was setting a course
straight along the ridge of them, heading southward.

"How far will this thing fly?" I asked.

"It will fly around your world many times, if I want it to."

"What kind of fuel does it use?" I asked incredulously.

"I don't know what that is. It uses a substance we call Ziss. It is a
good fuel."

"It must be!"

I looked back along the ridge of the mountain's top toward the valley we
had left. We were in a bubble on the top of the flat, circular ship; one
could see in any direction. Back there a series of glowing round shapes
shot upward, came after us in a long curve that would bring them ahead
of us on our course. Carna changed her course to parallel the pursuit,
and they changed again, to intercept her new direction. Again she
changed, circling farther west.

But it was no use! Rapidly they overhauled us.

"Can't you get more speed out of it?" I shouted at her, for they were
very close.

"We have been unlucky, my friend. This ship is not in good shape. There
is something wrong with it. I cannot make it go as it should, or there
is something I do not know...."

Swiftly they came up with us, over us, and beams of light shot from them
down upon us. The ship was held now, rigid. One could feel the
acceleration cease. Like a bird on a string we followed as they swung
back toward the valley. Minutes later we were being lowered into the
open space we had just left. I clicked the safety off my rifle,
loosened the gun in my holster. I covered the door, shielding myself
behind the round shape of a machine. But Carna put a hand on my weapon,
shook her head.

"If you kill some of them, they will make of you a Shinro. If you submit
meekly, it may be I can talk to someone and save you. I have ways. I
understand them. They will be glad to get me, and I will tell them _you_
know many things they need to know. I can save your life. Later we can
try again, in another ship. Next time we will not be so unlucky."

It sounded like sense, and I looked into her deep eyes searchingly. She
meant well. Perhaps she could do what she said. I did not know these
aliens; she was almost one of them.

As the door opened in the side, I lay the rifle down, stood with crossed
arms as the thin, hopping horrors came near.


These things had _never_ been men. They had faces that were empty of
features, just flat, shiny, gray eyes, two holes where they breathed, no
mouth that I could see. There was a long neck around which the collar of
their white robe was gathered in folds. Their hands were horny, like an
insect's claws. They were not human, they were only four-limbed, and
walked--or hopped--in an erect position. There the resemblance ceased.

They led us out, Carna rattling off a series of sounds I could hardly
follow. Something about:

"We had to flee from the Zervs, we did not believe you would take us in,
we had to steal a ship. I am Carna, a Zoorph of the first grade, and
this man is a native of the United States, the greatest country of this
earth. Do not harm him, he can help you if he wishes."

Her words must have had quite an effect, for the weird, insect-like men
examined me with their eyes as we hurried along, across the hangar
space, into the big building of rose granite. Within twenty minutes we
were entering a tremendous room, and Carna nudged me.

"Their boss, Carl! Look impressed."

It was easy to look impressed. I _was_ mightily impressed by the _She_
on the throne!

       *       *       *

I had no eyes for the score or so of Schrees that surrounded the massive
carved chair, even though I was curious about their difference from men.
Above them were her sleepy eyes, wide almonds, molten and wise,
incandescent with intense inner fire above a mouth that was a wide,
scarlet oval torn into the whitely-glowing face.

A great black pelt softened the harsh lines of the throne, framed her
chalk-white body so that it curved starkly sensual, dominating the great
chamber with beauty. It was a beauty one knew this woman used as a tool,
a weapon, keen and polished and ready, and it struck at me swift as a
great serpent, the fires behind her eyes driving the blow.

She wore a kind of sark of shadowy black veil, sewn over with sparkling
bits of gem. It was in truth but an effective ornament for the proud
firm breasts, the narrow waist, the arch of the hips and the curves of
her thighs. Inadvertently I let out a low whistle of approbation and
astonishment. Carna, beside me, nudged me sharply, and I snapped out of
it.

The purple, lazy lids of her eyes moved, the slow weary-wise gaze
centered on me, her hand moved. In two strides a man from the
throne-side had me by the arm, and another seized my other, tugged me
forward to her feet, thrust me down on my knees. Still, I looked.
Curiosity and something more held me in a grip I couldn't shake.

This was more than a woman, I sensed. There was an awe of her throbbing
in me. Not fear--something deeper, something one feels before the
unexplainable, something one feels gazing at the moon and wondering; an
ominous, deep, thrilling and unexplainable emotion.

Closer, I could see her firm flesh was dusted over with a glittering
powder, the soft curves of her hair swept back to mingle and lose
themselves in the black fur of the pelt so that the night-black hair
seemed to spread everywhere about her and melt into the shadows.

Her hands were sinuous as serpents, the fingers tapering, the nails very
long like the Chinese. Her nose was exquisite, but thin-edged, and with
a cruel line on each side that vanished when she spoke.

"It is death to strangers in this valley...." she mused, not speaking to
me or to anyone, but with a cruel intent to toy with me in the words,
mocking, waiting for me to answer.

"I have been long on the way," I answered, in much the same tone, as
though we were speaking of some one not present.

"The way to death is sometimes long, and sometimes short. And, too,
there are things worse than death. But what was it you came here
seeking?"

"I did not know, until just now," I answered, still looking at her eyes,
which glanced at me, then away, then back again. She was interested in
spite of her apparent weariness with routine--or perhaps with life
itself.

"Now that you know, will you tell me?" She smiled a little, not a good
smile, but a secret jest with herself. An appearance of extreme evil sat
for a moment on her face, then went again, like the wind. Her voice was
grave, careless, yet modulated with an extreme care as if she spoke to a
child.

"I seek the wisdom I see in your eyes, to know what is and why it
wearies you. I want to know a great many things, about your people and
what they do here, what they mean to mine, what your plans may be--a
great many things I need now."

The sleepiness left her eyes, and she bent toward me with the grace of a
great cat and the shadows circling her eyes lifted a little. Wise,
aloof, indifferent, yet she did not know what I was, or what I meant,
and she meant to find out.

"So you know...." she mused, as if to herself.

"I know you are from space. I know it has been a long long time since
you first touched here; your people, that is. I know that you drove the
Zervs from this city and took it for your own. But that is all."

"It is too much. You cannot leave here." Her voice was sharp, and I was
surprised to learn that she had even considered letting me go free. It
was encouraging, after the dire pictures the Zervs and Nokomee had drawn
for me of these Schrees.

I looked curiously at them, the Zervs had called them "not human." They
_were_ different, as a negro is different from a white, or an Oriental
from a Finn. Their eyes were wide-set and a little prominent, their ears
thinner and smaller, their necks very long and supple--different still
from the Zervs. Yet they were a human race. I had misunderstood--or I
had not yet met those whom the Zervs called Schree.


Carna had knelt beside me, and I murmured to her:

"Are these the Schrees, or something else?"

"These are the high-class Schrees, they are very like the Zervs in
appearance. The other classes of the Schrees at sometime in the past
were changed by medical treatments into a different appearance. It was a
way of fixing the caste system permanently--understand?" She answered me
swiftly, in a whisper, and the woman on the throne frowned as she
noticed our conversation.

Her eyes fixed ours as she said, with a curiously excited inflection, no
longer bored with us: "Take these two to the place of questioning. I
will supervise the proceeding. I must know what these two intended here,
whether others of this man's people understand us."

"We're in for it!" said Carna, and I knew what she meant. Jerked to our
feet, we were hurried from the big throne room, down a corridor, through
a great open door which closed behind us.

That place! It was a laboratory out of Mr. Hyde's nightmares.

Up until now I had accepted the many divergencies and peculiarities of
the Zervs, the priestly insect-men, the monstrous workers--all the
variance of this colony from space--as only to be expected of another
planet's races. I had consciously tried to resist the impact of horror
on my mind, had tried to put it aside as a natural reaction and one
which did not necessarily mean that this expedition from space was a
horrible threat to men. I had tried to accept their ways as not
necessarily monstrous, but as a different way of life that _could_ be as
good a way as our own if I once understood it. There were attractive
points about the Zervs and even about these Schrees' rulers which bore
out this impulse toward tolerance in me.

But in this laboratory--or _abattoir_--some nameless, ominous aura or
smell or electric force--what it was I know not--struck at my already
staggering understanding with a final blow.

Now at last I met the real Schrees! I knew without asking. They seemed
to me to be an attempt by the peculiar insect-like "priests" to make
from normal men a creature more like themselves in appearance. Perhaps
it had been done from the natural urge to have about them beings more
like themselves than men ... and it was plain that the race of the
insect-like creatures and of men had become inextricably linked--become
a social unity in the past. It was also increasingly plain that the
four-limbed insect creatures had in the beginning been the cultured
race, been the fathers of the science and culture of this race, had
through the centuries lost their dominance to the Zervs and the Schree's
upper classes--had retained the "priest" role as their own place in
society. It was perhaps at that time that their science had brought the
Schree type into existence. There were perhaps a hundred of them at work
in the big chamber--a chamber bewilderingly filled with hanging surgical
non-glare lights, filling the place with a shadowless illumination,
revealing great, gurgling bottles of fluid with tubes and gleaming metal
rods; pulsing elastic bulbs; throbbing little pumps, with row on row of
gauges and dials and little levers along the walls.

There were a score of ominous-looking operating tables, some occupied,
some empty, about them gathered group after group of white-masked
Schrees. These were taller than men, near seven feet, with very bony
arms and legs, a skeletal structure altered into attenuation, with
high, narrow skulls, great liquid eyes, no brows, hairless skulls
showing bare and pointed above the white surgical masks.

Very like the Jivro caste, yes, but different as men are different from
insect. They walked with a long graceful stride, not hopping as the
priests' class. Their eyes were mournful and liquid with a dog-like
softness, their hands were snake-quick and long, they looked like
sad-faced ghouls busy about the dismemberment of a corpse--a corpse of
someone they had loved, and they appearing very sad about the necessity.
Such was their appearance; mournful, ghoulish, yet human and warm in a
repressed, frustrated way.

The tall, sad-eyed Schrees turned from the preparation of two rigs like
dental chairs, except that they were not that at all, but only similarly
surrounded with gadgetry incomprehensible to me. We had stood isolated,
waiting, with four guards between us and the door.

As we were each placed in one of these chairs, our wrists and ankles
fastened with straps of metal, I expected almost any horrible torture to
be inflicted upon us.

They shot a beam of energy through my head and I heard words, sentences,
a rapid expounding of alien grammar and pronunciation which sank deep
into my brain. My memory was being ineradicably written upon with all
the power needed to make of me whatever they wanted. But apparently
their only purpose now was to give me a complete understanding of their
language. An hour, two, swept by, and now the heretofore almost
unintelligible gibberish about me became to my ears distinct and
understandable words. I was now acquainted with the tongue of the
Schrees, far better than little Nokomee had taught me the somewhat
different tongue of the Zervs.

Then they wrapped about my waist and chest a strong net of metal mesh,
and I knew that now something strenuous was going to occur, for I could
not move a muscle because of the complete wrapping of metal mesh.


Now a metal disk was set to swinging in front of my nose so that I could
not see what they were doing to my companion. I watched the metal disk,
and saw behind it the tall swaying figure of the Queen enter and
approach. She stopped a few feet from my chair, and her eyes were intent
upon me. Then a light flashed blindingly in the reflecting disk, it went
back and forth faster and faster, and I felt a strong vibration of
energy pass in a beam through my head, throbbing, throbbing ... darkness
engulfed me. It was a darkness that was a black whirlwind of emotion.
The sense of the desertion by humankind, by God and mercy and
rationality swept through me and overwhelmed my inner self. I will never
forget the utter agony of shrieking pain and loss that formed a whirling
ocean of darkness into which I dived....

In this maelstrom of seeming destruction I lost all grip, had no will,
was at sea mentally. Into this shrieking hurricane of madness a calm
voice intruded. I recognized a familiar note--it was the ruler herself,
her voice no longer bored, but with a cruel curiosity that I knew meant
to be satisfied if it killed me.

"Tell me what your people intend to do about the flying saucers they
speak of in their newspapers?"

"They do not believe they exist; they are told they are delusions," I
heard myself answering. I was surprised to hear my voice, for it came
with no conscious volition on my part.

"That is for the public; that is a lie. But what do the powers behind
the scenes intend to do about them?"

"They are searching for them, to learn all they can about them. They do
not understand where they come from, but they have some information.
They suspect they are from space, and are afraid of them."

"And they sent you here to learn what you could. They brought you the
golden statuette to help you gain an entry, did they not?"

I tried to resist the impulse to tell the truth, for I could realize
that if she thought I had the power of my government behind me, my fate
might be different than if I did not. I tried to say "yes, they sent
me," but I could not! I answered like an automaton:

"No, my government has no knowledge of my expedition. I came purely to
get gold and for no other reason. Mining is my business."

She gave a little exclamation of frustration. Then after a pause she
asked:

"Do you think our way of life and your own could live together in peace,
could grow to be one?"

Again I made futile efforts to hide my revulsion and fear of them all.
It was no use. The flood of force pouring through my head was more
effective than any truth serum.

"No, to me you are horrors, and my people would never consent to live at
peace with you. You could never conquer us. Until the last of our
cultured members were dead they would resist the horrible practices of
your culture."

"That is as I surmised," she mused. "But I would have you tell me why
this is so. What is it you find so revolting about us."

"What have you done to my companions? Do you think men want that to
happen to them?"

"That was a punishment for entering here without permission. That would
not happen to any but enemies."

"Men could never accept the altering of the shapes of workers, the
tinkering with the hereditary form of their children, the artificial
grafting upon our race of revolting and unnecessary form changes. Your
whole science is a degeneration of wisdom into evil, tampering with life
itself. You are horrors, and you do not know it."

I could hear her steps as she turned and left, tapping angrily upon the
floor. After her I could hear the shuffling, heavier tread of her
retinue. As the flood of vibration ceased, I began to curse aloud for
the undiplomatic truths I had been forced to utter. In seconds my arms
were free, and I was led out, a tall grim-faced guard on each side, with
a firm grip on my arms. I wondered what was happening to the lovely
Zoorph, but I did not get a chance to look. I was thrown into a cell,
and the heavy wooden door shut. The thud of a bar dropped in place
punctuated the evening's experience with a glum finality.

       *       *       *

I lay for hours with my mind in a whirl from the effects of the truth
ray. Jivros, or insect-priests, moved phantom-like before my sleepless
eyes, watching from the dark and waiting. Gradually my thinking became
more normal, and I began a systematic analysis and summing up of what I
had learned of these people. There were but a few members of the ruling
groups, and it was evident the rule was split between the Jivro caste of
the insect men and some normal-appearing groups who had divided the
power with them in the past. Under these were the Schrees, and under
these the malformed working caste or castes. The Schrees had contact
with some space-state, the Zervs were outcasts of the ruler caste who
had been driven from that space-state--perhaps more than one
planet--sometime in the past and had hid out upon earth until recently
located by the power that ruled on their home planets. Now they were
fugitive and nearly powerless, and I knew the Zervs were few in number
from my own observation. There were perhaps a hundred, perhaps two
hundred. They had contact with some of the Jivros with whom they were
familiar, but the appearance of Jake and Noldi and Polter among the
workmen in the city told me that these Jivros could be traitors to them,
could be giving new allegiance to the conquerors of the Zervs. My mind
centered on two facts. The Jivro caste were the real source of the evil
in these people. It was their unnatural attitude toward human life which
had made this race the horror it was, and they were still exercising
that evil influence.

Morning came through a high barred window, and after a while food came,
slid beneath the door. I did not see the bearer of the food, though I
called out in curiosity. He did not answer, only shuffled wearily away.

The morning crawled past, the sun mounted until I could see the golden
orb near zenith. Then came what I dreaded, the tread of a number of
feet. The bar was lifted; I saw four armed guards and a waiting
white-robed Jivro, his protruding pupiless eyes moving as he ran his
gaze over my figure. I could not help shrinking from the horror of his
examination, brief though it was, for I realized he might be deciding
just what freak of nature he could make out of me.

I was marched out, down the corridor, up a long ramp, a turn, along two
other corridors, up another ramp. The tour ended before a wide metal
door, the guards spaced themselves at each side, the door was opened by
the agile, hopping Jivro. I went in ahead of it.

There were but four beings in the room, and I stood before the long,
foot-high table behind which the four reclined upon cushioned couches.

They were four divergent creatures. One was the queen, whose name I had
yet to hear spoken. One was a very old Jivro, his skin ash-white and
covered with a repulsive scale, like leprosy. The third was a
mournful-eyed Schree, clad in an ornamented smock-like garment, from
which his thin limbs thrust grotesquely. The fourth was a handsome,
long-necked male who resembled the queen. He lounged negligently some
distance from the three, as if in attendance upon her. I deduced he was
her paramour, husband or close relative, perhaps a brother.

I stood eyeing them silently, waiting. I gathered the three heads of the
government were here, and the extra one represented the balance of power
in the hands of the queen. His negligent lack of interest seemed to me
to be an evident giving of his voice to the queen, if he was a part of
this gathering.

The queen's voice had lost its sleepy, mocking tones, was sharp,
incisive:

"You present a problem new to us, earthman. Sooner or later, if we
decide to remain upon this planet permanently, we will have to meet and
conquer, or meet and engage in commerce with the other members of your
race. You are the first educated member of your race who has fallen into
our hands. We must study your people, and we would like your willing
cooperation. Will you give it willingly? Or must we put you to death?
Which would perhaps symbolize, even indicate directly, our future
attitude toward your races."

"I am quite willing," I said, before I had a chance to bungle it worse,
"quite willing to exchange information on your people for the same about
my own. However, I doubt that your people will find this planet
congenial to an invader who ignores the natives as you have done."


"We did not come here to colonize, earthman. We came in pursuit of
renegades from our law, fugitives who fled when their plots were
uncovered. But we are considering the possibility of a permanent colony
here, and you could help us...."

For an instant her eyes dwelt upon mine with a peculiar warning
expression, as evident as a wink, and the expression was evanescent as a
breath. I caught on, and made my face agreeable and subservient.
Immediately her own reassumed a harsh, proud set, her voice became even
more incisive and cold.

My eyes drifted casually to the blank, cold stare of the old Jivro, to
the mournful liquid eyes of the Schree, on to the apparently
disinterested gaze of the queen's friend. The only ominous feeling I got
was from the eyes of the aged insect-man, and my deduction that they
were the source of the evils of these people was strengthened. The
chills ran down my back, and something within me thrilled as I
understood that this queen was playing a part to please the Jivros, that
her interests were actually divergent. Her voice was saying:

"You could help us greatly by explaining your life to us, who are so
different; make it possible that in the future trade and cultural
intercourse might spring up between the two alien ways of life. There
will be no peace without understanding, you realize!"

"I quite agree with your views, and will help you in any way that I
can," I said loudly, for the old Jivro seemed to be hearing with
difficulty. He leaned back at my words, seemed to relax as if pleased.

The queen turned to her companion, smiled and said:

"Genner, you will see that he is taken care of as a guest, and endeavor
to learn what you can from him. I will hold you responsible for the
success of this experiment."

"Very well," Genner murmured, "but it seems to me, Wananda Highest, that
we can never allow the wall of secrecy between ourselves and the people
of this planet to be breached. To consider doing otherwise ..." for an
instant his eye hesitated upon hers, then he went on, "... could hardly
be logical, but of course, there is much we could learn from them, and
they from us. That, I see, as the only purpose of this exception."

Just then a great hullabaloo broke out in the corridors outside, the
door burst open, and into the room three captives were borne,
half-carried, half-pushed. I stood back out of the way, and the three
were prodded into a row in front of the low table. Among them I
recognized with a start my erstwhile guard, Holaf, of the Zervs.

Wananda leaned forward, her eyes glittering with sudden triumph, her
voice thrilling with a cruel mocking note.

"More of the skulking Zervs fail to avoid our warriors! Where did you
find them, Officer?"

"They were attempting to release the captive Croen female in the crystal
prison of the cave of the Golden statue, your highness. Our spies among
the Zervs informed us of the attempt."

Wananda's eyes blazed at Holaf. Her voice became more shrill with
something almost like fear. The three men shrank back visibly from her
fury.

"So it is not enough you plot treason, you must also turn against your
Gods? You know the Croen powers, you know what she would do to us all,
you included. But so that you can overcome the Schrees, nothing else to
you is sacred, nothing too vile for you to do. Away with them, let them
become the least among the mindless men."

The tall Schree warriors, their long faces expressionless, started to
hustle the three captives toward the door again. Holaf wrenched free,
turned, his face contorted with hatred.

"You have hounded us until we are but few, Wananda the Faithless, but
you will never conquer us. We still have your doom in our hands, and it
will find you out. Death to you, woman without mercy, creature without
soul! These sacred Jivros plot your downfall, and your people pray that
they will succeed. The ancient Jivro rule would be better than the
justice you administer, you snake in a woman's flesh!"

The Schree holding Holaf's arms let go, tugged a weapon from his belt,
struck Holaf over the head with it. He slumped unconscious, with blood
running over his face from the blow. The three were taken out, and
Wananda leaned back. Seeing my intent face, she waved a hand to her
companion, Genner, who rose to his feet and motioning to me, preceded me
from the room by another door than that which I had entered. I followed
him.


Apparently I was on my honor, for no guard followed, and Genner bore no
weapons I could see but a little jeweled dagger in his belt.

As he walked a step ahead of me, I asked:

"Who is this Croen that Holaf spoke of, in the crystal column. I saw
her, wondered at her, in the room of the golden goddess. Why do they
think she could be released?"

"The Croen are a powerful race of wizards, Carlin Keele. They live far
off from our home planets in space, and they have a code of conduct that
makes them monitors, doctors, interferers in all matters of other races'
business. If she were released, she would at once attempt to overthrow
our power, to set up a state after the Croen pattern. It is their way.
They consider themselves as superior to all others, and they do have a
knowledge of nature which they use to impose their will upon all
peoples. They are worshipped as Gods by many primitive people, and so
consider themselves above all laws but their own. She was captured many
years ago in an attempt to overthrow the rule of Wananda upon a small
satellite planet. Wananda did not kill her, but placed her in suspended
animation within the protective crystal plastic. Our queen intends to
revive her and study her mind for her wisdom, but we have not had time
because of the press of events. Soon, now, she will become a tool in our
hands to build greater the eminence of Wananda."

"Peculiar looking creature, yet attractive," I murmured.

"The Croens are physically beautiful, but they are warlike and cruel,
they do not desire peace and the way of life of the Schrees and Jivros
is an irritant to them. They hate and despise us, and we return them the
favor."

I did not reply, but my heart seemed to throb in sympathy with the Zerv
attempt to free the beautiful creature from her living tomb.

"Could she turn the tables for the Zervs if they had succeeded?"

"I really don't know," answered Genner, opening a door and motioning me
into the apartment. "These are my quarters. There is plenty of room, the
place is usually empty of all but slaves. I seldom sleep here myself,
preferring more congenial and less lonesome sleeping accommodations. I
think you will find it comfortable. I will see you at the evening meal
time."

As I walked in, the door closed and I heard the lock click. I was a
"guest" with reservations.

Curiously I examined the place, the unreadable books kept in niches
behind transparent sections of the wall, the strange furnishings, at
once exotic and comfortless to me. The books I could not get at, finding
no way to open the transparent panels which seemed an integral part of
the wall. I could not feel comfortable in the seats and lounges, as they
were very low, requiring an oriental squat at which I am not adept. I
compromised by stretching out along a hard couch raised some six inches
above the floor. There were no gadgets to tinker with, the place was to
me barren of necessary appurtenances ... strange people, indeed.

As I was dozing off, the lock clicked in the door, and I sat up,
startled to see Wananda glide in and close the door quickly behind her.
She was alone, and there was something furtive about her.

"Welcome to my abode, beautiful one."

The woman smiled, an almost human smile; reserved, yet with an
unexpected warmth. I waited with intense curiosity for her explanation
of her visit.

"I come to you for aid, for I can talk to none of my own. I am in
trouble which perhaps no one but you could remedy. Will you give me your
honor, will you do what I ask without question, will you be my friend?"

I was taken aback that this apparently powerful personage should be
seeking aid of me, a prisoner. I answered:

"I see no reason why you should not trust me, as I know no one here to
betray you to. But are you not the supreme power here? Why should you
want my aid?"

"Because you do not understand my position does not mean that I am not
in trouble. These Jivros are difficult allies for one with blood in her
veins. I was raised to be a ruler. The Jivro priests were my tutors and
my administrators before I came of age. It is only reluctantly they have
followed the orders from the rulers of our home planets to obey me. They
intend to slay me, and report my death as an accident. I live in fear,
and I have long awaited their treachery. There is but one hope for me
and that is Cyane, the Superior One whom I saved only by enclosing her
in that living coffin. That is what I ask of you--to succeed where the
Zervs have failed, and to release her and guide her in flight from here.
She can lead your people, save them from these monstrous Jivros who have
made of my race the things which you see. I would save your people as
well as myself. Will you try to release her?"


I leaned back against the cushions, crossed my legs, took out my pipe.
This was not exactly a surprise, but I had not realized the rift between
her and the peculiar insect-men was such as to cause her to fear for her
life.

"How does one release a person from such a death?" I asked. "In my
people's understanding of life, death comes with the stopping of the
breath."

"She can be released by an injection of a stimulant which I can obtain
for you. She is not dead, but in a condition very near to death, like a
spider stung by a wasp. If she were free, she would soon scour your
earth clean of the Jivros. Our race needs her even more than your own,
yet I must pretend to be her enemy. I must pretend to be your
seductress, and worm from you the knowledge which the Jivros will use to
conquer and enslave your planet and your people. I must play this part,
unnatural to me, of a cruel and heartless ruler, or they will have me
killed by some subtle poison which they will call illness. You see, the
Jivros are our doctors. Much of the wisdom of our race is in their
hands. They are our priests and our administrators. They leave to us
only useless occupations which will not allow us to be dangerous. For
centuries they have been taking over every vital function of our life. I
am allowed to live only so long as I am a willing tool, and foolish
enough to wreak their evil will upon my people. It is a part I cannot
continue to play. Every instinct of my being shrinks from what I am
forced to order done daily, from what I am forced to allow them to do to
human beings."

This was a different kettle of fish than I had expected. This slender,
lovely creature, with her hands wrung together in pain and sorrow for
her brutally maltreated people, this tear-streaked lovely face contorted
with an agony which she had not spoken of to anyone else--this actress
supreme, who for all her life had pretended to approve of the alien
Jivro's sabotage of her own racial stock--was a heart-rending picture,
and her own face told me with its extreme tension that what she said was
a fact. But perhaps this alien from space _could_ act that well? I
preferred to believe her.

"I don't see how you expect me to get a chance to release Cyane of her
crystal coffin? I will have no opportunity."

"I will _make_ an opportunity. I am not yet alone or helpless, much as
the insects would like me to be. This is my only power, that I am the
same blood as the people, and not a Jivro. They know that, and
constantly try to destroy this strength of mine by making me commit
cruelties which I cannot always avoid for fear of such of them as the
old Jivro whom you met at the council. So long as I retain his favor, I
live. When he raises his finger in the death signal, my days will be few
thereafter."

"I think I understand your position. I have heard of puppet rulers
before--woman whom I am delighted to learn has a human heart after all.
I am wholly with you, and want you to feel that you can trust me to the
hilt."

She smiled and dried her eyes. After a moment she leaned forward, and
the glory of her beauty, the near nudity of her utterly graceful body
struck at me as she fixed my eyes with her own, her face now intent with
will to make me completely understand quickly what she knew must be very
obscure to me.

"The Jivros fear the power of Cyane, the Croen captive, as they fear
death! The Croens have fought to destroy their power for centuries, on
many planets in our area of space. Cyane is one of their greatest. She
is a scientist of vast wisdom, and one who has developed a technique of
increasing the vitality of life within herself, as well as in anyone she
chooses to favor. You could well win from her such gifts, if you should
release her. It is one reason I wish to release her, in order to win
from her that secret of long life which she holds. The Croens are
masters of warfare and she would be able, with only a little help, to
develop an attack which they could not withstand."

"If they are so powerful, how is it they have not defeated the Jivros?"

"The Jivros are a very ancient, very widespread race. The Croens came
into our space-area recently, as time goes, only three centuries by your
time. They were lost. There were only a few hundred in a great ship, and
they settled upon a small uninhabited and airless satellite of our home
planet, were there for many years before they were discovered. When the
Jivros attacked them to destroy them, they found in spite of their
innumerable ships and countless warriors they could not harm them. But
their attacks angered the superior ones, and they began a campaign of
extermination against the insect men's empire. Since the Croen were
few, they began to recruit from among the Zervs and other groups who
were subservient to the Schrees. The Schrees were the ancient tools of
the Jivros, and have always held positions as tributary rulers, since
the insect-men themselves found subject peoples obeyed the Schrees more
readily. They have always kept the priest-like power and, by poisoning
and other devices, remove any Schree puppet who displeases them."

"Go on," I said huskily, her rapt face and intent manner, her utterly
lovely ivory body, glittering everywhere with the shining powder which
she used, the subtle penetrative scent of her--I was hard put to
concentrate upon her words.


"I plan to have the crystal pillar opened, perhaps, have Cyane brought
to my own chambers, and I will pretend to set up apparatus to read her
sleeping mind and so learn from her. Naturally the Jivros will become
suspicious of me if I do so, as they fear the knowledge of the Croen
which has always proved too great for them. There will be but a few days
time between my action in bringing her here, and my own death or her
confiscation by the Jivros. But in order to overrule me in this, they
will have to make a pretext, charge me with infidelity, convince the old
Jivro that I intend harm to him and his. During that time you must find
a way to release Cyane and escape with her."

"Why don't you yourself release her and escape with her?" I asked.

"Because I can be useful to her when she attacks us. Besides, I am
constantly under the Jivro eyes, and they know me so well they would see
my perturbation, they would know something was wrong and forestall me.
You alone could do it, and, too, I depend upon your alien knowledge to
provide a barrier or two to their overcoming you. Your weapons which you
bore when we captured you--do they fear them?"

"I never shot any of them; I don't know."

"Perhaps I will send you with the party to get Cyane. That way you can
find a chance to inject the stimulant when they are not looking. They
must remove the crystal from about her to move her; it is too heavy to
carry otherwise. Then when she awakes, you can find a way to divert
their pursuit, provide a false trail. Do you understand?"

"I could try, but I cannot tell if I could outwit them or not."

"They are really very stupid things, the Jivros. Like an insect, their
patterns are fixed and repetitive. They are almost incapable of original
thought. Once you know them, you can always outwit them. With you will
go my brother, Genner. He may be successful where you are not."

"It is agreed then." I stood up; this low couch made my knees stiff. She
took my movement as a dismissal of her, and flushed deeply. I smiled at
her embarrassment, and went down on one knee to bring my face level with
hers where she half reclined on the bench-like lounge.

"Dear lady," I said in English, not finding the necessary Schree words
in my artificial memory for a term of respect--then in Schree phrases,
"I will do my utter best to help you and your people. It is my duty to
my own race, too, as it is yours to yours. Trust me, so far as good-will
may go. Together, we will rid ourselves of these unclean Jivros of
yours!"

She rose then, and I stood too, still holding her hand that I had seized
in my own to impress her with my sincerity. For an instant she looked
at our two hands clasped together, then she placed an arm on my
shoulder, leaning against me and trembling slightly with emotion. Tears
sprang out in her eyes. She brushed them aside.

I did not know what to do. For fear of offending her, I restrained the
impulse to take her in my arms, and it took great willpower.

Something about her aroused my deepest admiration. Here was a woman who
had been playing a difficult part for years, whose heart was sore with
sorrow for her blighted people, and who must yet seem to approve. The
signs of long strain were very plain on her face. I understood that this
was one of her greatest fears, that her mind would give way and betray
her true emotions to the Jivros.

Clumsily I patted her bare shoulder. For an instant her wet cheek was
pressed against my own, then she went gliding swiftly away, her face
once again proud and empty of all human feeling. At the door she turned,
swept her palm once over her face, removing the tears and as the hand
passed upward she smiled as sweetly as a young girl, with a pathetic and
utterly charming mischievous expression. Then the palm passed downward,
and her face was left again stiff and masklike, the lips twisted a
little into a cruel thinness, her eyes hard as agates on my own. She was
superb, and I silently applauded. Then she was gone.


As I stood there, musing on the nature and the strange life of Wananda,
a mocking, sultry laugh made me whirl, for I had thought I was alone.

Standing beside the tall, open window--a window I had examined and found
impossible of exit because beneath it was a straight drop of some
seventy or eighty feet--was my erstwhile companion and prisoner, the
Zoorph, Carna!

Still in her hand was the long, fantastically ornamented drape behind
which she had been concealed during my "secret" interview with the
puppet queen.

"You!" I exploded. "Where did you come from and what did you hear?"

"Very interesting things, friend Keele. She is a fascinating woman, is
she not?" Carna made a pretty mouth, as if kissing something, and with
her fingers a gesture new to me, but one unmistakable in meaning. "She
now has your simple heart in her hand, to do with as she wishes. You are
a fine fool, you!"

"I thought you had psychic powers. You claim to read minds and foretell
the future, and you do not understand that she is fine and honest and
utterly admirable! You are the fool, Carna!"

She laughed.

"You are right, and not so simple. I said that only to know if your
perceptions were keen enough to know that what she said was true."

"Now you know. How did you get here, what do you want, what have they
done to you?"

She snapped her fingers, and gave the Zerv equivalent of "pouf."

"They gave me their tongue, as they did you, I notice. They questioned
me much longer than you, as they thought I knew the Zervs might be
caught. I did not tell them much. But it was my fault that poor Holaf
was caught. I did know he was going to try to revive the Croen captive.
They wrung that out of me, and then put me in a room directly above this
one. I knew that you were below me from the talk of the guards. I made a
rope from the hangings and slipped down to see you. I may go back up
when I get ready."

She came toward me as she spoke, her hips undulating exquisitely, that
sultry smile of completely improper intent on her beautiful face. She
wore still the silkily gleaming black net in which I had first met her.
It was torn now and even more revealing.

I fixed my eyes on the wide web of linked emeralds at her throat to keep
my eyes from hers, for she had a disturbing power to make a man's head
swim and his will disappear. It was perhaps no greater power than many
another woman possesses, but to me she was particularly devastating. I
moved back as she came toward me, smiling a little, and said in spite of
my liking for her:

"Keep away from me, Zoorph! You will destroy my soul!"

She laughed huskily.

"What is a soul or so to the passion that could burn us, my Carl? Do you
really fear me, stranger from a strange people? Don't you know how much
I thirst to drink of your lips! Look at me, you coward. Are you afraid
of a woman? Don't you know how curious I am as to how you of this planet
make love? I who am a student of love, am most curious about you. Stand
still. Here we are prisoners, about to die, perhaps, and you refuse me
one sup of pleasure before we die? You are a cruel, and a spineless
creature. I despise you, and yet I want you very much."

I kept backing away, around the room, and she pursued me at arm's
length, her long graceful legs dramatically striding, making of her
pursuit a humorous burlesque, yet I knew she was quite serious about it.
If little Nokomee had not warned me against her, I might have succumbed
then and there, for, as she said--"What good is a tomorrow that may
never exist for us?"

"What did you come for, Carna? To make a fool of me?"

"I thought we might try to escape again, but this pretty queen of the
accursed Schrees has charmed you to her will, and I must await a better
opportunity. But that does not prevent me from trying to outdo her
attraction for you. Do you love her already, Carl?"

"Of course not, I just met her."

This was utterly ridiculous, yet it was a lot of fun and I could see no
real reason why I should resist Carna's advances. To me she was about
the most attractive woman I had ever met, and I might never see her
again. I gave up my retreat, seized the girl almost roughly in my arms,
bent her back with a savage, long-drawn kiss and embrace. Then I
released her, to see what she would make of an earthman's kiss.


She stood for an instant, her hand pressed to her lips, her eyes wide
with surprise, one hand raised as if to push me away. Then she giggled
like a young girl, and put both hands on my shoulders.

"So that is what you call love, strange one? Shall I show you how we of
far-off Calmar do the first steps of courtship?"

"That would be interesting," I said huskily, my lips burning.

Her voice became low and penetrating.

"You will be two, yet alone, above the all." She said other words whose
meanings I did not know. My head swam, my soul seemed to be floating in
a sea of new and strange emotions. I sank into a dream state, and with
her low suggestive words in my ears, a new world came gradually into
form about us, we were two lovers walking among plumed fern-trees,
beside deliciously tinkling streams, the songs of birds rang like little
bells all about. I was conscious of her warm lips upon my own and of her
eyes like two deep dark pools in which my own gaze swam and sank and
rose.

Suddenly a rude, loud voice broke in, the dream of paradise vanished
from about us.

Before us stood Genner, his face angry, and in the wall I saw the panel
by which he had entered where I had thought was only blank wall. He
cried:

"You, Zoorph, I had thought not to interfere. But you are not going to
enslave this man to your will. We need him, and your people need him
too, and what you do is not right, for you know as well as I that if he
falls entirely under your spell he will be left no will of his own!"

Carna, not even abashed at the intrusion, almost spit as she angrily
retorted:

"What is the difference whose will he obeys so long as it is what we all
desire that gets accomplished? He would be better off with my
experienced direction than with his own ignorance of our ways, in
anything you plan. Do you think I want to be left out? Do you think I do
not desire freedom from the Jivros, too? Do you think I want to be made
into a mindless thing when I fail to please them?"

"Never mind; get back where you came from. This man is our ally, not our
slave, and your behavior is bad. I will hold this against you. Go!" He
pointed at the window with one rigid, outstretched arm, and Carna moved
slowly away, saying:

"No, Prince, do not think me an enemy! It is only that my heart _is_
moved toward this strange one, I wanted him _very_ much, and how else
can a Zoorph love than as she has been taught?"

The prince smiled at her words, his arm fell to his side.

"Very well, little temptress. Kiss your love goodbye. It may be a long
time before I let you see him again. If he desires it, you may meet
later on. But I will warn him, so that he does not become your slave."

"I would not rob him of his self, my Prince. I have an affection for
this one!"

"We will see that you do not, sweet Carna. Now get out, and be quick.
The time approaches."

She darted to my side, where I sat still bewildered by the eerie yet
utterly delightful experience with the witchery of a Zoorph, pressed
burning lips to my own, caressed my cheek with her fingertips, gave my
hand a quite American squeeze. Then I watched her slender legs swing up
and out of sight as she went up her improvised ladder hand over hand.
She was athletic as a dancer.

"Whew," I said, passing my hand over my heated face, and grinning at the
Prince.

"Yes, whew! If it had not been for me you would have become her
property, for they are very accomplished in making people do what they
want."

"Hypnotism, developed beyond anything I ever heard of! It must be
hereditary, such power!" I mused aloud. Genner answered as if I spoke to
him.

"The word hypnotism I know not, I guess you mean what we call Zoorph. It
is a cult, teaching the art of enslaving others to your will. But she is
a good girl, and her Zoorph qualities are not evil. For your own sake,
remember always to hold yourself in check, or she will automatically
become your mistress. A man does not like to be a slave even to so
charming a mistress."

I did not say anything. I saw nothing wrong with the idea just then.

"Were you there behind the panel while your sister and I talked?" I
asked.

"Of course. To make sure nothing went amiss. If some curious Jivro had
come to the door, she would have joined me in the passage."


The Prince sat down across from me on a low stool.

"I will lead this group she will send to bring the Croen. You will
naturally accompany us, as I am to keep an eye on you. Wananda will give
you the fluid to inject into her veins. You must not be seen making the
injection. Somewhere along the way she will revive. She is an extremely
strong creature, and will immediately make her escape. I will order none
to shoot at her with vibro guns, as we do not wish her harmed. We will
hurry back to get ships to pursue and capture her. But we will be unable
to capture her.

"If you can manage to keep up with her in her flight, do so. You should
be able to outrun a Jivro; they are not very fast. But whether you can
keep up with the Croen, that I doubt. However, make the attempt, and
when you are alone with her, explain why we want her to escape, who her
friends are. If you do not do that, she may elect to make her way
through the wilderness, which would be fatal for her. Knowing she has
allies among us, she will find a way to attack us."

I grunted. I did not see how they expected one lone woman, however
fantastically gifted with wits and know-how, to overcome the ships,
armament and organization of the Jivros, even with Wananda working to
neutralize their power.

"She must be a wizard; you expect such wonders of her!"

"There will be a ship waiting to pick her up as soon as she is out of
sight of the Jivros who will accompany us. I have sent it already. It
waits in the hills by the barrier. With you along, you can contact the
remaining Zervs. They will augment your power. I can send more ships
manned with my men, later. We have been preparing for this a long time."

"Aren't you doing a lot of talking? Walls have ears, you know, and those
Jivros of yours look pretty shifty to me."

"It is the hour of their sleep. They are creatures of regularity, like
ants, you know. They live by routine. There are only guards awake. I
know exactly where every one of them stands at this moment, where every
one of them sleeps. I have not been inactive."

       *       *       *

We filed out of the city gate, a party of nearly fifty, a score of them
bearers of a big palanquin-like vehicle in which they proposed to carry
the Croen's inert body.

I was remembering the brief examination of her that I had made when I
entered the cavern of the golden statue.

A four-armed female of near-human aspect, but with a single horn on her
forehead. A member of a race from distant space, alien even to these
visitors to earth. She had been utterly different from anything I had
even imagined as human--yet somewhere, somehow the origin of that race
had been similar to our own. I wondered if space was peopled with such
near-human races, all descendant from some ancient space-traveling race
who had colonized--then passed on into forgotten time?

The party wound on, taking that same trail by which I had entered the
cavern with Hank and Jake and Frans. Silently I blessed the fate that
had spared me the things that had been done to them. Their only
release, I imagined, could be death.

Overhead the rocky walls began to close, the light grew dim, ahead came
that eerie glow from the magnetic statue. The prince's eyes caught mine
in a swift, silent order to be ready, and the two of us drew ahead of
the column. In my jacket pocket I held the hypodermic, one of Schree
design, different from a modern medical hypodermic only in that it was
decorated with incut figures of glorified Jivros, carved in the
crystalline cylinder, and the metal was of gold.

There were only two of the repellent insect-men with us. I surmised they
were there only as observers, but that was not the case. They were there
because they had to be. I could see an unusual agitation on their blank,
bulge-eyed faces, if those insect masks could be called faces. They were
afraid of this Croen female, even in her inert condition.

The tall, graceful Schree warriors followed us into the cavern, and last
of all came the two hopping Jivros. The intense attraction of the statue
drew me, but I remembered how I had avoided it before, and kept my eyes
averted. Like light on a moth's eyes, the power of it seemed to strike
into the will only when the eyes were upon it.

We gathered around the column of crystal. The Schrees attached a loop of
rope to the top, pulled it carefully from the base. When it was
stretched out horizontal upon the floor, the two Jivros set to work with
little spinning metal disk-saws, cutting a line entirely around it
lengthwise. Then they tapped it with small hammers, and the cut cracked
through. Lifting off the top section like the lid of a sarcophagus, the
Croen lay exposed to the light of day.

I stood entranced by the exquisite beauty and majesty of the naked
creature until Prince Genner nudged me with an elbow. Even as he did so,
he whirled, pointed, cried out:

"There, through that doorway, one of the traitorous Zervs spies upon us.
Catch him, my warriors, before they bring the others down upon us!"

As if drilled or awaiting this order, the tall Schrees set off as one
man, running through the same doorway by which I had followed the angry
Nokomee.

The prince and I were left alone with the two Jivros, who stood beside
the nude figure of the alien Croen. They eyed us, their eyes jerking
nervously from our faces to the body of the Croen. Quite calmly the
Prince tugged a vibro-gun, very like the weapon Holaf had worn at his
waist, from his belt and trained it upon the two horrors.

"This day will come for all the Jivros," cried the prince in a
triumphant voice, and shot a terrible blue bolt of force into the body
of each of them. The second had snapped a little weapon from his breast,
hidden in the folds of his white robe, and as he fell, the beam of it
cut a long smoking channel in the floor rock. The prince calmly picked
it up, pressed the trigger lever, handed the thing to me. I pocketed it,
then stepped over to the nude body of the Croen. I inserted the needle
carefully in the artery at her inner elbow, pushed the plunger slowly
home, my eyes on her face with a deep awe.

The prince bent beside me, watching her face intently, and both of us
stood rapt, waiting for I knew not what except that it would be more
marvelous to meet such a god-like creature as this face to face than
anything else that had ever happened to me.

But a sound of feet up the corridor made Prince Genner spring to his
feet.

"Quick, man, help me get these dead horrors out of sight! I do not trust
all those warriors, though most of them are in sympathy with us."


We sprang to the dead things. I bent and picked one up by the shoulders.
Surprisingly, frighteningly light they were, as if filled with cotton.
Their limbs were truly skeletal, and curiously I tugged the white robe
from the strange insect body as I followed the prince. The thorax, the
wasp-waist, the long pendulous abdomen, the atrophied center limbs
folded across the wasp-waist--the whole thing was like a great white
wasp without wings. As we flung them into an empty chamber, I turned the
burden face down, and on the back were two thin wisps of residual wings.
Once these things had been winged!

We sped back to the side of the sleeping Croen.

I stopped ten feet from the giant figure, surprise, awe, a thrill of
admiration filling me! She was sitting up, her hands at her temples,
peering about with her great eyes distracted. On her face, even in this
condition of tension, still unaware of her surroundings, was the
greatest evidence of intelligence I had ever sensed. This Croen race, I
realized, was something truly beyond an earthman's understanding.

But the prince had no time for the awed, stupefied condition into which
sight of her had struck me.

"Come, Cyane, great one, we have released you, but you must flee at
once. I know how weak you must be, but if you can, please rise and flee.
This man will accompany you. He is alien to us, and it is better that he
be out of the hands of the Jivros as quickly as possible. Go, dear one,
swiftly, swiftly--we will find you later!"

The great body moved, gathered itself, stood tottering, gazing wildly
about. The prince pointed at the cavern entrance where our footprints
still showed in the dust. To me he cried: "Go up the rocky side as far
as you can when you reach the slopes. The north side, earthman. Keep
going, and conceal yourselves in the bush. I will guide the search away
from you."

I ran ahead of the tottering figure and she followed, her steps
gathering strength. Faster she followed until we raced along the dim
cavern way. The rocky roof opened out and the blue sky showed overhead.
The prince had gestured to me when we had entered to a ledge that angled
upward from the gully, and I knew now what he had meant.

I could not keep up with the great strides of the now fully aroused
Croen goddess. She turned back, picked me up like a child, and in great
leaps bounded up the side of the canyon along the ledge. Up and up and
over, and still she ran, untiring. I was not rescuing, I was being
rescued!

As we ran beneath the shadow of the trees, a figure rose suddenly up
before us. I was astounded to see it was Holaf, whom I had thought the
Jivros had already dealt with.

"I await you, Cyane, great one, to guide you to safety. The prince has
sent me," he cried.

The great striding creature slowed, spoke to me with a voice full of a
deep music.

"Do you trust this man?"

"He may be trusted in this case. He has already risked his life to set
you free."

She set me down. I looked at Holaf, who was too excited to be amused.

"Hasten, we must get under cover at once. A place awaits, and many men,
arms, tools. We have long fought for this day, Cyane!" Holaf was wholly
ecstatic to see the success of his plans. I realized the prince had made
an ally of him with the same kind of interview the queen had granted me.

Holaf led us around the side of the mountain, keeping in the shelter of
the trees, and by a back route to the same hideaway in the mountainside
where I had first met him.

I greeted Nokomee with a glad smile, but her smile was not so glad and
my heart was hurt to find she was angry with me. But the great Croen
creature left us no time for argument.

The caves where the two hundred or so Zervs had hidden for so long were
quite numerous and confusingly branched. There was room there to hide an
army if needed.


I went at once to the small chamber where Nokomee had placed the packs
and camping equipment from the horses, and took out one of Hank's big
old forty-fives, belted it on. The old-fashioned belt was filled with
cartridges. I also took my own Winchester Model .70. I had a plentiful
supply of 130-grain Spitzer-point bullets, a high-velocity, long-range
killer that I might get a chance to use. I filled my pockets with
cartridges, took a knapsack and filled that. So, burdened down with
lethal equipment, I hurried back to Cyane's side. I didn't want to miss
a move of that visitor from far space. I wanted to learn, and I had an
idea she would show plenty of science if she got into action. The prince
wasn't gambling on her for nothing, not with that glorious sister of his
in jeopardy.

She had seated herself on that same big bench where I had first met the
Zoorph, Carna, and the Zervs were coming and going to her rapidly-given
orders. A dozen of the older Zervs were assembling apparatus under her
direction, and if I expected to learn something, I saw I was going to be
disappointed, for the stuff was inexplicable to me.

I went on outside to the ledge from which the city could be seen. I was
worried about how Genner had explained to the Jivros the death of the
two who had accompanied him. I had taken a pair of small binoculars from
my packs, and seeing activity near the gates of the wall, I trained the
lenses upon the wall.

I gave a cry which brought the Zervs speeding to me. I handed the
focused glasses to Holaf, pointed at the gates. He put them to his eyes,
then he too gave a cry of warning, and raced back to the Croen.

For, filing out of the gates and spreading out across the valley was the
vanguard of an army. The glass had shown the streets filled with
marching men.

For a few minutes I could not understand exactly what had happened, then
I guessed. The prince had asked for permission to use the entire forces
of the city in a search for the Croen! The strategy of the man was
exquisite. He was playing on the Jivro fear of the Croen to get the
military power fully in his hands!

Even as the great limbs of the Croen woman brought her to my side, as I
handed her the glasses, round disk ships began to rise from the center
of the city one after the other until at least five score of the smaller
type were in the sky. After them came two of the larger craft that I
knew were really space ships with huge inner chambers in the bottom
where the small craft nested.

An all-out search for the Croen was on in earnest!

But now quite suddenly an astonishing thing happened. One of the great
mother ships swung in a circle, came alongside the other, and from the
great center bulge of the upper surface a blue beam lashed out, struck
the other in a slicing flare and sheared off the entire upper bulge in
one blow. The great ship faltered for an instant, then began to fall. It
struck the ground near the wall with a blinding explosion. As the great
mushroom of white smoke began to lift up, the stem of the mushroom blew
away, and where the ship had fallen was only a hole, surrounded by bits
of shattered metal. The wall near the explosion was breached in a
fifty-foot-wide break, and the bodies of men could be seen through the
breach, killed by concussion.

From the city a blazing yellow beam lanced here and there in pursuit of
the traitor disk, but it darted like a dragonfly, up, down, and zig-zag.
The pursuing beam came nowhere near it. Somehow I knew the prince, and
perhaps Wananda too, were in that ship, and my heart was in my throat as
I thought of the queen in that ship, being shot at by the repulsive
insect men.


The army deploying on the plain kept right on marching, columns slanting
outward from the center, forming three columns that spread out like the
extending prongs of a trident. I could make nothing of it.

Several dogfights had broken out among the smaller disk ships since the
fall of the mother disk, but these were quickly over, and the flight
came on, swift as arrows.

The remaining mother disk settled to earth on the level land directly
below our hiding place, and the smaller disk settled now around it. The
army marched on, nearer and nearer.

I looked at Holaf, handed him the glasses.

"I don't know whether we are lost, or, whether the prince has joined us,
deserting the Jivros in the city you Zervs built."

"None but Prince Genner knew our hiding place, and who else would place
themselves under our fire range, knowing we were here?" Even as he
spoke, the door opened in the side of the great disk, and the prince
sprang out, turning to assist his sister to the ground.

The Croen, Cyane, standing beside me, suddenly leaped off the ledge, her
long limbs making easy going of the sloping detritus below. Seconds
later she was running easily across the plain toward the ship, and I was
surprised to see the prince and the queen bow their knees to her, kneel
before her as if praying to a goddess. She touched the bowed heads with
her fingertips, and the three figures then entered the disk and the door
closed. The ship lifted, took off alone in a southerly direction, flying
higher and higher and out of sight. Even as it disappeared, another
great disk lifted from the city, set out in the same direction in
pursuit.

But the smaller ships below lifted at once as they sighted this pursuit,
set out after the second mother disk.

"I guess we're going to miss the fighting," I said to Holaf.

"We can get into it when the time is right. We've got to move at once.
The Jivros know our location now. Come on!"

Holaf strode back into the cavern that had been the Zerv's hideout for
so long. I followed, stopping curiously to examine the apparatus which
the Croen had abandoned on the advent of the prince. It was a kind of
still, bubbling now with a wick lamp under the red fluid, and nearly a
gallon of the end product had collected in a big jar.

"What was this distillation all about?" I asked Holaf.

"It was a medicine she was making for the Shinro. She said that an
injection into their blood would increase their perceptions to a human
range of intelligence, and that then we could use their resulting rage
against their mutilators. It is only a temporary effect. It will wear
off in a day, leave them again to the stupidity the Jivros gave them.
Now, she's gone, I don't even know the dosage. It is useless, the prince
took her from us."

"We can use it, if it is complete. I have the needle I used to revive
the Croen. Bring the stuff; we'll try it."

"We could circle the army, get into the city...." said Holaf, his eyes
glittering on mine.

"Let's go," I cried, getting his idea.

       *       *       *

We were near a hundred and fifty young Zerv fighters, and perhaps as
many women and old men and children. We wound through the passages of
the tunnels in the mountain, came out on the far side from the valley.
Along the mountainside we traveled, and I realized we were at the mercy
of any force we met, being too few and too hampered with baggage and the
helpless members of the Zerv families.

But Holaf knew what to do. He pointed out a trail toward the wilderness
to the thin little column, told them where to take cover and await his
return. Then with myself and a dozen of his best warriors, he turned his
face again toward the Jivro stronghold.

We circled the valley, marching hard, crossing the upper narrow end.
Coming toward the city, twilight was closing down, and we made the last
few miles in complete darkness.

Near the walls, Holaf chopped a thirty-foot sapling, which we carried to
the wall. A young Zerv swarmed up the pole, let down a rope to help the
ascent of the others. I climbed the rough pole after him. I hadn't the
athletic ability of these Zervs who seemed to like to climb ropes hand
over hand. So over and down into the silent city we went, drawing up
pole and rope after us, hiding them in the shadows of the wall.

Like shadows we stole along the streets, and after long minutes heard
the unmistakable feet of the Shinros. They came with that ghastly
mechanical rhythmic tread, eyes staring, backs burdened. I guessed that
now their burdens were materials for the defense of the wall. We
followed, and not far distant from the breach of the explosion of the
disk ship, found our chance. They were accompanied by four of the
hopping Jivros, and upon the back of each a young Zerv sprang, silent as
stalking cats, striking them down, crushing their skulls with vibro-gun
barrels.

Holaf and I set to work immediately on the mindless Shinros, injecting
shots of the red fluid into their veins one by one, varying the shots to
gauge the effect. But it was potent stuff, and before I had the third
man under the needle, the first was speaking in a hoarse, angry voice.

"What has happened to me, what--what?"

Holaf said: "These are almost all graft jobs, were once captives and
normal men. The result, if this shot works, is going to be a thoroughly
angry man, fighting mad for the blood of the Jivros." Then he raised his
voice to the newly revived Shinro.

"You were made into a beast of burden by the Jivro insects! Tonight you
will get your revenge. This shot of sense we are giving you will last
only till daylight, so your life does not matter--it will revert to the
beast in the morning. Go and spend your time where it will hurt the
Jivros most--spill their blood. Their power is ending this night! This is
the beginning of the end for all the Jivro parasites of our race. What
we begin tonight will not stop till every Jivro in the ancient Schree
group of planets is dead and gone!"

As we completed our injections, the column stood waiting, but a column
of sane men, ready to shed Jivro blood for their revenge.

"Go as if to get more burdens of stone to repair the wall. When the
Jivros show themselves, kill, get weapons, do not stop killing until
they are gone or you are dead. You have but this night; make the most of
it."

The column plodded off, in the same apparent condition we had first met
them. But in their brains was boiling, enraged sanity, in a condition of
complete rebellion, of murderous intent.

"They'll sell their lives for something worthwhile, tonight," said Holaf
into my ear, as we set off on their trail. We intended to make the most
of any opening the revived Shinros made for us.


Two more columns of toiling Shinros we liberated with injections, then
our supply of fluid was exhausted. Just what more to do to hurt the
Jivros we didn't know.

"How many ships do those Jivros have? Why are they always in hiding?
Since I've been around here I haven't seen a dozen of 'em at one time!"
I asked Holaf, my feet tired from sneaking along the deserted streets.

"They never come out in the open except for some express reason, such as
driving the Shinros to work. They still have probably a score of ships."

"Twenty of those big disks?" I asked.

"Yes, I would say that many. But they will not bring them out to battle
unless there is no other way. A Jivro never does anything he can get a
human to do. Now that they have only the Shinros in the city, with the
army out there searching for the Croen--and maybe the most of it
deserting to some rendezvous the prince sent them word about--they will
do nothing unless they must. You know how a spider hides when it senses
danger?"

"There are many insects that hide when they are in fear."

"They have that trait, but they also have courage when desperation
drives them. Now they are holed up in their strongholds, waiting
developments. They will only come out to fight if they see an
opportunity to crush their opposition, or if they are driven forth."

Suddenly the long beam of a searchlight lanced across the night sky
above, then another and another. For an instant a huge disk showed in
the beam. It tilted and drove abruptly sideways out of the light. The
beam danced after. It was not seen again, and still more beams winked
on, began to search, systematically quartering the sky.

"I would say our friends, the Jivros, were in for it. The prince and the
Croen are attacking," I said to Holaf.

He grunted.

"I didn't expect it so soon. They do not have the strength in ships. But
the Croen must have some stunt figured out to equalize their power."

We moved along pretty rapidly, keeping to the shadows, and soon were
again at the side of that flat, paved place from which the disk ships
took off. Overhead loomed the beetling walls of the palace from which
the prince had led his people in revolt--manned now by the Jivros. I
wondered how it felt to them to have to do their own fighting.

The beams moving about from the top of the building lit the streets
about us with a distinct glow. It was no place to remain. We moved back
along the parallel street, and I had an idea. Whatever was I carrying
all this weight of heavy game rifle and knapsack of cartridges, and not
even getting in position for a shot? I gestured to Holaf and tapped the
rifle, pointing up.

He got the idea, led me to a dark doorway and we entered the building,
made our way to the roof. Lying prone along the parapet of the roof, I
adjusted the sights for two hundred yards, and swung the rifle sight
slowly across the flat roof of the palace. The reflections of the big
searchlights made the surface quite bright, and about each light was a
group of the tall white-robed Jivros. They made perfect targets!

I began to fire, taking my time, centering each figure exactly. At each
shot, one Jivro fell. I had fired but a score of times, and the
white-robed creatures began to leave the lights, to cluster about the
archway over the roof stair.

Grouped as they now were, I did not need to aim. I fired four more clips
as rapidly as I could load them. Then the remaining Jivros began to
swing the great beams in a frantic search for the deadly fire. As the
beam swung toward us, Holaf seized my head, pushed it beneath the
parapet. The beam swept on without pausing. I raised my head and kept on
firing.

All of the beams but two were now stationary and unattended. I could not
reach these, the angle of fire was wrong; but I could see the base of
the lights, and as they swung again toward me, I fired into the center
of the beam. It blinked out. Holaf clapped me on the shoulder.

"Get the rest of the lights, man, never mind the damned insects! The
Croen will take care of them soon enough."

One by one I put out the search beams, the sky overhead grew dark again.

"These are the creatures who expect to conquer the earth!" I cried out
scornfully to Holaf. "They could be bested by a bunch of boy scouts with
twenty-twos!"

"They have never fought! They are only priests, not warriors. They are
not thinking of conquering anything now, without their willing servants.
They are fighting only for life!"


Overhead still wheeled the circle of guarding disks, manned, I knew, by
the inexperienced priest-like insect men. I took a careful aim at the
glowing transparent bulge in the center of the nearest, hoping the alien
plastic was as soft as the earth plastics. But there was no way to tell
if it had pierced the shell of plastic, or if it had done any harm.

Fumbling in my pockets, I pulled out a loaded clip, lay there pondering
with the clip in front of my nose. Absently I noted the black band
around the nose of the bullets, indicating it was a high-velocity,
armor-piercing cartridge, manufactured by the U.S. Army for exactly such
emergencies as I faced. I did not know if it would prove too big a
powder-charge for my rifle, I did not know then even how I came to have
the cartridges. Polter had bought some Army ammunition and these must
have been among his things. I may have been firing them steadily and not
known the difference.

I inserted the clip, and lay there with my fore-sight following the disk
ship in its steady circling flight. Just where would an armor-piercing
steel bullet do the most harm? I shot the clip out at the great round
body of the thing, trying to guess where a hit might damage machinery or
pierce fuel tanks. There was no visible result, and I gave the flying
disks up as a bad job. How did I know they were built to resist meteors
in ultra high-speed space flight? It didn't even occur to me.

"Where're your buddies?" I asked Holaf. He lay beside me peering down
into the street below.

"Gone to join the Shinro. They are storming the doors of the palace
now." He gestured toward the street.

I leaned over the parapet. Below in the street the hideous, mutilated
bodies of the Shinro moved in a mass. They had brought up a huge beam,
and were pounding it against the great palace doors. Others climbed
toward the tall barred windows, some of them slipped through. But of the
white-robed Jivros there was now no visible sign.

I was about to send a few shots through those same windows, when a
waving white cloth from a window near the top of the huge structure drew
my eyes. A sudden fear struck my heart. Could that be my Zoorph, left
there--could that be Carna? I felt sure it was, and something warm and
pitiful seemed to flutter in my chest as I thought of her alone among
those hopping Jivros. I got to my feet, started across the roof.

"Where are you going, earthman?" asked Holaf, placing a hand on my
shoulder.

"I am going into that place, but there is no need you accompanying me. I
think I saw Carna at her window, a prisoner! I would like to free her."

Holaf gave a cry of unbelief.

"No, you cannot do that! The Croen means to destroy that place down to
the ground. Carna will have to perish with it. It is too bad, but you
cannot enter there. I know what is going to happen."

Even as he spoke, a great white blossom of flame spurted suddenly over
our heads, spread and spread across the sky above the circling ships.
Looking up, my eyes were struck blind. I dropped to the roof surface
with agony. Then came the terrific, stunning concussion. The prince was
letting off the fireworks at last! I exulted, even as I despaired.
Somehow I only now realized that this waiting, strange Zoorph in her
prison, who faced death because forgotten by her friends--_must not
die!_ In my heart some warm thing she had waked there with her magic
breathed, moved, sprang into complete life. I could not see her die! I
must get into that place that I saw was doomed, even as I now saw two of
the great ships above falter in flight, turn and slide downward at
increasing speed. The concussion had broken them, perhaps destroyed the
life within them. I realized that in a short time the same thing was
going to happen to the headquarters of the Jivros.

Below, the booming of the great ram against the palace door ceased,
there came wild shouts, cheers, running feet, terrible screams of agony.
I ran down the ramps up which we had ascended to the roof. Heedless of
danger, I raced along the dark street, across the wide-open space
surrounding the palace.

About the palace door the dead were sprawled in mangled heaps. Among the
dead were several white robes, now stained with the pale blood of the
Jivros. I surmised the frightened creatures had opened the door,
intending to kill the men wielding the ram--and had been unable to do a
complete job. The doors gaped open. I stumbled over the reeking heap of
slain. A dying man raised one horrible crab claw to me, called out my
name! It was Jake, his ugly face now a horror. I had not even known he
had received the reviving shot of the Croen medicine.

I bent to hear his words, but he only looked at me for a second, his
lips formed one word: "Gold!" He laughed bitterly, repeated it: "Gold,
hell!" and then his head dropped lifeless.

I raced on into the place, and at my heels came Holaf. In his hands he
held the vibro gun, and on his face was a wild triumph. He kept crying
aloud:

"Death to the Jivros! An end to tyranny!"


I had no time for the political angles which so inspired Holaf. I raced
upward along the same paths by which Prince Genner had led me to my own
detention quarters. I did not know how to reach Carna's room except that
it lay directly above my own. I raced into the open door of the prince's
quarters, and to that window by which Carna had entered. I leaned out,
shouted at the top of my voice.

"Zoorph, are you there?"

Her voice came to me with a message of relief, yet it justified my worse
fears. She was here, and the place was about to be blasted by some
titanic explosive of the Croen science creation! Her words were
indistinct, but the tone was almost mocking, and I thought I heard her
laugh.

"Can you come down, Carna, or do I have to come after you?"

Seconds later the knotted drape she had used before swayed down into
sight, I grasped it to steady it. Her bare legs followed, and now her
voice came to me with a sweet mockery:

"Never let it be said that Carna required a lover to climb to her
window! Rather let it be said that passion made Carna risk...."

Overhead another of the terrible blasts of flame blazed across the sky.
The light blazed all about us, and Carna leaped from the window ledge
into my arms even as the concussion struck at us. I lost my balance; we
fell to the floor together ... and her voice went calmly, mockingly on,
loud in the sudden ensuing silence:

"... death itself to be at her lover's side! And it sounds as if we both
risked death this night!"

I lay there staring into those mysterious depths of her strange
wide-spaced eyes, and she giggled a little. I could not help laughing.
Even as I struggled to retain sense an almost hysterical laugh of relief
broke from me.

We got to our feet, and in spite of the terrible danger, our arms kept
hold of each other, our eyes still held together, and our lips were
drawn together and burned there for minutes.

"This is madness, woman, we must get out of here. The Croen has made
bombs for the prince's ships. He has rebelled against the Jivros,
released the Croen, Cyane, they will blast this place, perhaps the whole
city, before this night is over!"

"So no one placed any value on the life or the help of Carna but the
earth man! Why did you come here for me, Carl?"

"I saw your scarf at the window. I learned then what I did not know
before--I could not let you die! Do you know what I felt when I knew you
were still in this prison?"

"Of course I know. You see, Carl, the magic of the Zoorphs is really a
magic of love. You love me, and I willed it so. You will always love me
now!"

I was not entranced by her words.

"We have no time for a discussion of metaphysics or of love, woman.
Come, we must get out."

Carna gestured toward the doorway. I whirled, stood frozen with startled
nerves. There stood the old Jivro whom I had met in the council beside
the queen. In his hands were no weapons, and at his back were no tall
Schree guards. I wondered if the desertion of the Jivros had been so
complete. Even as I stooped to retrieve the heavy rifle from the floor,
his hands gestured, and the rifle eluded my reach, seeming to glide
across the floor. I followed it, and he gestured again.

Some force seemed to freeze me. It had not been nerves that held me
before, I learned, but his eyes upon me! Unwinking, the ancient master
of what worlds unknown to me, regarded me, and I knew I was helpless
before the power he controlled. My lips moved, but no sound came out.

A sudden blast of light came from the window, and the vast concussion
shook the building terribly. For an instant I felt freedom in my limbs.
I tugged out the .45 at my belt, leveled it, fired. The Old One
staggered, his eyes blazed at me, and his hand gestured again. The gun
fell from my hands, and some terrible black thing struck into my brain,
tearing, rending. I fell forward into blackness....

       *       *       *

Swirling nothingness, a dry cachination as of some dead-as-dust thing
laughing at life itself, a shuddering vibrance flooding through my flesh
in waves of terrible nausea, a dim glow that grew and grew into
terrifying painful brilliance, then paled and died again into the
swirling blankness that was not death, but a knowledge of deep
injury....

Again and again the swirling horror of my brain slowed, almost stopped.
My eyes almost opened into the painful light, and the deep interior
vibrating sensation swelled into overpowering violence. I sank again
into darkness. Over and over I struggled almost to the doors of
consciousness, only to be shoved back by the consciously controlled
exterior force.

At last the sickness passed, and my mind quieted. I struggled into
wakefulness. As I opened my eyes, the face of the old Jivro gaped with
its noseless, bulging eyes not a foot away, the thin, wide lips and
mouth hanging open like a trap, the ridges across the mouth like a fish,
white and horrible.

I retched at the repellent sight, and the mouth moved, the words came
out so strangely, like a mechanical voice:

"Tell me, earthman, how is the weapon with which you shot my men on the
roof made? What are the details of its construction, and the formula for
its explosive?"

I almost laughed.

"You are ridiculous, old insect! Such things are known only to
technicians in factories, not to mining men like myself."

Again the blinding light struck at me, the sickening shaking of the
vibrance welled through me. I sank and was raised again to
consciousness.

Still the same foolish old insect face, the same bulging ignorant eyes.
The words:

"Tell, then, how this Croen and the forces of Prince Genner may be
overcome? Speak, earthman."

The compulsion moved me, and I answered:

"There is no way you can overcome them, Jivro. You are doomed, and there
is no hope for your tyranny over the Schrees to continue. They have
tired of the Jivros, and you deserve what you are going to get."

Again the sickening application of force and again the exterior
compulsion to speak. I said:

"Your only chance to get back power is to get forces from your home in
space, wherever that may be. You cannot overcome these fighting men and
their weapons, which are as good as your weapons, for you Jivros have
relied for too long upon the Schrees and Shinros for your fighting, and
for your thinking too, by the questions you ask. Have you not done any
thinking in your life, that you ask me such silly questions?"

A change came over the old creature. I knew he was wounded, for I had
seen the glistening milky fluid pouring from the wound in his breast. He
leaned weakly against the table to which I was strapped, his eyes on
mine glazing over with death. The wide lips at the very bottom of the
flat face, moved:

"The Jivro Empire is ending, I think, earthman. We dug our own grave
when we relegated all unpleasant duties to our conquered races. For an
age the Jivro has been a creature shunning all work and effort, even
thinking. We were bound to lose our grip. I see now that I am really
foolish, and not a strong being of intellect. Our doom is written, and
the day of the writing was that day when we conquered and enslaved the
Schrees."

"Now you are talking sense, Old One. You see what is plain to all
others; at last it becomes clear to you. But you are dying, and it is
too late for wisdom to come to the Jivros. Once you set your feet on the
path to greatness; but when you did evil, your feet naturally turned to
the downward path of decadence. Evil is not a way of life, it is a way
of death."

The bulging eyes on mine flickered with a fierce inner fire for an
instant, then the head bent lower. For an instant he tottered there
beside me, then crashed to the floor with a sound like a bundle of dry
sticks.


I turned my head, saw that I was in the chamber of my first
interrogation, and the sound of feet about me was the Jivro "doctors,"
moving to carry away their ruler. I saw the sleek body of Carna on a
table but a dozen feet away. Three of the tall white-robed insects bent
over her, one moving a control in a great lamp device, another
scribbling on a pad, and the third was speaking. Evidently the Zoorph
was getting the third degree, too. I lay back weakly. I felt as if I had
been through a washing machine and some of my buttons left in the
wringer.

As I closed my eyes, a vast _boom_ crashed into my ears, the table
jumped beneath me, pieces of masonry fell bounding on the floor and I
raised my head, staring wildly. Evidently the prince and the Croen were
still bombing the place.

I tugged at the straps on my wrists and ankles. They gave a little. I
kept on tugging, turning my head as far as I could to see how the insect
men were taking their bombardment. They stood, near fifty of them, in a
group by the door. Evidently they had started to run out when the crash
came, but had stopped when it was evident the roof was going to remain
intact. If those things had any sense they would be in the deepest
sub-basement they could find, I figured. The Schrees must have been
carrying them as helpless parasites for too many centuries to realize
they could do without them, for them to be so inept.

Straining my neck, I watched the grotesque high-breasted white figures
about the doorway, they were tittering to each other in some tongue I
did not know, a strange sound like the rasping of corn husks under
squeaking wagon wheels. Suddenly the whole palace shook terribly, the
floor seemed to reel, an unbearable sound raged at my ears. I cringed
from the pain of the sound. When I opened my eyes, the whole mass of the
Jivro medicals was jammed in the doorway, struggling to get over each
other, and the squeaking and rasping increased into a bedlam of sound. I
laughed, a deep "ha ha," and from the neighboring table Carna cried:

"See what wonderful creatures are the tyrants when things are not going
their way. If I had known they were like that in war, I would have
killed them all myself long, long, ago. I would have poisoned them, and
when they asked me who did it, I would have said, _boo_ and they would
all have run away and hid!"

As the last of them got through the door, I gave my loosened straps one
mighty pull, and the heavy leather tore. I could hear it part in the
sudden silence. Again and again I strained, and at last the leather
parted entirely. My right hand was free. Feverishly I tore at the other
fastenings. There could be but little time left us before that bombing
struck dead center and brought the whole palace down. We had to get out.
I knew it quite as well as those fleeing insect men.

Free at last, I rolled off the table, landed on all fours, leaped to
Carna's side, and released the buckles of the straps. As she sat up, her
face level with mine, she pursed her lips, and I gave her a hearty
smack. As her arms went about my neck, I picked her up, raced through
the doorway, along the passage, down the ramps. I was weaponless, but I
had no longer any fear of the Jivros. I saw a group of them busy in a
big chamber as I passed, but I raced on, spinning around the next
corner, down the ramps and on ... on ... until I felt the coolness of
fresh air ahead, ran out beneath the stars again, and along the shadowed
street.

Putting my Zoorph back on her feet, we raced toward that breach in the
wall. Over our heads the great blasting explosions went on, and I saw
but three of the circling disks left to the defense of the city.

Outside the city wall we stopped to catch our breath, leaning against
the wall in the shadow.

Carna said, musingly: "It is all over for the ancient Empire of the
Jivros, if help does not come for them tonight. For, now that they are
seen to be so helpless without their slaves and their fighting men, the
news will spread. Planet after planet will rise against them. This is
their finish!"

"They expected to conquer earth, Carna. They could never have done it.
For a little while, perhaps, but not for long."

"They might have! They are like ants; they have a highly developed
pattern of activity. But when that pattern is disrupted, they are lost.
They do not think--they remember."


"We've got to make contact with the queen and with Genner and the Croen.
We will be left out of things." I was wondering what Carna's future
plans were.

"You are interested in the beautiful sister of the Prince?" asked Carna.

"You are interested in the so handsome Prince?" I answered in the same
tone of voice.

"Of course, what woman would not be! But I am more interested in you,
for I fell in love with you. But I can fall out again, and maybe--who
knows...." she laughed.

"What's more to the point, Carna, is she interested in me?"

"I could tell you," said Carna, her eyes mysterious on my own, luminous
and huge in the darkness.

"Well, perhaps you had better tell me, then."

"Why? I love you!"

"You mean she _is_ interested in me!"

"Very much, and she is a very smart woman who has ways of getting what
she wants. I am very much afraid she will take you with her to space
when they go, and leave poor Carna in her ruined city, with no one but
the wild beasts and the dead bodies. This will be the end of this
place."

"You are wrong!" I smiled, thinking the girl was flattering me.

"No, not wrong, dear earthman. I am very much afraid of the future, for
I am to lose you, but I have a way of avoiding that."

"And what is that way?"

"You will find out when the time comes, and you may like it very much!"

"Let's get away from this wall where we can see what's going on...."

We plodded across the level, grassy valley floor, walking backward some
of the time, watching the great circling ships above the city's center,
and the lancing blue paths of their rays stabbing at some darting
adversary high above them.

Then from the western sky came a series of round low shapes, speeding so
rapidly the eye could hardly distinguish them from the darkly glowing
horizon. After their passage, in a close series, came the air-scream of
falling missiles, high-pitched, then came a terrific cannonading of
explosions. Fountains of fire sprang up in exact sequence, one after the
other. The ground shook and shook underfoot, each shock seeming greater,
to add its strength to the one preceding it. I knew that this was for
the Jivros the end of their plans on earth.

Simultaneous with the arrow-swift flight, two great blazing lances of
blue fire shot downward from the ships far overhead, transfixed the
circling spheres one after the other. They tilted, plunged slowly,
faster and faster--ended in great splashes of fire and sound somewhere
in the city below.

I mopped my face. The night was hot, and relief flooded me.

"We got out of there just in time, Miss Mystic!"

She nodded, her white smile in the night a beautiful thing.

"What is this Miss Mystic word you use?"

"It means Zoorph, Carna. It is U.S.A. speech."

"U.S.A. speech," she parroted. "Some day I will talk U.S.A. speech, too,
like you!"

"I hope so. This tongue of yours gives me cramps in the jaws."

We plodded on across the grass, heading for the cliff ledge where we had
met. I knew no where else to go.

Quite suddenly came a soft sussuration overhead, a light-beam lanced
down, pinning us there. I tossed Carna aside, rolled myself out of the
path of light. But mercilessly the light beam spread, until we were
again within the circle of illumination.

But no blue death ray followed. The dark shape settled to the earth
beside us, and the door in the side opened.

I sprang to my feet in glad surprise to see Holaf in the round doorway,
motioning us to enter. He cried:

"Come, the day of the Jivro has ended, there is work now for men to do!"


Carna laughed happily, ran to the doorway, and as Holaf caught her waist
and swung her up, she kissed him on the cheek, still laughing in
abandoned joy to know that finally the centuries-long nightmare fastened
on her people was ended. I followed more sedately, wondering what now? I
thought of poor cross-eyed Jake Barto, and of the three fortune-hunters
who had gone the same path--and as I shook Holaf's hand, questioned the
ecstatic confidence of release upon his face.

"Suppose the Empire sends ships here, will they not destroy all you
have gained? Why do you feel so sure their power is broken? They were
but few here?"

"They will not send ships, for no messenger got away. What do you think
the ships of the prince have been doing? This is the beginning of their
end!"

"How did you get out of the palace? The last I saw you, you were
storming the place, gun in hand, and cheering...."

"When the bombs began to burst against the very roof, I got out. I
killed a few Jivros first, though! It has been a good time; the best of
my life!"

"Were you picked up as you picked us up?"

"Of course. Look there who it is that has done us the honor...."

My eyes followed his finger pointing through the far arched doorway to
the control room. At the bank of levers and dials, her face intent upon
the scene through the circular plastic dome, sat Wananda. Inadvertently
my eyes went to Carna's face; she nodded once, vigorously. I knew she
meant:

"See, I have told you the truth. She knew where you were, her heart told
her, who else would descend to pick you up while the fighting was still
going on?"

I went to her, and stood for a moment beside her, watching her swift
hands, the light on her midnight hair, the delicate superb chiseling of
her forehead and nose, the exquisite aura of womanhood about her--she
was every inch a queen.

She turned, startled to find me there, then smiled, and a warm flush
spread slowly from her neck upward to her temples. She knew that I knew!
She laughed a little quiet sound to herself.

"That is why the Zoorphs are hated, earthman. One can never keep a
secret!"

"You must have the powers of Carna yourself, to know that she told me."
I answered.

"I have studied their methods. One comes by such talents hereditarily.
The Zoorph is only an organization which concentrates on taking in and
teaching such gifted children. I, as a princess, had a tutor of their
sect. I know that you love her, too, you know."

"And not yourself. But she confesses that I love her only because of her
skill at hypnosis, or something of the kind. To me that seems unfair,
but I cannot help it. I love her, though I am drawn to you. But why
should we concern ourselves with these matters? You will go back to
space with your ships to carry rebellion to the other Jivro strongholds.
I will be left behind to mourn you both."

"Why should you be left behind? Do you find the Schree or the Zerv
company so repellent?"

"Not at all. I should desire nothing more than to see the worlds of
other suns, other places in the far paths of space. Yet...."

"Yet what? Have you a wife here, children?"

"No, not that. But I have possessions it cost me many years of effort to
acquire."

Carna came silently into the room, stood on the other side of the queen.
For an instant Wananda closed her eyes, and some subtle sense of my own
told me they were talking with each other in a way I could not hear.
Wananda opened her eyes, turned to me, smiling whimsically.

"Carna suggests that she will give your love to me in return for a
certain favor."

"Do you want my love, Wananda?" I asked softly.

She did not stop smiling secretly to some sound she heard and I did
not.

"You see, earthman, our race has never developed the morals and
inhibitions which your people find so necessary. We are polygamous, and
not apt to be jealous. She offers to give you to me as a royal husband
in return for the privilege of being your slave, your housekeeper, your
body-servant as it were. What do you say?"


I was stunned. So openly to be bargained over; frankly to be invited to
marriage, to two women at the same time! Weakly I countered:

"Your people would object to an alien consort!"

"The word is strange to me. Among us you would be a ruler if you married
me. Among us all men have several wives. But women have but one
husband."

"You are offering me the rule of the Schrees?"

"Yes, and if our coming war with the Jivro creatures turns out well, it
will mean not one planet, but many. I cannot say how many, as some of
those never allied with the Schrees before will naturally gravitate to
us in gratitude for our releasing them from the Jivros. I am agreeable
mainly because I know that we need your earth science, your different
culture--as wedded to our own science we would be invincible. We will
need everything finally to conquer the ancient ingrown tyranny of the
Jivros. I am not offering you exactly any bed of roses. Besides, I like
and trust Carna. I can understand why she loves you, and why she
bargains for any part of you. She knows I have but to exert my own
wisdom of Zoorph to release you from her hold on you."

"I see. Let me get this straight. You love me; it is agreeable to you
that I continue to love Carna; but I will love you too. Two wives who
love me, a kingdom, and the chance of knocking over a whole empire of
insects who have parasitized human races in space and meant to do it
here. There is no way I can refuse!"

Carna laughed.

"With two of us working your mind for you, how could you refuse?"

Wananda frowned at Carna's frankness.

"It is stated in the nineteenth law of Zoorph code that no victim is
ever to be told of his enslavement openly, Carna. Why do you break the
law?"

"I don't know, Wananda Highest. I think it is because I want to be fair
to him, and give him a chance to do his own thinking, too."

I grinned.

"Our race has long been familiar with your so-called magic, dear ones.
We call it hypnotism, and if you think I cannot resist it, remember that
I shot the Old One with his eyes upon me."

Wananda suddenly set the big lever she held into a notch, turned to me,
her face full of a charming surprise which I yet knew was an act.

"So you think you can resist your wives' wills, do you, earthman? Come,
Carna, let us humble his boasts once and, for all!"

Their two lovely faces pressed cheek to cheek, the two pair of eyes
bored into my own, and four quick slim hands gestured about my chin. A
dizzy enervation swam into me as though I were bleeding to death, as
though honey and whiskey were being poured down my throat, as though I
had fallen suddenly onto a pink cloud of spun candy.

Visions of terrific pleasure began to hum in my head, my knees gradually
gave way beneath me, until I was on my knees before the two women. My
hands were unconsciously extended as if to fend them off, and each of
them seized a hand, pulled me to the round bench at the back of the
control cabin. They stroked my cheeks, began to murmur their "magical"
phrases in their mysterious mystic secret words, and my wits began to
float into a very genuine paradise where their two faces, side by side,
became flower and fruit and tree and earth itself.


When I awoke from the dream into which they had sent me, Carna was
seated beside me, nodding sleepily, her head on her chest, and Wananda
had returned to the controls of the ship. As I looked at each of them, I
found _a new something had been added_! I loved each of them equally
well!

I sat up, stretching. Sometimes it is comforting to have problems
decided for one. Now I did not have to go through any excruciating pangs
of conscience or guilt or fight myself into a state of not wanting one
or the other of them. They had just adjusted me to the situation
mentally, and I felt that everything was perfect in the best of all
possible marriages for me!

"Well, I'm getting hungry!" I cried, apropos of nothing except that I
did feel pangs.

My Zoorph did not even get up. She reached out one hand to where a
covered tray sat on the bench beside her, and handed it to me. I took
off the lid, and on it were broiled chops, steaming deliciously baked
beans, some kind of soft brown bread--fruit, a sweet perfumed wine.

"The master is hungry, Carna will provide!"

If I get cross-eyed as Jake Barto, it will be from trying to see two
women at once.

Oh yes, I forgot to tell you that Nokomee became the prince's third
wife. I wished her happiness. For me, two are enough!


THE END





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Valley of the Croen, by Lee Tarbell

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK VALLEY OF THE CROEN ***

***** This file should be named 26010.txt or 26010.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/6/0/1/26010/

Produced by Greg Weeks, V. L. Simpson and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
