The Project Gutenberg EBook of Security, by Ernest M. Kenyon

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Security

Author: Ernest M. Kenyon

Release Date: July 28, 2008 [EBook #26140]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SECURITY ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Alexander Bauer and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                        [Illustration]

                           SECURITY

    _If you let a man learn, and study, and work--and clamp
    a lid on so that nothing he takes into his mind can be
    let out--one way or another he'll blow a safety valve!_

                      BY ERNEST M. KENYON

                     Illustrated by Freas


Suddenly Collins snapped the pencil between his fingers and hurled the
pieces across the lab, where they clattered, rolled from the bench to
the floor, and were still. For a moment he sat leaning against the desk,
his hands trembling. He wasn't sure just when the last straw had been
added, but he was sure that he had had enough. The restrictions, red
tape, security measures of these government laboratories seemed to
close in on his mind in boiling, chaotic waves of frustration. What
was the good of his work, all this great installation, all the gleaming
expensive equipment in the lab around him? He was alone. None of them
seemed to share his problem, the unctuous, always correct Gordon, the
easy-mannered, unbearable Mason, all of them gave him a feeling of
actual physical sickness.

Gardner's "Nucleonics and Nuclear Problems" lay open on the desk before
him, but he looked instead beyond through the clear curving glass windows
toward the sweep of green hills and darkening sky and the shadows of the
lower forests that gave Fair Oaks its name. Beside him unfinished lay the
summaries of the day's experiments, and the unorganized, hurriedly jotted
notes for tomorrow's work. The old intellectual alertness was gone.
Delight in changing theory, in careful experimentation no longer sprang
from his work and were a part of it. There was a dull, indefinable aching
in his head and a dry, dissatisfied sensation in his mouth.

Along the ordered walks below his laboratory windows workers and
technicians streamed toward the gates, checking out for the day through
the usual mass of red tape, passes, and Geiger tests. Lights were
flicking on in the long East Wing Dormitory across the quadrangle, and
the mess hall, where he had recently eaten a tasteless supper, was
lighted.

Shortly after restrictions had really begun to tighten up last fall,
he had written to a worker who had published making a minor correction
in his calculations and adding some suggestions arising from his own
research. A week later his letter was returned completely censored,
stamped "Security-Violation." It was that evasive Gordon's fault. He
knew it, but he couldn't prove it. Collins suspected that the man was
not a top-notch researcher and so was in administration. Perhaps Gordon
was jealous of his own work.

Even the Journals were drying up. Endless innocuous papers recalculating
the values of harmless constants and other such nonsense were all that
was being published. They were hardly worth reading. Others were feeling
the throttling effects of security measures, and isolated, lone
researchers were slowing down, listless and anemic from the loss of
the life blood of science, the free interchange of information.

The present research job he was doing was coming slowly, but what
difference did it make? It would never be published. Probably it would
be filed with a Department of Defense code number as Research Report
DDNE-42 dash-dash-dash. And there it would remain, top-secret, guarded,
unread, useless. Somewhere in the desk drawers was the directive worded
in the stiff military manner describing the procedures for clearing
papers for publication. When he had first come here, he had tried that.

"Well, good, Collins," Gordon, the Division Administrator, had said,
"glad to check it over. Always happy when one of our men has something
for publication. Gives the Division a good name. I'll let you know, but
we have to be careful. Security you know."

Somehow he had never heard. The first time he had made a pest of himself
with Gordon who was polite, evasive, always plausible. Gordon,
Gordon--it was becoming an obsession with him he knew, but the man
appeared at every turn. He personified the system.

In the past months his work had seemed to clog up in details and slow
down. The early days of broad, rapid outlines and facile sketching in of
details were gone. Now the endless indignities, invasion of personal
rights and freedom, the hamstringing of his work, the feeling of being
cut off from the main currents of his field, filled him with despair,
anger, and frustration.

                 *       *       *       *       *

Suddenly he raised his head, slammed the notebook shut and switched off
the desk lamp. Not tonight. Tomorrow would be time enough to write out
this stuff. He needed a drink.

The hall was dark as he locked the door to his lab except at the far end
near the stairway where a patch of yellow light shone through an open
doorway. Mason, he thought, Allan Mason, the one guy at Fair Oaks
Nuclear Energy Laboratories who was always so damnedly cheerful, who
didn't seem to mind the security restrictions, and who was seen so often
with Gordon. As he walked rapidly past the open doorway, he caught a
flashing impression from the corner of his eye of Mason's tall figure
bent over his bench, his long legs wrapped around a lab stool, the
perpetual unlit pipe hanging from the corner of his mouth. Then as he
swung quickly toward the stairs, he heard Mason's cheerful hail.

"Hi, Milt, hold up a sec."

Reluctantly he paused at the head of the stairs scowling momentarily,
and then slowly turning and retraced his steps.

The lab was brightly lighted, and Mason stretched and smiled pleasantly.

"Come in, old man, I'm about ready to knock off for the evening. How
goes it?"

Collins mumbled an O.K. trying to keep the irritation out of his voice,
and Mason went on.

"Just finishing up some loose ends so I can get off to the Society
meeting on Monday. You going?"

Shaking his head Collins felt his dislike for this man growing. The
annual meeting of the North American Society of Theoretical Physicists.
He didn't even give it any thought any more. Maybe he could go, but it
didn't seem worth the effort. In the past he had tried to go to the
meetings, but somehow work, rush work, some change of emphasis had come
up on the project, and he had had to cancel his plans. He'd finally
given up, but with Mason these things seemed to come easily, and he
wondered why--

"That's too bad"--his voice droned pleasantly on, and Collins' eye
caught several botany texts in the book rack above Mason's desk. So, he
had time to read stuff outside of his field. His work was going well.
He had time for meetings and was allowed to go to them--the anger rose
slowly like a swelling bubble from the hard core of his stomach. Then he
realized that Mason had stopped talking and was looking at him.

"Milt, you look glum tonight. Is there-- Why not have supper with me,
and we'll take in the movie in the lounge?"

"I've eaten already." Collins was on his feet. He forced a, "Thanks
anyway. See you tomorrow. I'm--" and he was gone.

As he strode angerly across the quadrangle Mason's words and cheerful
attitude rankled in his mind. The gravel of the walk spurted from under
his shoes, and the night air was clear and cool. It was good at least to
feel something other than despair again, even anger.

But once in his study with its attached bedroom and bath that made up
his living quarters, he sank to the couch near his desk, all of the
fight gone. He needed a drink. Today all the irritations, tensions, and
suspicions of the past months seemed to close in on him. His work was
going badly. Perhaps seeing Mason had brought it to a head. The fifth of
bourbon in the bottom desk drawer was partly gone from the party last
month. He took a swallow neat, and the fire of the liquid burned and
clawed its way down his throat and spread with blossoming warmth in his
stomach.

Kicking off his shoes and loosening his tie he leaned back with the
bottle on the floor beside him.

Later in the evening when the early clarity of thought had left him and
his mind moved disjointedly in and out of seemingly brilliant, emotional
solutions to his problem, he knew he must have a showdown. Lying back on
the couch he drifted into sleep determined to have it out with Gordon in
the morning--resign if necessary.

                 *       *       *       *       *

The momentary pause of lighting his cigarette gave Collins a chance
to decide where to start, as he sat across from Gordon. The Division
Administrator was older with a heavy-jowled, close shaven face, and he
waited patiently for Collins to speak.

"Dr. Gordon, I am having a great deal of difficulty in making an
adjustment both in my work and in my personal relations here at Fair
Oaks, and last night I realized that I would have to talk to you about
it."

Gordon's face changed slightly, his eyebrows rising almost
imperceptibly.

"So, what ... how do you mean, Milt?"

Use of the first name--the familiar approach thought
Collins--administrative technique number blank blank dash blank.

"Dr. Gordon, these security measures we are under, the difficulty of
publishing, of getting to scientific meetings, the problem of getting
furloughs, lack of knowledge of what is going on in my own field, it's
just a little too much. It's personally irritating, but it greatly
hampers my work as well. Frankly, I'm against the entire security
program as it now stands. If it isn't stopped research will ... well,
simply be impossible. Free interchange of information is essential to--"
His fingers were gripping the arms of his chair.

"Yes, of course, Milt, but corny as it sounds there is a war on you
know. Oh, not a war with military weapons--yet, but a cold war of
science and engineering, a struggle for supremacy in many fields of
knowledge. If information of our work leaks out, gets to the enemy, we
might as well not do that work. We can't be too careful."

"I agree, but it goes too far." He leaned forward. "My private mail is
read, and on my last furlough I am certain I was watched from the time I
left the gates out there until I returned, and I don't like it. I can't
prove it, but-- That's getting to the point that life's not worth
while."

"Come now, Milt, don't you think you're taking this a little too
seriously? You're getting stale, overwrought. You need a fresh point of
view. Lots of our people feel as you do at one time or another, but most
of us learn to live with these necessary regulations, and do our work in
spite of them. Let me make a suggestion, relax, take a little time off,
develop a hobby. Why not do some reading in a field of science other
than your own. It's good for you. Several of the people here are doing
it. I do it, Carter, even Mason for instance--"

Collins could feel the anger rising in him again.

"Look, Gordon, I'm not going to mince words. I'm sick and tired of
this mess, and you might as well know it. You can have all your damn
relaxations and hobbies, or what have you. I want to do my work, and
if I can't do it here, I'm going somewhere where I can do it. In plain
English unless we can have an understanding right now--I resign."

It had come out, and Collins was breathing hard, but Gordon's expression
hardly changed as he looked over the tips of his joined fingers, while
the younger man stopped and crushed out his cigarette viciously in the
ash disposer on the arm of his chair. Gordon doodled on a small pad for
a moment, his eyes not meeting Collins'. Then he spoke slowly.

"I'm sorry you feel that way, Milt. I ... I'm afraid I cannot accept
your resignation. You see," he said softly, "none of us can leave Fair
Oaks--now."

Collins looked up, amazement and incredulity written on his face.

"What do you mean--can't leave? I can leave any time--"

Gordon slowly shook his head almost sadly. "No, only assistants,
technicians, maintenance people, and they are carefully watched or
restricted to this area. People like yourself, like me, we have
information, knowledge which cannot be let out of government hands at
this time. We're here probably for the 'duration'; maybe longer."

"But--this is barbarous. I--" the words clogged, jumbled as he tried to
get them out. His emotions ran from anger, to amazement, to indignation,
followed by a trickle of fear, and as he stared at Gordon, the fear
grew. He could scarcely hear Gordon's words--

"Take my advice--relax--and forget your fears--accept the restrictions
and go ahead--read in some other field--come in again when you've
thought it out." He was scarcely aware when Gordon slipped a bound
journal volume into his hands and walked with him to the door--and
closed it behind him.

                 *       *       *       *       *

Collins left Gordon's office in Administration moving slowly, one arm
hanging loosely by his side, the other clutching the book. The corridor
stretched ahead into B Wing with its laboratories flooded with the glow
of mid-morning sunshine, bright and unreal. His mind was dazed, his
thinking processes stopped in a kind of stunned unbelief. He could not
even quit now. An undercurrent of fear ran close to the surface of his
confused mind. It was the end of science, the end of all his work. All
of the stifling, strangling restrictions of security on his work, on
his private life, came whirling back as a monstrous, formless threat,
something unspeakably big and powerful and unbeatable against which he
could not fight.

To his right as he moved slowly down the hall the double doors of the
main library reading room were open with the stacks and study cubicles
beyond, silent and restful. He paused and then entered crossing into the
maze of the stacks through a grilled iron doorway. The important thing
now was not to meet anyone, not to have to speak or smile or think. It
was very important now to be alone and quiet.

He walked until he found an empty cubicle, the endless walls of books,
repositories of knowledge, silent and reproachful around him. Knowledge
and books such as these would soon be added to no longer. He slumped
into the chair and gazed at the tiny reading desk with its softly
glowing lamp and the small stack of volumes on the rack left by previous
users. Absently he stared for a long time at the volume Gordon had given
him as if seeing it for the first time. Then with a deliberate effort he
opened it and thumbed through slowly only half seeing its pages. _The
Journal of Botanical Research._

The pages in the _Journal_ were like a look through an open window.
Outside of classified projects in "harmless" fields of research the work
of science went on, papers were published, reputations were made,
freedom still existed. He remembered Gordon's sleek smile and advice
to relax and read in other fields. This stupid useless advice still
rankled. Of course, he probably was stale, but to read junk like this!

Silently and in his mind, he cursed the day he had studied physics,
better archeology or zoology, anything. Suddenly he stopped riffling the
pages and leaned forward, rapidly turning back to something that had
caught his eye. It was a three and one-half page paper on "The
Statistical Probability of Chromosome Crossover" written in neat
sections with several charts and references. It was by M. Mason.

Something clicked in Collins' mind--read the journals--Mason's unconcern
with security, the botany books on his desk the night before. It didn't
make sense, but it added up to something. Mason knew something and so
did Gordon. He half rose. He had to get to the bottom of it. Clutching
the bound _Journal_ Collins turned and weaved through the stacks and out
of the library waving the protesting librarian aside and strode down the
corridor toward the laboratories.

                 *       *       *       *       *

The door to Mason's lab was partially open, and he looked up quizzically
from taking an instrument reading as Collins burst in.

"Mason, I--" he planked the bound volume of the _Botanical Journal_ on
the lab bench beside the instrument ignoring Mason's wince as the
instrument needle quivered with the jar. "Did you write this?" His
finger jabbed at the open page.

Mason glanced at Collins, removed a pair of glasses from his white lab
coat pocket, and putting them on leaned forward and studied the page for
a moment.

"Yes. Not bad either though I shouldn't say it. I didn't know you were
interested in Botany." His voice was casual with a slight questioning
note.

Collins suddenly felt ridiculous. What was he accusing the man of? Mason
had a right to publish on anything he wanted to, still a muddled series
of half facts, incidents and suspicions chased through his mind.

Mason walked over to his desk and filling his pipe sat down thoughtfully
and leaned back motioning Collins into a nearby chair.

"I think I know what is on your mind, Milt. Maybe I can straighten this
out. Gordon told me a little while ago that you wanted to resign."

Collins stiffened. So, these two were working together.

"Milt, did you ever stop to think how lucky we are? Where can you get
better equipment, help, coöperation in the country than here?" Collins
leaned forward to speak, but Mason went on. "Oh, I know all the problems
of security and how it strangles work." He paused for a moment as though
trying to grasp the right words.

"Look, Milt, what's the basic problem? Why do security measures strangle
research? Isn't it a matter basically of a breakdown in the interchange
of ideas? Sure, and it has come about because there has been no method
of communication which would not get to and be used by our enemies. So,
like yourself, I'm forbidden to publish the results of my work here in
the journals. Why? Because those results are in my field of study, chain
reactions.

"I'm frustrated just as you have been and science suffers. What do I do?
I write articles in a field that isn't restricted, botany. It's a new
field of interest to me, a hobby if you like. The stuff is published and
gets wide distribution. Every decent library in the country gets it.
Every scientist all over the country can read the papers if he cares to.
Then the word gets around, by the scientific grapevine, with a little
judicious ear-bending. I get a reputation--in Botany.

"Now the botanists know that I am not a botanist. They understand what
I am doing. The word spreads, and they leave my stuff alone. The
physicists in my specialty know my name, and they get the word, and
pretty soon they are glancing over certain botany journals apparently
for relaxation. They read my papers. It's slow, but it works." Mason
leaned forward and struck a large stick match under the lab bench top.
Drawing several puffs through his pipe his eyes were on Collins'
confused face. Then he laid the pipe down.

"The enemy botanists may read the botany journals, sure, but the enemy
physicists don't. Their totalitarian training has made them inflexible
in their thinking, besides they have their hands full trying to keep up
in their own fields. The curse of specialization is a blessing to us.
When the enemy botanists read it, it makes sense, but it doesn't help
them much in their work--more or less innocuous." He waved toward the
botany texts on his desk. "It took me six months to learn enough about
it to do the job." As he spoke Mason untangled his legs and brought the
open journal over to his desk.

"All right, notice in my article I am writing on chromosomes--chains of
genes, and my field is--?"

"Chain reactions," Collins finished softly, "but--"

"The article itself is well disguised, but it's a parable. It's botany
on the surface, but it gets over enough chain-reaction theory to be good
physics, if you read it right. You see botany is what you might call my
code field."

The bright light of noon shimmered on the white buildings and green
lawns beyond the lab windows. Collins was silent and thoughtful.

"Well, that's about all. Gordon knows. He's in with us, but the
Government doesn't suspect--yet. Oh, they may catch on to us. Information
may leak out to the enemy. There's some chance, but when we're caught
we'll think of something else. Most of us believe it's worth the chance.
There's a risk in anything."

Suddenly all the pieces fell into place, and Collins' anger and confusion
melted away. In its place was a sense of relief and hope, hope for the
future. It wasn't the final answer, but it was a way to keep going. He
was not alone any longer. He had friends who understood, who had been
through what he had been through. It was a good feeling. He heard
Mason's voice again.

"Milt, why don't you do some library work? Botany's my code field. I
don't know what yours is, but you've got some catching up to do. There
may be some interesting stuff published already in your code field."

Collins did, and he developed his new interest enthusiastically. Gordon
had been right. He had been getting stale. Besides, astronomy was a
fascinating field, and suns with their revolving planets in some
respects are very like atomic systems, if you look at it that way.

                             THE END



   Transcriber's Note:

   This e-text was produced from Astounding Science Fiction
   October 1955. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence
   that the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Security, by Ernest M. Kenyon

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SECURITY ***

***** This file should be named 26140-8.txt or 26140-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/6/1/4/26140/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Alexander Bauer and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
