The Project Gutenberg EBook of John Jones's Dollar, by Harry Stephen Keeler

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: John Jones's Dollar

Author: Harry Stephen Keeler

Release Date: October 10, 2008 [EBook #26867]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK JOHN JONES'S DOLLAR ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









[Illustration]

JOHN JONES'S DOLLAR

By HARRY STEPHEN KEELER

    _Take a board with 64 squares on it. Put a grain of wheat on the
    first square--two on the second--four on the third. Keep doubling in
    this manner and you will find there isn't enough wheat in the world
    to fill the sixty-fourth square. It can be the same with compound
    interest._


On the 201st day of the year 3221 A.D., the professor of history at the
University of Terra seated himself in front of the Visaphone and
prepared to deliver the daily lecture to his class, the members of which
resided in different portions of the earth.

The instrument before which he seated himself was very like a great
window sash, on account of the fact that there were three or four
hundred frosted glass squares visible. In a space at the center, not
occupied by any of these glass squares, was a dark oblong area and a
ledge holding a piece of chalk. And above the area was a huge brass
cylinder; toward this brass cylinder the professor would soon direct
his subsequent remarks.

In order to assure himself that it was time to press the button which
would notify the members of the class in history to approach their local
Visaphones, the professor withdrew from his vest pocket a small
contrivance which he held to his ear. Upon moving a tiny switch attached
to the instrument, a metallic voice, seeming to come from somewhere in
space, repeated mechanically: "Fifteen o'clock and one minute--fifteen
o'clock and one minute--fifteen o'clock and one min--" Quickly, the
professor replaced the instrument in his vest pocket and pressed a
button at the side of the Visaphone.

As though in answer to the summons, the frosted squares began, one by
one, to show the faces and shoulders of a peculiar type of young men;
young men with great bulging foreheads, bald, toothless, and wearing
immense horn spectacles. One square, however, still remained empty. On
noticing this, a look of irritation passed over the professor's
countenance.

But, seeing that every other glass square but this one was filled up, he
commenced to talk.

"I am pleased, gentlemen, to see you all posted at your local Visaphones
this afternoon. I have prepared my lecture today upon a subject which
is, perhaps, of more economic interest than historical. Unlike the
previous lectures, my talk will not confine itself to the happenings of
a few years, but will gradually embrace the course of ten centuries, the
ten centuries, in fact, which terminated three hundred years before the
present date. My lecture will be an exposition of the effects of the
John Jones Dollar, originally deposited in the dawn of civilization, or
to be more precise, in the year of 1921--just thirteen hundred years
ago. This John Jon--"

At this point in the professor's lecture, the frosted glass square which
hitherto had shown no image, now filled up. Sternly he gazed at the head
and shoulders that had just appeared.

"B262H72476Male, you are late to class again. What excuse have you to
offer today?"

From the hollow cylinder emanated a shrill voice, while the lips of the
picture on the glass square moved in unison with the words:

"Professor, you will perceive by consulting your class book, that I have
recently taken up my residence near the North Pole. For some reason,
wireless communication between the Central Energy Station and all points
north of 89 degrees was cut off a while ago, on account of which fact I
could not appear in the Visaphone. Hence--"

"Enough, sir," roared the professor. "Always ready with an excuse,
B262H72476Male. I shall immediately investigate your tale."

From his coat pocket, the professor withdrew an instrument which,
although supplied with an earpiece and a mouthpiece, had no wires
whatever attached. Raising it to his lips, he spoke:

"Hello. Central Energy Station, please." A pause ensued. "Central Energy
Station? This is the professor of history at the University of Terra,
speaking. One of my students informs me that the North Pole region was
out of communication with the Visaphone System this morning. Is that
statement true? I would--"

A voice, apparently from nowhere, spoke into the professor's ear. "Quite
true, Professor. A train of our ether waves accidently fell into
parallelism with a train of waves from the Venus Substation. By the most
peculiar mischance, the two trains happened to be displaced, with
reference to each other, one half of a wave length, with the unfortunate
result that the negative points of one coincided with the positive
points of maximum amplitude of the other. Hence the two wave trains
nullified each other and communication ceased for one hundred and
eighty-five seconds--until the earth had revolved far enough to throw
them out of parallelism."

"Ah! Thank you," replied the professor. He dropped his instrument into
his coat pocket and gazed in the direction of the glass square whose
image had so aroused his ire. "I apologize, B262H72476Male, for my
suspicions as to your veracity--but I had in mind several former
experiences." He shook a warning forefinger. "I will now resume my
talk."

"A moment ago, gentlemen, I mentioned the John Jones Dollar. Some of you
who have just enrolled with the class will undoubtedly say to
yourselves: 'What is a John Jones? What is a Dollar?'

"In the early days, before the present scientific registration of human
beings was instituted by the National Eugenics Society, man went around
under a crude multi-reduplicative system of nomenclature. Under this
system there were actually more John Joneses than there are calories in
a British Thermal Unit. But there was one John Jones, in particular,
living in the twentieth century, to whom I shall refer in my lecture.
Not much is known of his personal life except that he was an ardent
socialist--a bitter enemy, in fact, of the private ownership of wealth.

"Now as to the Dollar. At this day, when the Psycho-Erg, a combination
of the Psych, the unit of esthetic satisfaction, and the Erg, the unit
of mechanical energy, is recognized as the true unit of value, it seems
difficult to believe that in the twentieth century and for more than ten
centuries thereafter, the Dollar, a metallic circular disk, was being
passed from hand to hand in exchange for the essentials of life.

"But nevertheless, such was the case. Man exchanged his mental or
physical energy for these Dollars. He then re-exchanged the Dollars for
sustenance, raiment, pleasure, and operations for the removal of the
vermiform appendix.

"A great many individuals, however, deposited their Dollars in a
stronghold called a bank. These banks invested the Dollars in loans and
commercial enterprises, with the result that, every time the earth
traversed the solar ecliptic, the banks compelled each borrower to
repay, or to acknowledge as due, the original loan, plus six
one-hundredths of that loan. And to the depositor, the banks paid three
one-hundredths of the deposited Dollars for the use of the disks. This
was known as three percent, or bank interest.

"Now, the safety of Dollars, when deposited in banks, was not absolutely
assured to the depositor. At times, the custodians of these Dollars were
wont to appropriate them and proceed to portions of the earth, sparsely
inhabited and accessible with difficulty. And at other times, nomadic
groups known as 'yeggmen' visited the banks, opened the vaults by force,
and departed, carrying with them the contents.

"But to return to our subject. In the year 1921, one of these numerous
John Joneses performed an apparently inconsequential action which caused
the name of John Jones to go down in history. What did he do?

"He proceeded to one of these banks, known at that time as 'The First
National Bank of Chicago,' and deposited there, one of these disks--a
silver Dollar--to the credit of a certain individual. And this
individual to whose credit the Dollar was deposited was no other person
than the fortieth descendant of John Jones who stipulated in paper which
was placed in the files of the bank, that the descendancy was to take
place along the oldest child of each of the generations which would
constitute his posterity.

"The bank accepted the Dollar under that understanding, together with
another condition imposed by this John Jones, namely, that the interest
was to be compounded annually. That meant that at the close of each
year, the bank was to credit the account of John Jones's fortieth
descendant with three one-hundredths of the account as it stood at the
beginning of the year.

"History tells us little more concerning this John Jones--only that he
died in the year 1931, or ten years afterward, leaving several children.

"Now you gentlemen who are taking mathematics under Professor
L127M72421Male, of the University of Mars, will remember that where any
number such as X, in passing through a progressive cycle of change,
grows at the end of that cycle by a proportion p, then the value of the
original X, after n cycles, becomes X(1 + p)^n.

"Obviously, in this case, X equalled one Dollar; p equalled three
one-hundredths; and n will depend upon any number of years which we care
to consider, following the date of deposit. By a simple calculation,
those of you who are today mentally alert can check up the results that
I shall set forth in my lecture.

"At the time that John Jones died, the amount in the First National Bank
of Chicago to the credit of John Jones the fortieth, was as follows."

The professor seized the chalk and wrote rapidly upon the oblong space:

    1931   10 years elapsed   $1.34

"The peculiar sinuous hieroglyphic," he explained, "is an ideograph
representing the Dollar.

"Well, gentlemen, time went on as time will, until a hundred years had
passed by. The First National Bank still existed, and the locality,
Chicago, had become the largest center of population upon the earth.
Through the investments which had taken place, and the yearly
compounding of interest, the status of John Jones's deposit was now as
follows." He wrote:

    2021   100 years elapsed   $19.10

"In the following century, many minor changes, of course, took place in
man's mode of living; but the so-called socialists still agitated widely
for the cessation of private ownership of wealth; the First National
Bank still accepted Dollars for safe keeping, and the John Jones Dollar
still continued to grow. With about thirty-four generations yet to come,
the account now stood:

    2121   200 years elapsed   $364

"And by the end of the succeeding hundred years, it had grown to what
constituted an appreciable bit of exchange value in those days--thus:

    2221   300 years   $6,920

"Now the century which followed contains an important date. The date I
am referring to is the year 2299 A.D., or the year in which every human
being born upon the globe was registered under a numerical name at the
central bureau of the National Eugenics Society. In our future lessons
which will treat with that period of detail, I shall ask you to memorize
that date.

"The socialists still agitated, fruitlessly, but the First National Bank
of Chicago was now the first International Bank of the Earth. And how
great had John Jones's Dollar grown? Let us examine the account, both on
that important historical date, and also at the close of the 400th year
since it was deposited. Look:

    2299   378 years    $68,900
    2321   400 years   $132,000

"But gentlemen, it had not reached the point where it could be termed an
unusually large accumulation of wealth. For larger accumulations existed
upon the earth. A descendant of a man once known as John D. Rockefeller
possessed an accumulation of great size, but which, as a matter of
fact, was rapidly dwindling as it passed from generation to generation.
So, let us travel ahead another one hundred years. During this time, as
we learn from our historical and political archives, the socialists
began to die out, since they at last realized the utter futility of
combating the balance of power. The account, though, now stood:

    2421   500 years   $2,520,000

"It is hardly necessary for me to make any comment. Those of you who are
most astute, and others of you who flunked my course before and are now
taking it the second time, of course know what is coming.

"During the age in which this John Jones lived, there lived also a man,
a so-called scientist called Metchnikoff. We know, from a study of our
vast collection of Egyptian Papyri and Carnegie Library books, that this
Metchnikoff promulgated the theory that old age--or rather senility--was
caused by colon-bacillus. This fact was later verified. But while he was
correct in the etiology of senility, he was crudely primeval in the
therapeutics of it.

"He proposed, gentlemen, to combat and kill this bacillus by utilizing
the fermented lacteal fluid from a now extinct animal called the cow,
models of which you can see at any time at the Solaris Museum."

A chorus of shrill, piping laughter emanated from the brass cylinder.
The professor waited until the merriment had subsided and then
continued:

"I beg of you, gentlemen, do not smile. This was merely one of the many
similar quaint superstitions existing in that age.

"But a real scientist, Professor K122B62411Male, again attacked the
problem in the twenty-fifth century. Since the cow was now extinct, he
could not waste his valuable time experimenting with fermented cow
lacteal fluid. He discovered the old _v_-rays of Radium--the rays which
you physicists will remember are not deflected by a magnetic field--were
really composed of two sets of rays, which he termed the _g_ rays and
the _e_ rays. These last named rays--only when isolated--completely
devitalized all colon-bacilli which lay in their path, without in the
least affecting the integrity of any interposed organic cells. The great
result, as many of you already know, was that the life of man was
extended to nearly two hundred years. That, I state unequivocally, was a
great century for the human race.

       *       *       *       *       *

"But I spoke of another happening--one, perhaps, of more interest than
importance. I referred to the bank account of John Jones the fortieth.
It, gentlemen, had grown to such a prodigious sum that a special bank
and board of directors had to be created in order to care for, and
reinvest it. By scanning the following notation, you will perceive the
truth of my statement:

    2521   600 years   $47,900,000

"By the year 2621 A.D., two events of stupendous importance took place.
There is scarcely a man in this class who has not heard of how Professor
P222D29333Male accidentally stumbled upon the scientific fact that the
effect of gravity is reversed upon any body which vibrates
perpendicularly to the plane of the ecliptic with a frequency which is
an even multiple of the logarithm of 2 of the Naperian base 'e.' At
once, special vibrating cars were constructed which carried mankind to
all planets. That discovery of Professor P222D29333Male did nothing less
than open up seven new territories to our inhabitants; namely: Mercury,
Venus, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune. In the great land
rush that ensued, thousands who were previously poor became rich.

"But, gentlemen, land which so far had been constituted one of the main
sources of wealth, was shortly to become valuable for individual golf
links only, as it is today, on account of another scientific discovery.

"This second discovery was in reality, not a discovery, but the
perfection of a chemical process, the principles of which had been known
for many centuries. I am alluding to the construction of the vast
reducing factories, one upon each planet, to which the bodies of all
persons who have died on their respective planets are at once shipped by
Aerial Express. Since this process is used today, all of you understand
the methods employed; how each body is reduced by heat to its component
constituents: hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen, carbon, calcium, phosphorus,
and so forth; how these separated constituents are stored in special
reservoirs together with the components from thousands of other corpses;
how these elements are then synthetically combined into food tablets for
those of us who are yet alive--thus completing an endless chain from the
dead to the living. Naturally then, agriculture and stock-raising
ceased, since the food problem, with which man had coped from time
immemorial, was solved. The two direct results were, first--that land
lost the inflated values it had possessed when it was necessary for
tillage, and second--that men were at last given enough leisure to enter
the fields of science and art.

"And as to the John Jones Dollar, which now embraced countless
industries and vast territory on the earth, it stood, in value:

    2621   700 years   $912,000,000

"In truth, gentlemen, it now constituted the largest private fortune on
the terrestrial globe. And in that year, 2621 A.D., there were thirteen
generations yet to come, before John Jones the fortieth would arrive.

"To continue. In the year 2721 A.D., an important political battle was
concluded in the Solar System Senate and House of Representatives. I am
referring to the great controversy as to whether the Earth's moon was a
sufficient menace to interplanetary navigation to warrant its removal.
The outcome of the wrangle was that the question was decided in the
affirmative. Consequently--

"But I beg your pardon, young men. I occasionally lose sight of the fact
that you are not so well informed upon historical matters as myself.
Here I am, talking to you about the moon, totally forgetful that many of
you are puzzled as to my meaning. I advise all of you who have not yet
attended the Solaris Museum on Jupiter, to take a trip there some Sunday
afternoon. The Interplanetary Suburban Line runs trains every half hour
on that day. You will find there a complete working model of the old
satellite of the Earth, which, before it was destroyed, furnished this
planet light at night through the crude medium of reflection.

"On account of this decision as to the inadvisability of allowing the
moon to remain where it was, engineers commenced its removal in the year
2721. Piece by piece, it was chipped away and brought to the Earth in
Interplanetary freight cars. These pieces were then propelled by
Zoodolite explosive, in the direction of the Milky Way, with a velocity
of 11,217 meters per second. This velocity, of course, gave each
departing fragment exactly the amount of kinetic energy it required to
enable it to overcome the backward pull of the Earth from here to
infinity. I dare say those moon-hunks are going yet.

"At the start of the removal of the moon in 2721 A.D., the accumulated
wealth of John Jones the fortieth, stood:

    2721   800 years   $17,400,000,000

"Of course, with such a colossal sum at their command, the directors of
the fund had made extensive investments on Mars and Venus.

"By the end of the twenty-eighth century, or the year 2807 A.D., the
moon had been completely hacked away and sent piecemeal into space, the
job having required 86 years. I give, herewith, the result of John
Jones's Dollar, both at the date when the moon was completely removed
and also at the close of the 900th year after its deposit:

    2807   886 years   $219,000,000,000
    2821   900 years   $332,000,000,000

"The meaning of those figures, gentlemen, as stated in simple language,
was that the John Jones Dollar now comprised practically all the wealth
on Earth, Mars, and Venus--with the exception of one university site on
each planet, which was, of course, school property.

"And now I will ask you to advance with me to the year 2906 A.D. In this
year the directors of the John Jones fund awoke to the fact that they
were in a dreadful predicament. According to the agreement under which
John Jones deposited his Dollar away back in the year 1921, interest was
to be compounded annually at three percent. In the year 2900 A.D., the
thirty-ninth generation of John Jones was alive, being represented by a
gentleman named J664M42721Male, who was thirty years of age and engaged
to be married to a young lady named T246M42652Female.

"Doubtless, you will ask, what was the predicament in which the
directors found themselves. Simply this:

"A careful appraisement of the wealth on Neptune, Uranus, Saturn,
Jupiter, Mars, Venus, and Mercury, and likewise Earth, together with an
accurate calculation of the remaining heat in the Sun and an
appraisement of that heat at a very decent valuation per calorie,
demonstrated that the total wealth of the Solar System amounted to
$6,309,525,241,362.15.

"But unfortunately, a simple computation showed that if Mr.
J664M42721Male married Miss T246M42652Female, and was blessed by a child
by the year 2921, which year marked the thousandth year since the
deposit of the John Jones Dollar, then in that year there would be due
the child, the following amount:

    2921   1,000 years   $6,310,000,000,000

"It simply showed beyond all possibility of argument, that by 2921 A.D.,
we would be $474,758,637.85 shy--that we would be unable to meet the
debt to John Jones the fortieth.

"I tell you, gentlemen, the Board of Directors was frantic. Such wild
suggestions were put forth as the sending of an expeditionary force to
the nearest star in order to capture some other Solar System and thus
obtain more territory to make up the deficit. But that project was
impossible on account of the number of years that it would have
required.

"Visions of immense law suits disturbed the slumber of those unfortunate
individuals who formed the John Jones Dollar Directorship. But on the
brink of one of the biggest civil actions the courts had ever known,
something occurred that altered everything."

The professor again withdrew the tiny instrument from his vest pocket,
held it to his ear and adjusted the switch. A metallic voice rasped:
"Fifteen o'clock and fifty-two minutes--fifteen o'clock and fifty-two
minutes--fift--" He replaced the instrument and went on with his talk.

"I must hasten to the conclusion of my lecture, gentlemen, as I have an
engagement with Professor C122B24999Male of the University of Saturn at
sixteen o'clock. Now, let me see; I was discussing the big civil action
that was hanging over the heads of the John Jones Dollar directors.

"Well, this Mr. J664M42721Male, the thirty-ninth descendant of the
original John Jones, had a lover's quarrel with Miss T246M42652Female,
which immediately destroyed the probability of their marriage. Neither
gave in to the other. Neither ever married. And when Mr. J664M42721Male
died in 2946 A.D., of a broken heart, as it was claimed, he was single
and childless.

"As a result, there was no one to turn the Solar System over to.
Immediately, the Interplanetary Government stepped in and took
possession of it. At that instant, of course, private property ceased.
In the twinkling of an eye almost, we reached the true socialistic and
democratic condition for which man had futilely hoped throughout the
ages.

"That is all today, gentlemen. Class is dismissed."

One by one, the faces faded from the Visaphone.

For a moment, the professor stood ruminating.

"A wonderful man, that old socialist, John Jones the first," he said
softly to himself, "a farseeing man, a bright man, considering that he
lived in such a dark era as the twentieth century. But how nearly his
well-contrived scheme went wrong. Suppose that fortieth descendant had
been born?"


THE END




Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from _Amazing Stories_ April 1956 and was
    first published in _Amazing Stories_ April 1927. Extensive research
    did not uncover any evidence that the U.S. copyright on this
    publication was renewed. Minor spelling and typographical errors
    have been corrected without note.

    The original equation given, x (1 + p)n, has been corrected to show
    the 'n' as superscript: X(1 + p)^n.





End of Project Gutenberg's John Jones's Dollar, by Harry Stephen Keeler

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK JOHN JONES'S DOLLAR ***

***** This file should be named 26867.txt or 26867.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/6/8/6/26867/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
