Project Gutenberg's The Sword and the Atopen, by Taylor H. Greenfield

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Sword and the Atopen

Author: Taylor H. Greenfield

Release Date: October 11, 2008 [EBook #26883]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SWORD AND THE ATOPEN ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









 The Sword
 and the Atopen

 By TAYLOR H. GREENFIELD

    _The conversion of light into electricity by spectrum is an
    interesting possibility. The idea of using foreign proteins on the
    human system to repel enemies, is also interesting. Do you get it?
    We didn't either until we read the story. Read the yarn and you'll
    get it too._


Although Divine intervention in human affairs passed into the realm of
the mythical toward the end of the twentieth or at the dawn of the
twenty-first century, one is almost inclined to give thanks to the
Supernatural for the marvelous efficacy of Dr. Rutledge's discovery and
stratagem which so recently freed us from the Oriental menace.

A year ago only the Mississippi and the most severe winter in many
generations was staying the complete invasion of the United States. In
an unbelievably secret manner our enemies had for five decades been
developing a scientific offensive against which our laboratories could
not in a short interval protect us. The vast and fundamental discoveries
made during the past hundred years by the Orientals (and now the
heritage of the whole world) can only be compared to the Industrial
Revolution of the nineteenth century. Without warning, through the
discovery of the cause of gravitation, the Mongols practically lifted
their Nangsi metal transports (which were built of a material combining
the lightness of aluminum with the strength and hardness of steel) out
of the sea; and in five days skimmed across the surface of the Pacific.
The whole West lay at their mercy, though we know with what gallantry
their forces were held in check from summer until winter, when the enemy
had reached the Mississippi.

[Illustration: They were planning details of the final campaign.]

Of course, one of the surprises which the Orientals had not counted on
was the providential inspiration of Dr. Mernick of the Hopkins, who
devised the now famous Mernickian transformer by which light from the
sun, received through a series of grates, is stepped from the
wavelengths of light into those of electricity. This gave us a sudden
limitless source of power on which the enemy had not counted. It
virtually lifted our forces off the ground and made them almost the
equal of an enemy who had succeeded in neutralizing the gravitational
drag.

The final and most disastrous card our subtle enemies played was dealt
on the prairies in Nebraska. They themselves were afraid of their weapon
and wanted plenty of space to try it in. I was personally present at its
debut, being at the time in General Sanford's stationary observing
helicopter which, through the agency of the power supplied by a
Mernickian transformer, hung motionless as a bee fifteen thousand feet
in the air. Only the treble hum of the air turbine could be heard
faintly through the transparent walls of the observatory constructed of
the annealed clersite, which has taken the place of the unsatisfactory
glass used by our forefathers. The toughness and tensile strength of
this element, comparable to the best chrome steels, combined with its
crystal clarity, made an ideal warfare observation unit. It was
practically invisible and likewise quite bullet proof. The great
strength of the material in our machine, and the rapidity with which we
could rise and fall, indeed made us difficult prey. In addition to this
we were hanging behind the great electric field that the Radio Defensive
Corps had spread like a screen before our forces, greatly to the
embarrassment of the enemy in the use of his anti-gravitational
machines.

As we stood at our posts, we saw the great degravitated bombs hurtled
against our lines suddenly come into contact with the fan-like electric
field, somersault a few times and fall. At the edge of the electric
screen the ground was excavated to an enormous depth by the bursting of
these intercepted degravitated bombs, most of which had been projected
from stationary batteries three or four hundred miles behind the enemy
lines. The local batteries bombarding with the old fashioned Sangsi
steel shell were still effective. On the whole, however, from our own
observation of the local front and from the television reports we were
constantly receiving, we judged that the American and Allied Caucasian
forces were more than holding their own.

General Sanford, the Chief of the Signal Corps, who stood by my side,
grasped my arm, and pointed to the west. Everyone crowded to our side in
excitement. Before we could gasp our amazement, the incandescent spot
which our Chief had mutely indicated on the distant horizon, zoomed in a
blazing arc across our zenith and plunged into the terrain of the
English forces which were occupying the little town of Ogallala about
six miles to our south. We held our breath. What next?

Only a faint throbbing seemed to pulse in the air above the spot where
the missile sank. I was about to pronounce the diagnosis of "a dud,"
when someone cried, "My God, General, they've turned hell loose this
time!" The whole atmosphere for a quarter of a mile radius about the
fatal bomb quivered as over a heated griddle. Even as we remarked this,
the area began to glow cherry red. A deafening thunder assaulted our
ears when to our horror the earth on which had stood the now burning
town of Ogallala, rose a gigantic incandescent ball and shot like a
meteor into the heavens. Our car was a feather tossed in the ensuing
hurricane, but even while we bobbed back and forth there was an
ear-splitting explosion as the land that was once an American village
burst into a blinding blue flare of hydrogen flame twenty-five miles
above us.

The swaying of the car gradually subsided in the tortured atmosphere,
and a gentle rain began to fall. Ogallala had been chemically "stepped
down" into the most primitive element, combined with the oxygen above
and was condensing back to earth again as a few globules of H{2}O. That
day was a sort of crisis; the enemy had discovered and turned upon us
the power of atomic degeneration! And I, as assistant chief chemist of
the American Army, felt my heart become heavy within me as I soared back
to the Central Laboratory.

       *       *       *       *       *

Even as I watched the advent of the electronic detonator two days
previously the inspiration had come to me. What had happened to the
doomed Nebraskan town had been so obvious. Through some unexplained
agency discovered by the Orientals, the electronic restraint of the
normally stable elements had been removed. In a brief time Ogallala had
degenerated through all the steps of the periodic table until it became
hydrogen, at which point, owing to the terrific air current and
incandescent heat, it had recombined with the oxygen of the air as
simple molecules of water.

I thought I had a clue as to how it had been accomplished. The Central
Chemical Laboratory was the focus of feverish excitement. The air was
tense with the expectancy of tremendous things. Every scientist there
felt that we were on the verge of discovering the principle of the
Mongols' new weapon. "Give us time!" "Time" was the plea we sent daily
to the Defense Headquarters. "Only six weeks more, only a month," we
begged, "and then we'll make a boomerang out of the enemy's invention."
Anderson, Mahaffey, Dr. Spritz--all the great physicists and chemists of
the present age--labored at my side endeavoring to trick Nature into
giving us that saving secret.

The television 'phone called my name. I immediately hurried to the booth
and saw General Loomis, the Commander-in-Chief of the American and
Caucasian Armies, standing in his helicopter headquarters. He seemed
haggard and worn. "How much longer, Johnson?" he asked. "The enemy has
pretty well eaten out the country and with the advent of winter and lack
of food, are bending all their efforts to crush us. Besides, we cannot
tell just how long it will be before they begin turning out their new
bomb in other than experimental quantities. Two weeks, I should
estimate, is about all the longer I can hold them."

"If that is the case, General Loomis," I replied, "we may as well give
up. Two months will see us ready. But two weeks--!"

I felt a hand laid on my shoulder. Dr. Rutledge, my science chief, had
stepped into the booth behind me and overheard the conversation.

"General Loomis," Dr. Rutledge spoke, looking for all the world like a
patriarch of olden times, "until five minutes ago what Johnson has just
said would have sealed our fate. But now, I think, I believe, we have
one more card to play. I have only this moment completed a series of
reactions which have resulted (as I calculated they should) in the
production of a new protein, similar in appearance to flour. It should,
although of course I have not yet had time to verify this statement, be
a practical substitute for flour; and indeed, it is my belief that it
will easily be mistaken for that substance. Its particles are laminated
similar to starch, of an identical size, and the nutritive factor should
be greater than that of bread. It is, in short, a new, a foreign protein
never before found in this world of men!"

"Very interesting, I am sure," replied General Loomis, with a trace of
bitterness and sarcasm in his voice. "Your noble efforts will result in
feeding the yellow devils an excellent artificial fare. They will be
grateful, I know!"

"Exactly my object, general," Dr. Rutledge replied. He continued
impressively: "You have until now relied upon me largely in the waging
of this war to save the white race from the menace of the yellow. Since
all is lost at any rate, grant me one last effort in behalf of my
country. At all costs, Loomis, hold your present lines for two days,
preparing to suddenly retire to the west bank of the Mississippi. I
leave it to your strategy to make a sudden retreat (which should extend
over a period of at least ten days) appear as if enforced by the enemy
themselves."

"There should be no difficulty in that direction," General Loomis
interpolated, smiling wryly on the television screen.

"Once on the west bank," went on Dr. Rutledge seriously, not noticing
the interjection, "make a stand for a day or two and then suddenly
retreat across the river to the east bank as if again forced to do so.
Now, General, two days from this time--before your retreat begins--I
shall, I trust, have your armies all along the lines supplied with my
new artificial, foreign protein flour. This you will leave in the
enemy's hands, which, you have intimated, will be much to their delight.
You will do the same at the stand which for a while you held on the west
bank. But, mind you, let none of your men use any of this perfectly
harmless food. I will personally see to it that you will receive it in
such containers that none will come in contact with your persons."

"Doctor," Loomis said after staring at the old scientist some time in
astonishment, "except for years of personal acquaintance, I would say
that you were suffering a mental shock. Knowing you as I do, however, I
pray to God you're making no mistake this time. I'll do as you wish."
His figure faded from the screen.

The next fortnight was one of black despair. I myself doubted on
occasions whether or not the old doctor was mentally accountable--even I
who had trusted him so long. General Loomis and his staff called up
daily to inquire if Dr. Rutledge had any change of plans. As for the
army and the populace, they were one in calling on the President to make
terms with the enemy. The allies truly were on the point of collapse.
All that kept up what morale was left in the chemical division was the
unrelenting demands made on us by Dr. Rutledge to continue to ferret out
the electronic detonator. Until then, he had scarcely bothered with our
work; now he would hear of nothing else. "Today's the Day!" was the
slogan he had displayed above every bench.

Finally the fatal day arrived. The retreat across the Mississippi was
consummated. This time it was not feigned. The Mongols were hungry, and
their appetites were whetted for more flour such as had sustained them
for the past twelve days. Moreover, new electronic bombs were beginning
to be supplied them.

My name leapt at me across the room: I was being called by that almost
human instrument, the television 'phone. Both my superior and I hurried
to the cabinet. It was, as we had guessed, Loomis. "It's all up," he
said wretchedly. "The fresh supply of atomic degenerating bombs, for
which the enemy has been holding back, has now arrived. They matched and
neutralized our electric field defense screen just an hour ago, leaving
us at their mercy. You've had your chance, Doctor, and failed. I advise
you both to make your way north and wait until these fiends forget the
inconvenience you both have caused them. As for me, I'm leaving this
instant to offer unconditional surrender in the name of all the allies."

       *       *       *       *       *

It was about ten o'clock in the morning, just after he had transported
all his forces hurriedly to the east bank, and as the Mongols were
occupying the old entrenchments on the west, that General Loomis closed
his conversation with the Chemical Laboratory. He turned to an aerial
officer who stood at attention beside him. "Major Maniu," he said,
"trail a white banner of truce on your plane and tell the enemy I will
parley with them. Tell them that we will serve rations presently to our
men who have worked all night without food or rest, and that if it is
agreeable to them, both sides shall simultaneously discontinue activity
at one o'clock. At that time I shall cross the river to offer them our
terms of surrender."

The officer saluted and hastened to his near-by plane. General Loomis
ascended into his helicopter to confer with his staff to draw up in
documentary form the surrender, and give the necessary orders relative
to lowering of fire that afternoon. He also spoke to the President and
to the crowd outside the White House, and then began nervously waiting
the crucial moment. About twelve-thirty, however, a remarkable fact
forced itself on his attention. Whereas the allied batteries continued
to thunder away, the fire from the Orientals became irregular and
sporadic. "Celebrating their victory beforehand," the French commander
remarked bitterly to his chief. Loomis nodded. "And getting careless,
too," another of the Staff added as he saw one of the enemy's detonator
bombs disintegrate three or four hundred acres of a Mongolian base
encampment fifty miles to the northwest and shoot it a monstrous blazing
rocket twenty or thirty miles into the midday sky.

By twelve forty-five the enemy's barrage had fallen completely all along
the line. Our battery nevertheless continued until the set time but
elicited no answer. Exactly at one General Loomis with two aides stepped
into his air-car. He was a picture of grief and despair. Three minutes
late the party landed forty miles across the river before the
headquarters and armored dining hall of the Oriental General Staff.

Loomis and his officers stepped out of their car and looked about. No
one was in sight. Not even a sentry guarded the mess room door. The
General paced back and forth a few minutes in indecision.

"Evidently they mean to make us feel our defeat," he said. "They
apparently do not even think it further necessary to observe rudimentary
diplomatic courtesy. Come on, boys, beggars can't be choosers, as the
antique saying goes." He led the way to the dining hall through a window
of which a light was seen shining.

"Perhaps if we find his xanthic highness after a good meal he will be
inclined to be a bit more lenient," Loomis whispered with a forced
laugh, trying to cheer his glum companions.

He opened the unguarded door of the hall. An instant later he reeled
back horror-stricken. Instead of a feasting gathering of officers
attached to the Mongolian Staff he saw before a feast of men contorted
in grotesque shapes by some violent death. Many lay beside the table,
some on it, their faces blotched with great, unsightly wheals, their
chests bloated until they seemed about to burst. Only one poor wretch
had any life left in him--he lay exhausted on the floor with great
streams of frothy mucous pouring from his nose and throat.

A possibility dawned in Loomis' mind. He dashed away to search the other
mess tents, shouting to his aides to follow suit. It was as he guessed:
they had landed in a camp of dead and dying; stricken by some mysterious
power. Hope suddenly surged back into his soul. He felt dizzy and faint.
Could a similar fate have caused the unaccountable silence of the
enemy's cannonade? Even as the thought came to him, he knew it must be
so. His marvelous old friend, Dr. Rutledge, had risen to the need of the
world and crushed the yellow menace.

       *       *       *       *       *

Such, truly, had been the case. In a single hour, through the agency of
a harmless food, the subtle scientist had crushed a nation. The
principle involved had been discovered nearly two centuries before, when
it was well-known that if an animal were injected with a small quantity
of a protein foreign to his body, a subsequent dose a hundred million
times as weak would cause its immediate and violent death. Even the
quantity that might be flying in the atmosphere and become dissolved in
the fluids of the nose or eyes would act as the most virulent of known
poisons. Through the ages, however, the human race had more or less come
in contact with all the proteins in their world and hence rarely became
highly sensitized to any protein occurring in nature. The terrible
toxicity of a protein which had never before occurred in nature and to
whose power mankind had never been even partially desensitized had up to
the time of Dr. Rutledge only entered the minds of a few scientists. His
strategy was the working out of a new maxim: Nature is terrible, but man
makes it more so.

       *       *       *       *       *

Foreign protein sensitization or anaphylaxis was the basis of Dr.
Rutledge's coup. The laws governing this reaction had been more or less
worked out by a group of scientists in the twentieth century. They had
demonstrated that if a guinea-pig or rabbit were injected with the blood
serum of another species, a subsequent dose of an infinitely small
quantity of this substance would cause convulsions, collapse and rapid
death. Inasmuch as there were many proteins in the atmosphere at that
time due to the unrestrained pollination of plants of every description,
it was not surprising that they found as many as ten per cent of the
white race afflicted with a slight pollen sensitivity which showed up
seasonally by causing spasms of the smooth muscle of the respiratory
system, a disease popularly called "hay-fever."

Since, however, the proteins of the world had always been present, the
human race had, by constantly coming into contact with them, become more
or less immunized to the majority. Only occasionally a case of violent
sensitivity came to light and was recognized as such. Two or three cases
there had been which the old scientist discovered while searching the
archives of ancient medicine and these gave him the clew he needed.

One was the case of a little girl who had somehow or other become
sensitized to the protein of wasp toxin and who suffered almost
immediate death from anaphylactic "choc" as the result of being stung by
that insect. A second instance concerned a woman who went into violent
asthmatic paroxysms if a mouse entered the room where she was, and whose
skin broke out into large wheals if touched with mouse hair. Finally,
and most outstanding in his mind, was the case of a child who was
thought to be sensitive to the fish protein in glue and who died almost
immediately when the physician testing her had brought a small quantity
of the dry protein into contact with a scratch on her arm.

These had, however, been rare cases, but they pointed out the method. It
had already been proved over and over again that animals could be
sensitized experimentally by treating them with foreign proteins,
provided that after the initial dose they did not come into contact with
the same protein until after a lapse of about two weeks. If they
happened to do so the first injection or treatment was frequently
neutralized and failed to give the desired sensitivity.

With the discovery of a new, highly pure and synthetic protein by Dr.
Rutledge the situation with the enemy could be put on a close parallel
with the laboratory condition. The enemy could be fed the protein when
they were in need of food and had little else, but since it was
synthetic, they could not get a second supply until the Doctor was able
to put the fatal meal in their way.


THE END




Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from _Amazing Stories_ April 1956 and was
    first published in _Amazing Stories_ January 1930. Extensive
    research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S. copyright on
    this publication was renewed. Minor spelling and typographical
    errors have been corrected without note. Subscript characters are
    shown within {braces}.





End of Project Gutenberg's The Sword and the Atopen, by Taylor H. Greenfield

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SWORD AND THE ATOPEN ***

***** This file should be named 26883.txt or 26883.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/6/8/8/26883/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
