The Project Gutenberg EBook of Omega, the Man, by Lowell Howard Morrow

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Omega, the Man

Author: Lowell Howard Morrow

Illustrator: Leo Morey

Release Date: October 11, 2008 [EBook #26882]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK OMEGA, THE MAN ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









A Classic Reprint from AMAZING STORIES, January, 1933

[Illustration]


OMEGA, the MAN

By LOWELL HOWARD MORROW

Illustrated by MOREY


The silver airship cut swiftly through the hot thin air. The noonday sun
blazed down upon it and the desert world below. All about was the solemn
silence of death. No living thing appeared either in the air or on the
drab, gray earth. Only the aircraft itself displayed any signs of life.
The sky, blue as indigo, held not the shadow of a cloud, and on the
horizon the mountains notched into it like the teeth of a giant saw.

The airship finally came to a hovering stop, then dropped rapidly toward
the salt-encrusted plain. It came to rest at last on the bottom of a
great, bowl-shaped hollow situated at the end of a chasm whose gray,
rock-strewn sides rose in rugged terraces for miles back into the sky.
In a few moments a panel in the vessel's side rolled noiselessly upward,
disclosing a brilliant light, and from the interior of the airship soon
appeared two figures who paused at the aperture and gazed out over the
parched earth. Then without fear or visible effort--although they were
seventy-five feet above the ground--they emerged from the ship and
floated down to earth.

These two humans--the sole survivors of all earth's children--were man
and wife--Omega and Thalma. They were burned a deep cherry by the fierce
rays of the sun. In stature they were above the average man now on
earth. Their legs were slender and almost fleshless, because for many
centuries man had ceased to walk. Their feet were mere toeless
protuberances attached to the ankle bone. Their arms were long and as
spare as their legs, but their hands, although small, were
well-proportioned and powerful. Their abdominal regions were very small,
but above them were enormous chests sheltering lungs of tremendous
power, for thus nature had armored man against the rarefaction of the
earth's atmosphere. But the most remarkable parts about this truly
remarkable couple were there massive heads set upon short, slim necks.
The cranial development was extraordinary, their bulging foreheads
denoting great brain power. Their eyes--set wide apart--were large and
round, dark and luminous with intelligence and their ears were
remarkably large, being attuned to all the music and voices of life.
While their nostrils were large and dilated, their mouths were very
small, though sensuous and full-lipped. They were entirely hairless--for
even the eyebrows and the eyelashes of man had entirely disappeared ages
before. And when they smiled they betrayed no gleam of teeth, for nature
had long discarded teeth in man's evolution.

The great, silver ship of the sky now rested in a deep pocket on the
floor of an ancient sea. Millions of years, under the sucking energy of
the sun and the whip of many winds, had sapped its waters, until only a
shallow, brackish lake remained. Along the shores of this lake, which
covered scarcely more than a hundred acres, a rim of yellowish, green
grass followed the water's edge and struggled against the inevitable,
and here and there among the grasses flowers of faded colors and
attenuated foliage reared their heads bravely in the burning sunshine.
And this lone lake, nestled in the lowest spot among the mountains and
valleys which once floored the Pacific, now held the last of earth's
waters. Barren and lifeless the rest of the world baked under a
merciless sun.

       *       *       *       *       *

Now clasping hands, like children at play, Omega and Thalma approached
the lake. They glided over the ground, merely touching their feet to the
highest points, and finally stopped with their feet in the warm, still
water.

Omega ran his cupped hand through the water, then drank eagerly.

"It is good," he said in a low, musical voice. "And there is much of it.
Here we may live a long time."

Thalma laughed with sheer joy, her large, red-rimmed eyes aglow with
mother light and love.

"I am glad," she cried. "I know that Alpha will be happy here."

"It is so, my love, and--"

Omega checked and stared out over the glassy lake. A spot in its center
was stirring uneasily. Great bubbles rose to the surface and eddied to
one side, then suddenly huge cascades of water shot into the air as if
ejected by subterraneous pressure. As they stared in silent astonishment
the commotion suddenly ceased and the surface of the lake became as
tranquil as before.

"There is volcanic action out there," said Omega fearfully. "At any time
the ground may open and engulf the lake in a pit of fire. But no, that
cannot be," he added, staring at Thalma with an odd light in his eyes.
For he suddenly recalled that no volcanic action or earth tremor had
disturbed the surface crust for ages.

"What is it, Omega?" she whispered in accents of awe.

"Nothing to fear, my dear, I am sure," he replied, averting his eyes.
"Likely some fissure in the rock has suddenly opened."

And then he embraced her in the joy of new-found life. For long ages
mind had communicated with mind by telepathic waves, speech being used
for its cheer and companionship.

"We will make ready for Alpha," said Omega joyfully. "In very truth he
may be able to carry on. Moisture may return to earth, and it is more
likely to return here than elsewhere. Remember what the Mirror showed
last week over the Sahara plains--the makings of a cloud!"

They cheered each other by this remembrance how, just before they had
consumed the last of the water in their recent home and buried the last
of their neighbors and friends, the reflecting Mirror had brought a view
of a few stray wisps of vapor above the Great Sahara which once had been
reclaimed by man, where teeming millions in by-gone ages had lived their
lives.

"The inclination of the earth's axis is changing as we know," he went on
hopefully as they turned back toward the ship. "The moisture may come
back."

His was the voice of hope but not of conviction. Hope, planted in man's
soul in the beginning, still burned brightly in these last stout
hearts.

Alpha was still unborn. Omega and Thalma had willed a male child. In him
was to be the beginning of a new race which they hoped with the aid of
science would repeople the earth. Hence his name, the first letter of
the Greek alphabet, of which "omega" is the last.

"I am afraid, my love," said Thalma, looking back over her shoulder at
the placid lake. "I wonder what heaved the water about that way."

"Don't worry about it, my dear," he said as they paused beneath the ship
and he put his arm protectingly about her. "As I have said, it probably
was the shifting of a rock on the bed of the lake. It is nothing to
worry about, and I feel that we have nothing to fear for a long, long
time. And we have so much joy to look forward to. Remember Alpha is
coming, and think of his glorious future! Think of his changing all
this!" And he swept his hand toward the grim, gray hills. "Just think of
again gardenizing the world!"

       *       *       *       *       *

It was indeed a dreary view upon which they gazed. On every side, upon
the mountains and hills, over salt-encrusted plains and upon the rocks,
were the skeletons and shells of departed life. Fossils of the animal
and the vegetable kingdoms greeted one on every hand. Great fronds of
palms of the deep, draped with weird remains of marine life long
extinct, stood gaunt and desolate and rust-covered in the hollows and on
the hills. Long tresses of sea weed and moss, now crisp and dead as
desert sands, still clung in wreaths and festoons to rock and tree and
plant just as they had done in that far-off age, when washed by the
waters of the sea. Great forests of coral, once white and pink and red
with teeming life but now drab and dead, still thrust their arms upward,
their former beauty covered and distorted by the dust of the ages.
Whales and sharks and serpents and fish of divers species and sizes,
together with great eels and monsters of the deep, lay thickly over the
land, their mummified remains shriveled by the intense heat, their
ghastliness softened by the ashes of the years.

Millions of ages had rolled away since the struggle began--the battle of
life on earth against the encroachments of death. And now death stalked
everywhere, grinning with malicious triumph, for he had but one more
battle to fight. Already his grisly clutch was closing on the standard
of victory. Man had mastered life but he had not conquered death. With
the magic wand of science he had reached out into space and viewed the
life of far-off worlds. He had routed superstition and fear and
selfishness. He had banished disease and learned all nature's secrets;
had even visited other worlds and had come to know and understand his
God, but still death had marched grimly on. For even the abysmal moment
of creation had marked the world for his prey. Slowly but surely death
had closed his cold hands about the earth. The sun flung forth his hot
rays and drew more and more of the earth's moisture and dissipated it in
space. Gradually the forests vanished and then the streams and lakes
dwindled and disappeared. By this time the atmosphere had thinned almost
imperceptibly--and only by the aid of his scientific instruments had man
been able to detect its thinning. Less and less rain fell, and finally
even the ice-caps about the poles trickled away. Cold and gaunt and
shadowy those regions lay silent and lifeless throughout the long
nights, and loomed like gray ghosts in the hushed light of the summer.
The sun blazed on relentlessly and the shores of the seven seas receded
age after age, but with his science and his machines man had doggedly
followed the retreating waters, husbanded and harnessed them and thus
retained his grip on life.

But now at last life on earth had come to its final battlefield. The
plans of the battle were sharply drawn, but there could be no doubt of
the issue. No one knew this better than Omega, for the sun shone on with
undiminished power. Yet the rotation of the earth had slackened until
twenty-five hours constituted a day, while the year was 379 days and a
fraction in length. Man, gradually adjusting himself to the new
conditions and environment, had triumphed even in the face of a losing
fight. For he had learned to smile into the hollow sockets of death, to
laugh at the empty promises of life.

       *       *       *       *       *

Back in their ship Omega and Thalma gazed out over the dead world, where
the salt crystals gleamed and sparkled in the sunshine.

"Will all this ever become green again and full of joy and life?" asked
Thalma wearily.

"Why not?" asked Omega. "Although the race has come to its last stand,
water is here and before it is gone who knows what may happen?"

Omega spoke only to please his wife, for well he knew in his heart that
the star of hope had forever set. And always he was thinking of that
commotion in the waters of the lake. What could have caused it? What did
it portend? He was sure that the answer was to be one of tragedy.

"We know that for uncounted ages the world was green and beautiful, was
vibrant with life and joy," he went on. "And why may it not be so again,
even though now it is garbed in the clothes of the sepulchre? Let us
trust in the power of our son."

Thalma did not answer, and Omega, seeing that she was terribly
depressed, fell silent. So they sat in their great airship, strangely
dejected despite the close proximity of the life-giving water, while the
sun flamed through the cloudless sky and set in a crimson flood beyond
the lifeless plains. Night fell but still they sat brooding. The stars
shone out in the purple heavens, but they noticed not their glory. The
ship was wrapped in an awful silence. No night wind whispered its
message nor warmed the cold, desolate earth, stretching down from the
poles, nor cooled the hot wastes about the equator. The naked mountains
rose stark and forbidding into the sky, which hung like a great,
bejeweled bowl over the sun-scorched plains, where the dust of many ages
lay undisturbed. The shadows lay deep and dark over the valleys and
among the streets of cities dead and silent for many ages, and searched
out deep chasms which when the world was young had felt the surge of the
restless seas. No form of life winged its way through the darkness and
called to its mate. No beast of prey rent the air with its challenge. No
insect chirped. No slimy shape crawled over the rocks. Dark and solemn,
mysterious and still, the earth sped on through the night.

       *       *       *       *       *

Morning found them in much better spirits. Over their breakfast, which
consisted almost wholly of food in tablet form, they discussed their
plans. After which they went to the lookout in the bow of the ship and
gazed out at the gray world. There was no change. The same
heart-breaking monotony of death confronted them. But despite it all
they finally smiled into each other's eyes.

"It is home," said Omega proudly. "The last home we shall ever know."

"My God, look!" suddenly gasped Thalma, clutching his arm and pointing a
trembling finger toward the lake. "What--is that?"

Following her gesture he stared in terror and stupefaction. Rising above
the center of the lake where the day before they had beheld the agitated
waters, was an enormous, scale-covered neck surmounted by a long,
snake-like head whose round, red eyes were sheltered beneath black,
horny hoods. The horrible creature's head was swaying back and forth as
its black tongue darted in and out between wide-open jaws displaying
single rows of sharp teeth. Fully fifteen feet above the lake the awful
eyes looked toward the land. And as the neck moved in unison with the
swaying head the scales seemed to slide under and over one another a
perfect armor for the neck.

"A plesiosaurian!" exclaimed Omega, leveling his glasses at the beast.
"No--how can that be?" he added in bewilderment. "Those monsters were
supposed to be extinct ages ago. And they had a smooth skin, while this
thing has scales, like those of a brontosaurus, which was really a land
animal. This must be a cross between the two that through the process of
evolution has been developed. Anyway it is the last of the species and
it has come here--to die."

"Like us it has followed the water and come here to die," said Thalma as
she also leveled glasses.

For several minutes they watched the swaying head which every little
while twisted from side to side, as the blazing eyes seemed to be
searching for prey, while a whitish saliva dripped from the jaws. The
body of the beast, which they knew to be enormous, was hidden beneath
the water, but the agitation on the surface showed that powerful feet
and legs were stirring.

"Yes, it has come here to die," repeated Omega, "to fight for the last
drop of earth's water. It now has possession of the lake, and unless we
kill it, it will kill us or drive us away."

Almost with the words Omega seized an atomic gun and pointed it at the
brute's head. But before he could sight the weapon and pull the trigger
the monster, as though sensing danger, suddenly jerked down its head and
a moment later it had disappeared beneath the surface.

"It has gone!" cried Thalma. She was trembling as with a chill, and her
eyes were wide with terror.

"It will appear again," said Omega, "and then we will kill it, for the
water belongs to man. Doubtless that huge beast is all that remains of
life on earth save ourselves. To-night while you sleep here in the ship,
I will take a gun, take position behind a rock on the shore of the lake
and watch for its appearance. I think shortly after nightfall when the
rocks are cool it leaves the water and comes on land in a vain search
for food, for beyond a doubt it has devoured everything in the lake,
save marine mosses and the like. Yet as it has survived all contemporary
life except man, it may live for centuries unless we destroy it."

"But there are not centuries of water out there," Thalma said. "As to
your hunting this monster alone, I will not hear of it. I shall go with
you. Together we will destroy this menace of our new home."

       *       *       *       *       *

All Omega's eloquence could not dissuade her. So, after the sun had set
and the dry cold had chilled the hot rocks, they set out along the shore
of the lake and looked eagerly out over the still water for a sight of
their enemy. Nothing disturbed the silvery surface of the water.
Crouching behind a mass of coral they waited, but throughout the long,
still night they watched without reward, for nothing moved within their
range of vision. The stars, wonderfully large and brilliant in that
rarefied atmosphere, seemed to be the only link between them and the
unknown. Only their own hurried breathing and the muffled thumps of
their wildly beating hearts broke the silence. And as the sun rose again
above the dead plains, weary and discouraged they returned to the ship.

While keeping up a bold front for Thalma's sake, Omega's heart was sad,
for he well knew that unless they could vanquish that marine monster
they were doomed. That such a dreadful creature had come to them from
the mists of antiquity, as it were, was incredible. Yet he had seen it,
Thalma had seen it, and it resembled some of the sea-monsters he had
heard of in the past. They could not doubt its existence and must
prepare for the worst.

Omega's name had been conferred on him by an ironical whim of fate. When
he was born there were still many people on earth inhabiting the low
valleys of the Pacific's floor where much water still remained. But the
droughts had increased with the years, and before Omega had reached
middle-life all rain had ceased to fall. The atmosphere became so rare,
even near the ground, that it was difficult for the people with the aid
of their machines to draw sufficient oxygen and nitrogen from it to
prepare the food which had been man's principal sustenance for ages.

Gradually the weaker peoples had succumbed. But the remnants of the
nations gathered about the receding waters, all foreseeing the end, but
all determined to defer it as long as possible. There was no recourse.
For ages before Omega was born the nations, knowing that the earth was
drying up, had fought one another for the privilege of migrating to
another planet to fight its inhabitants for its possession. The battle
had been so bitterly contested that two-thirds of the combatants were
slain. By the aid of their space-cars the victors colonized other
planets in our solar system leaving the vanquished on earth to shift for
themselves. There was nothing for them to do but to fight on and await
the end, for no space-car that man had ever devised was able to
penetrate the cold, far-reaches of space. Only among the family of our
own sun could he navigate his ships. And now, like the earth, every
member of that once glorious family was dead or dying. For millions of
years, Mars, his ruddy glow gone forever, had rolled through space, the
tomb of a mighty civilization. The ashes of Venus were growing cold.
Life on Mercury, Jupiter and Saturn already was in the throes of
dissolution, and the cold, barren wastes of Uranus and Neptune always
had forbidden man.

So it seemed that the name, Omega, had been fittingly bestowed. More
than ever the stark truth made him shudder with apprehension, and he
felt that only the coming of Alpha would give him strength to carry on.

"Now we must make ready for Alpha," said Omega, even while thoughts of
the sea-monster chilled his heart. "We will make our servants prepare
the way. Here in this valley must be born a new race of men. Life must
come from death. Come, Thalma."

       *       *       *       *       *

She smiled back at him, reassured by his confident manner, and together
they entered a lower compartment of the ship. This compartment contained
the servants of which Omega had spoken--divers machinery and other
marvels of man's construction. Omega touched several buttons and a
section of the ship's hull rolled aside. He pressed other buttons and
whirled wheels. Then great sections of mirror slid out into the air and
without apparent direction or control they ranged themselves far up on a
steep hillside. Yet all were under perfect control. With invisible,
atomic rays Omega made all do his bidding. For countless centuries man
had mastered the atom, divided it, harnessed its electrons. Following
the discoveries of the great French scientist, Becquerel, man had
learned that the potential energy of all atoms--especially that of
radium--is almost limitless. And as the disintegration of the atom
carries an electrical discharge, man had learned to control this energy.
Omega's machines, utilizing atoms from everywhere, even the ether, split
them by radio-activity through electromagnetic waves, and utilized the
energy of their electrons which always move in fixed orbits. There being
forty radio-active substances, Omega took advantage of them all, and
equalizing the atomic weight of the atoms--whether those around a
hydrogen nucleus or a helium nucleus--he broke the atoms down and
directed the charges of their electrons. Then his motors amplified the
discharges and, through the medium of an electric current, projected
them in the form of invisible atomic rays which he could control and
direct against any object and sustain and move at will by means of
oscillating currents.

Soon upon the hillside, perfectly arranged and adjusted, appeared a
giant, parabolic, refracting mirror with which he could obtain a view of
any portion of the earth's surface by sending vibrating currents around
the world and reproducing impressions already recorded on the ether, on
the surface of the mirror. And beneath its center was a receiver,
through which he might have heard the minutest sound around the world,
had there been any to hear.

The small, atomic motors--which drew their energy both from hydrogen
nuclei, the ether of space and the radio-active substances of all
metals--now were placed on the hillside near the great mirror. There
motors were capable of creating and focusing light, without bulb or
other container, whenever and wherever needed. All were operated with
scarcely any effort by Omega.

In a measure it seemed strange that the Greek alphabet and all the
classics of the ancients had survived antiquity. But the latest
inventions of man explained it all. For man with his machines had
reached far back into the shadowy past and proved the immortality of all
thought and action. All the records of history, all the triumphs and
defeats, the joys and sorrows and aspirations of humanity, came out of
the past and marched across the screen of his historical recorder. As
nothing is ever lost, all sounds and impressions occurring on earth
since the dawn of its creation, being already impressed on the sensitive
plastic and all-pervading ether, the same as a photograph is recorded on
its film or plate, man had developed a machine for drawing on these
impressions until at will the history of the world was before him. Even
the varied life of the ancients came out of the past. Saints and
sinners, slaves and masters mingled. Confucius sat before him in
humility; Guatama counseled his followers to be humble; Christ died upon
the cross. Warriors and statesmen shouted their triumphs and bewailed
their defeats. Philosophers expounded their wisdom and Socrates drank
the hemlock. Hannibal and Caesar and Alexander fought their battles,
and Napoleon marched gory and unafraid from Austerlitz to Waterloo. All
came back at the call of Omega's science.

       *       *       *       *       *

As has been stated it was a giant craft on which Omega and Thalma had
come to this last retreat of man. Within its interior were all the
latest marvels of man's ingenuity and skill. These instruments of almost
supernatural power not only reached back into the past but also
penetrated the future. There was a great atomic-electric motor used in
creating and controlling climate as long as there was any to control.
Sending forth electromagnetic waves it massed and directed the
atmospheric pressure, sending heat waves here, cold ones there, thus
causing droughts and rainfall at will. But now, as with the case of most
of the other machines, Omega needed it no longer. He kept it because it
linked him with the joy of the past. Besides, there was the mind-control
appliance by whose aid man's mind might visit other worlds. This was
done through the development of the subconscious and the discipline of
the will. But Omega was weary of these pilgrimages, because his body
could not perform those far-off flights. As time went on he realized
that the earth was his natural home. Even the earth's neighbors, dead
and dying, offered him no haven.

Yes, Omega and Thalma had garnered the gist of the world's treasures
before commencing this last trek. Gold and precious stones were common
objects to them, because for countless ages man had made them at will,
but around those they had brought clustered sacred memories of loved
ones gone before. The biological machine in the chemical laboratory of
the ship--the machine that brought forth life from nature's bountiful
storehouse--was of little use now that both atmosphere and moisture were
nearly gone. Yet Omega cherished this machine, and aside from its
associations with the past, it held for him a fascination that he could
not understand.

Having set the Mirror and other mechanical servants in position, Omega
and Thalma returned to the ship, and slept throughout the day, for with
the descending sun they must again go forth to hunt that scaly demon
which had taken possession of the earth's last water.

The night was moonless, but the bright starlight brought all objects
into plain relief against the dark rocks. Taking position on the slope
several rods above the beach, Omega and Thalma watched the lake eagerly,
but nothing disturbed its mirror-like surface. As on the preceding
night the awful silence appalled them--even though they were accustomed
to the vast solitude. It was so calm and still, so full of death and
mystery, that it seemed they must cry out in the agony of their
emotions. As the very silence was crushing their spirits so the
knowledge that only one form of life on earth stood between them and the
water to which their last hope clung, was maddening. How they longed to
battle the hideous monster! But the hours dragged on with nothing to
disturb the dead, heart-breaking silence. At last the Great Dipper had
swung so far around that dawn appeared. Yet there had been not a ripple
on the lake. Omega concluded that his guess was wrong--the beast did not
leave the water at night to search for food. Perhaps it had learned the
futility of such a search in a dead, dust-covered world.

       *       *       *       *       *

Wearied by their long and fruitless vigil they must have dozed, for
suddenly Omega, who sat but a yard or two from Thalma, was aroused by a
padded footfall and the exhalations of a noisome breath. Looking up he
was horrified to see the monster towering above him, its head swaying
gently to and fro, as its great, awkward feet sent it lunging forward
and backward for many feet, its spotted, scale-covered body trailed over
the rocks. By suddenly rounding the shoulder of the rock, sheltering
Omega and Thalma, its head held high, it seemed not to have seen the two
humans, for its terrible unblinking eyes were fixed ahead on the water.
However, Omega, paralyzed with fear and astonishment, and being directly
in the beast's path, believed that his hour had come. This was to be the
end of all his plans--to be crushed by the enormous weight of the
monster which challenged his right to live. But in that tense moment
when he thought that it was all over, the lithe form of Thalma reached
his side and in a frenzy of terror pulled him away. But even then the
sloping belly of the onrushing beast tore him from her frail hands and
dashed him against the rock.

While he lay there stunned and unable to move, Thalma discharged her
weapon at the monster. Three times she fired in quick succession but the
shots went wild, and in another moment the great brute struck the water
with a resounding splash and disappeared from view. For a few minutes a
trail of surface bubbles marked its rapid course toward the lake's
center, then all was motionless and still as before.

"Are you hurt, Omega?" Thalma cried anxiously, kneeling by his side.

"Just shaken up a bit," he returned, sitting up with an effort. "Great
hunters are we," he went on with a laugh. "We almost allowed the game to
catch the hunters! Well, let's go back to the ship. We'll get him next
time."

But their narrow escape had shaken their nerve. All day long they
remained safely in the ship and kept their guns trained on the lake
hoping that the beast would show himself. How or when it had left the
lake they could not surmise, but that it was more formidable than they
had thought now seemed certain, and Omega concluded to bring science to
his aid. In this way he was sure that he would soon exterminate the
monster.

So the next day he lay a cable carrying a high voltage all around the
lake and connected it with traps of various designs both in the water
and on the land. No more would they risk their lives hunting the beast
in the open after nightfall.

The hot, still days that followed were anxious ones for these last
children of life. Not a trap was sprung. The beast did not drag his
slimy body and tail across the heavily charged cable. The last of his
kind, fighting the last battle of existence, it seemed that nature had
endowed him with uncanny cunning. There was the life-giving water for
whose possession no human kind challenged them, but this enemy was more
terrible than any man, savage or civilized whom the earth had ever
known.

       *       *       *       *       *

During these anxious, watchful days Omega and Thalma went often to the
Mirror and gazed into it in search of vapor clouds. And more than once
those gossamer-like formations appeared over different parts of the
world to gladden their hearts only to fade away before their vision. The
reflections of those embryo clouds became less frequent as the days wore
on. Omega and Thalma knew that they had no right to hope for the return
of water vapor. Their instruments, so finely attuned as to appear
endowed with intelligence, the records of the past and their own common
sense told them that. But nature and life in the upper reaches of the
air were dying as hard as their own hope. They knew that the aerial
manifestations they witnessed were but symptoms of the death struggle.
And yet a real cloud, dark and pregnant with moisture, suddenly appeared
in the Mirror. Consulting the chart they saw that it was hovering over a
great land of plain and mountains which formerly had been a part of the
United States of America.

"We will go and examine this gift from heaven," said Omega. "It moves
over a once beautiful land, which the voices of history tell us,
harbored a race of the free millions of years ago."

"Yes, we will go," agreed Thalma. "It may be after all that Alpha will
first see the light far from this dreadful hollow and--and--that monster
out there in the lake."

Omega hung his head. Well he knew that the presence of the monster was
slowly killing his beloved. She complained not, but her dreams were
disturbed with frightful visions, and often Omega awakened to find her
at a window staring out over the lake with terror-stricken eyes.

This new cloud was thousands of miles to the east but with fond
anticipations they entered the ship and plunged toward it. But although
they reached the spot in one hour, the last remnant of vapor dissolved
before their eyes, and they turned sadly homeward, once more beaten by
the inexorable decrees of fate.

So having decided at last that this deep valley must remain their home
forever, Omega looked about for a suitable building site, for although
the ship was safe and comfortable they longed for a home on the earth.
But the ever present menace of the sea-monster saddened them and filled
them with misgivings, despite the fact that Omega could guard the
cottage electrically. But Omega wondered whether electric safeguards
would keep this creature from coming some night to the cottage and
sticking his loathsome head in at door or window. Omega shuddered at the
thought, but refrained from mentioning such a possibility to Thalma.

Having selected a site under the branches of a great coral tree standing
within the shade of an overhanging rock, Omega erected a cottage. It
took him but a few days to build and furnish this building from supplies
on the ship. It was complete in every feature, even to running water
from the lake. Grass was brought from the lake and a lawn laid out about
the cottage in the shadows of the rock. The grass was kept watered for
Thalma's sake, even though the water was needed for other purposes and
the lake was diminishing steadily. But she was sacred in his eyes--she
the last mother the old earth ever was to know.

The interior of the cottage was embellished like a palace, for treasures
were brought from the airship to grace its walls. The richest rugs,
curtains, tapestries and silks the world had ever known were there for
Thalma's pleasure and comfort. Paintings of green verdure, of forests
and plains of waving grass, of tumbling mountain streams and cool,
placid lakes, Omega drew from the young days of the earth. The power to
portray nature's moods and beauties had increased in many men with the
passing of time. He placed these scenes before Thalma's couch that their
cool and inspiring presence might comfort her while she awaited the
coming of the child.

       *       *       *       *       *

One morning being weary of the stark monotony of the valley, whose
eastern wall was distant many miles, Omega and Thalma determined to
scale the heights above. For sometimes in the sinister aspect of the
chasm's walls, it seemed that the rocks would close together and crush
out their lives. They concluded not to take the air-car, but to go on a
rambling picnic with the ever present hope that they might discover
another oasis of life.

Hand in hand they rose into the air, up and up for miles past frowning
cliffs and dark caverns, yawning like grinning skulls above the outposts
of death. There was no visible effort in their flight. They but took
advantage of nature's laws which man had long understood. At last on the
highest peak they paused to rest on a dust-covered rock.

The red sun rose above the cheerless horizon and blazed on them from a
deep azure sky slashed across by bars of purple and gold. More than nine
miles beneath them spread the deep gorge, where nestled their little
home, looking like a doll-house, and above it shone the great, silver
ship. The lake shone like a speck of silver on the drab rocks. They
gazed down upon it in an attitude of worship, for it alone in all that
vast realm of peaks and plains and valleys symbolized life. Then
suddenly a dark speck appeared on the surface of the lake. Omega looked
at Thalma apprehensively, for well he knew the meaning of that speck.
Her face was pale and drawn, and she clung to Omega as they pointed
their glasses at the water.

The monster was again disporting himself. He threshed the water into
foam with his long, sinuous body, while his head wagged and his terrible
eyes looked toward the land. It was the first sight they had had of him
since the night he almost killed Omega.

"Look!" breathed Thalma, "it is coming ashore. Oh, I did hope that it
was dead!" And trembling violently she clung closer to her lord.

"Never mind, dear," consoled Omega as he watched the great beast waddle
toward the shore. "We will get him this time," he went on exultingly.
"Watch--he is going to get into the trap!"

But they were again doomed to disappointment. Within a few rods of the
shore, with its great, spotted body nearly all out of the water, the
monster stopped, lifted its head and looked slowly around in every
direction. Then apparently scenting danger, it turned, floundered back
to the center of the lake and submerged.

"I--I--am afraid," shuddered Thalma.

"There is nothing to fear," reassured Omega. "The beast cannot get to
our home, and one of these days he will either get caught in a trap or
we will get a shot at him."

Although Omega spoke bravely he was really worried about the beast and
the influence it was having on Thalma. He realized that he must at once
devise a better method of extermination. Even though he did not fear it
so much personally its presence was disturbing, and it was daily
absorbing so much water needful for themselves.

       *       *       *       *       *

This great gash in the earth's crust stretching for many miles below
them had been the deepest part of the Pacific Ocean when its blue waves
still lapped the shores of continents, and that little lake, far down in
the earth's bosom, was the pitiful remainder of that once mighty sea.
Far to the north-west, showing plainly against the sky in the focus of
their binoculars, were great ridges of mountain and table land, rising
gaunt and desolate from the ancient bed of the sea--the site of the
ancient empire of Japan. Round about them on every hand were the mute
remains of marine life, for the spot where they sat had been far below
the surface of the sea. Silent, mysterious, hopeless and dreary, the
prospect appalled even their stout hearts. How they yearned for the
sight of some living thing there upon those high peaks. Silence supreme
and dreadful, in which even their voices, hushed and tremulous, sounded
profane, cowed them by its unending solemnity and the relentless grip.
Gray and nude save for their pall of dust the mountains rose into the
sky, eternal in their ghostly majesty. And the dark valleys between with
their gray lips of death looked like the gaping mouths of hell.

"Death! death! eternal and triumphant death, thou art everywhere!" cried
Omega, springing up and gazing with hopeless eyes about over the
desolation.

Thalma rose and touched his arm. A smile of faith and confidence shone
on her face. He looked at her in wonder.

"Nay, death is not everywhere," she reproved gently. "Remember Alpha,
our son. In him life does and will live again."

"Forgive me, Thalma," said Omega, taking her in his arms. "You speak
truly. With your loyalty and courage I know we will win."

And so as it had always been from the beginning of time, even so in
these last days it took woman's love and devotion to sustain man.

Now Omega gazed around on the abode of death with an expression of
disdain. He challenged it and dared it to do its worst. Life still
triumphed, for he had Thalma and Alpha was coming soon. He would not
surrender. He would fight the dark forces of death--even that horrible
monster down there in the lake--and conquer them all. He would again
'gardenize' the world. The stubborn power of hope, that heritage from
his atavistic ancestors, was surging through his blood.

"We will change all this," he went on, waving his hand toward the far
rim of the sky. "We are still masters of life. But now let us descend,"
he added in answer to her approving smile.

So saying again hand in hand they stepped off into space and floated
easily down toward their last home.

Omega knew that his first important task was to get rid of the beast.
The fear-haunted expression in Thalma's eyes brooked no delay.
Accordingly they went to the ship, and each taking a small sack they
filled them with depth bombs. Thus armed they floated out over the lake
in quest of their enemy. But although quite shallow the water was opaque
for the most part being discolored by vegetable matter stirred up by the
monster, and the transparent portions were too deep for them to see
bottom. Long and carefully they searched at a safe distance above the
water, but no sight of the beast could be seen. Then hoping that a
chance shot might reach and destroy him they passed to and fro over the
lake's center and dropped their bombs. Great columns of water were sent
high in air deluging them with spray. That was all. Still, they had no
way of knowing whether a bomb had struck home. In spots the water was so
violently agitated as to suggest that the monster writhed in a death
struggle. But at last all became as quiet as before.

       *       *       *       *       *

It now occurred to Omega to surround the lake with an invisible wall of
electricity of such power as to electrocute the beast should he attempt
to go over or through it. This was accomplished by increasing the power
of his motors and by automatic controls projecting a high voltage
potential through the air around the lake. And then in addition to other
protective appliances already installed Omega put a similar wall about
the cottage, much to Thalma's relief and delight.

One night they had retired early, Thalma being weary and her time but a
few weeks away. To the sweet strain of music which had been in the air
for ages, they soon fell asleep. How long he had slept Omega could never
guess, but he was awakened suddenly. He sat up bewildered and stared
into the darkness, because for some reason all lamps were out. And then
he became aware of a peculiar sound coming from afar. It was a queer
noise combining the roar of the surf upon a rock-bound coast, the sigh
of the night wind through a forest and the rumble of thunder. Suddenly
it seemed to him that earth and cottage were trembling, and the walls of
the room swayed and buckled as though smitten by a great wind.

Frantically he rubbed his eyes, convinced that it was all a dream. But
the noise drew nearer, thundered in his ears. In terror he got to his
feet, tried to cry out. The words froze on his lips, for just then the
wall before him crashed in as though struck by an avalanche. Then came a
grinding, splitting jumble of sounds, the solid ground shook under the
passage of some mighty force which increased for a moment followed by a
piercing scream.

Frozen with horror Omega stared around the wrecked room whose tottering
walls seemed about to fall upon him. Where was Thalma? In a frenzy he
stared into the darkness, felt over the couch. She was gone!

In some way he got outside and there in the direction of the lake he saw
the monster, its great bulk looming high above the ground, its head
swaying with the swing of its legs as it lumbered along. And, merciful
God--held in the grip of the monster's jaws was Thalma!

The awful sight galvanized Omega to action. With a hoarse scream he
launched himself at the beast, passed rapidly through the air above the
monster and reached out for his wife. Scream after scream rent the still
air as he pressed forward and the beast lurched on in its haste to reach
the lake with its prey. But now Omega was close to his beloved, and he
reached out to grasp her as once more he screamed right into the ears of
his enemy. Then perhaps in sheer terror at the audacity of man, the
great jaws of the monster relaxed and Thalma fell limp and unconscious
to the ground.

As the beast lumbered on Omega knelt by her side.

"Thank God," he breathed, "she lives!"

Then he took her in his arms and turned back to the ruined home just as
a great splash informed him that once more the monster had entered his
element to challenge them for its possession.

       *       *       *       *       *

Thalma soon revived, but she clung to Omega and gazed about fearfully.
How she had wandered out of doors and had been snapped up by the beast
she could not tell, but Omega said that she must have been walking in
her sleep. They went at once to the ship and there spent the remainder
of the night.

Every light, including those about the Mirror, had been extinguished by
the beast breaking the circuit. Yet it appeared that the latter's
passage through the electric wall had caused no harm. Omega explained
that likely its bony scales had acted as an insulator against the action
of the invisible wall.

While the cottage was being repaired they remained on the ship. But
despite their recent harrowing experience, they went back to the cottage
when the repairs were complete. It was more home-like than the ship, and
Thalma had learned to love it, for it was to be the cradle of a new
race. But before they again took up their residence there Omega had
erected a high fence around the cottage yard. This fence was built of
heavy cables securely fastened to huge posts, and each cable carried an
electric charge of 75,000 volts. Omega was confident that the beast
could never break through. His confidence was shared by Thalma, but as
an additional precaution she suggested that Omega place a similar fence
about the lake. He did so, and when the last cable was in place they
stood back and surveyed the work with satisfaction.

"We have him now," exulted Omega. "He can never leave the lake alive,
much less reach the cottage. Despite his tough armor of scales this high
potential will penetrate to his vitals."

"It is well," said Thalma as they turned away.

As they neared the cottage they knew that a crisis was at hand.
Forgetting the dead world about them and subduing the fears that
sometimes clutched their hearts, they lived in the joy of anticipation
and made ready for the advent of a new soul.

Night came down moonless and dark save for the light of the stars. In
the recesses of the rocks and in the bottoms of the valleys intense
darkness held sway. But the grounds and the home of Omega and Thalma
were ablaze with a thousand lamps, and on the near-by hillsides giant
searchlights, which seemed to have no basis, which were born in the
bosom of the air and blazed without visible cause, shot their rays into
the sky for miles. Yet the powerful lights about the cottage were so
tinted as to be restful to the eye. Thus silent and with clock-like
regularity the agents of Omega performed their functions. Man had
mastered all the elements of life. All were his friends and servants,
and none was his master save one--death.

In a perfect setting and exactly at the time set for the event Alpha
came into the world, the child thrived from its first intake of earth's
air.

Three weeks from birth Alpha partook of solid food in tablet form drawn
chiefly from gaseous sources. At two months his speech was perfect, and
at six months his education began. By glandular control Omega nurtured
both his body and his mind and developed them rapidly. Small wonder that
this child--the last to grace and bless the world--became his parent's
only joy and hope. They guarded him from all dangers, instructed him in
the great part he was to play in the world's future and set about to
conserve that element on which all depended--the waters of the lake.

       *       *       *       *       *

But during all these long, hot days and frigid nights, the close
proximity of the monster cast a shadow over their souls, marred their
happiness by day and terrorized their dreams by night. Often, when the
sun beat down upon the lake, they saw his hideous head rise high above
the water and regard them with baleful eyes. Twice while at play Alpha
had seen him and had run screaming to the protection of his mother, who
had great difficulty in persuading him that there was no danger. This
seemed to be true, for the monster made no attempt to force the fence.
Endowed with more than the cunning of its remote progenitors, it seemed
to realize that it was trapped. Many nights Omega and Thalma, armed with
their ray guns and other implements of destruction, watched for the
beast to attempt to come on land. Sometimes he would raise his head and
look at them so long and steadily that icy chills ran along their spines
and their hands shook so that they could not sight their weapons and
therefore shot wild. Then the head would sink out of sight again.

Secure as they felt against his horrible presence it finally began to
sap their courage. Besides, the lake fascinated Alpha, now but three
years old but large and strong. He loved to wander by its shore and
dabble in the water, but so long as the beast remained, an ever present
danger was in this play. Besides there was the fear that he might escape
the watchfulness of his parents and come in contact with one of the high
tension cables.

And then Omega determined to try another plan--he would electrically
charge the water of the lake. He hoped that this would reach the monster
in his watery lair and kill him instantly. So he constructed two giant
magnets and placed one on each end of the lake. Then harnessing all the
electrical energy at his command he sent a tremendous current through
the water with high potential, alternating it at ten second intervals
for an hour.

Two weeks later he watched for the carcass of the beast to rise. He felt
now that his problem was to get rid of it so that it would not pollute
the water, but it did not appear.

With fear and trembling Omega observed that the water of the lake was
receding inch by inch. Then by chemical action on the coral beds and on
the rocks, he created a dense cloud and caused it to form over the lake,
thus in a measure protecting it from the sun's rays. But day by day,
despite the sheltering cloud, the water receded. Day after day Omega
moved his gauges hoping against hope that somehow and somewhere nature
would again awaken and bring water upon the earth.

During all these days and months the monster did not raise its head
above the surface of the lake--Omega was certain of this, for had the
water been disturbed ever so little his water seismograph, as well as
his cameras, would have recorded it. The monster was dead at last and
they were profoundly thankful. They were the undisputed masters of the
earth's last water! Now Alpha could play about the shore and swim in the
shallow water in peace and safety. So the dangerous fence was removed.

       *       *       *       *       *

Omega knew that in the beginning the Creator had made man master of his
own destiny. He had endowed him with reason and given the earth into his
keeping. Omega thoroughly understood the Ruling Power of the universe.
He read aright His commands, blazoned across the breasts of billions of
worlds, and by the same token he knew that humanity on earth was doomed.
Yet he was urged on by that unconquerable spirit which had made man king
of all. He set up his rain-making machinery with the smile of a
fatalist. For hundreds of miles its sinuous beams sprang into the sky,
writhed about like great, hungry serpents with their tremendous sucking
and receiving maws, then coiled back to earth bringing not a drop. But
one day the Mirror again showed small, faint clouds upon its surface.
They were scattered over various parts of the world and their presence
made Omega wonder. There appeared to be no reason for them.

"I do not understand those clouds," he said to Thalma as he sat with her
and Alpha in the shade of the coral tree. "Perhaps there are hidden
places of moisture, that have escaped the receiving rays of this
mirror."

"Let us go and see," exclaimed Thalma, her eyes agleam with a new hope.
"Let us make another voyage around the world. Alpha has never been far
from home."

"That is so," he agreed. "We will go at once."

So they entered the silver ship and sailed away over the hot, dry
wastes, on and on over the cities of antiquity. The ruins of New York,
London, Paris and other marts of the ancients were visited in their
melancholy quest for life. But even the sites of these cities were hard
to find. Only the tops of the tallest structures, such as the tip of the
Washington monument and the towers of office buildings stood above the
ashes and sands of centuries. But not even the shadow of a cloud was
seen. Still they sailed on--even skirted the dark wastes of the poles
and stopped in deep valleys to test for water. Twice around the
equatorial regions they voyaged in search of a new and better haven, but
in vain. The insistent cry for water burned in their souls and led them
back to the little lake--the last sop nature had to offer the remnant of
her children.

       *       *       *       *       *

Although the days were still hot and blistering, the nights were cold,
ice often forming on the lake near the shore and lingering until touched
by the advancing sun. Omega understood, and again a cold fear clutched
his heart. Unless by some miracle of the heavens sufficient moisture
should come back to the earth, no human soul could long endure the heat
of the day and the freezing temperature of night.

To still further conserve the precious water of the lake, Omega now
extended the folds of the cloud curtain down to its shores thus
completely enclosing it. And as this further reduced the evaporation to
a remarkable extent the hopes of Omega and Thalma took on new life. Here
they visioned Alpha and his children living and dying in peace, now that
the monster was no more. With the help of additional safeguards Omega
reckoned that the water might be made to last many more years, and,
before it could become wholly exhausted, some whim of nature might again
shower the earth with rain.

Now to pass the time--for there was nothing to do except to direct the
appliances about them--this last trio of mortals loved to leave the
shelter of the cottage, now that they had nothing further to fear from
the sea-monster, when the westering sun was low, and ramble among the
shadows of the cliffs and commune with the past, until the chill of
night drove them indoors. Sometimes sitting there in the dusk Thalma and
Alpha would listen to Omega's rich voice as he recounted an epic story
in the life of long ago. So to-day seated together on a cliff above the
airship, they watched the sun descend. Thalma and Alpha had asked for a
story, but Omega refused. For some time he had sat silent, his great,
brilliant eyes on the flaming sun as it sank toward the rim of the
earth. A great loneliness had suddenly seized him. He recognized it as a
presentiment of disaster. It was beyond the analysis of reason, but for
the first time in his life he longed to hold back that sun. Somehow he
feared the advent of the night. It seemed to him that before the morning
light would again flood the earth a dire calamity would befall them.

"Why so sad?" asked Thalma fearfully, and Alpha, at his father's knees,
looked up in wonder.

"It is nothing," replied Omega with forced composure as he caressed the
boy. "Some foolish thoughts of mine. Now as it is getting chilly I think
we had better go down. Oh, how I dread this awful cold which is creeping
steadily and mercilessly over the world!" he added softly, his eyes
lingering on the sun.

With her usual sweet smile Thalma agreed. So they rose and floated down.
When they reached the floor of the valley they paused and regarded the
cloud that screened the lake.

"It does well," remarked Omega. "It will make the water last into the
years."

"Yes, and all for our boy," said Thalma proudly. Alpha had left them and
was playing along the shore.

"It is now time that a mate for him be on the way," went on Omega
wistfully. "He must have a sister, you know."

"It is true," she agreed with a glad smile.

Omega had spoken truly. Without a mate Alpha could not perpetuate the
race. And so it was arranged that before the rising of the morrow's sun
a new life should begin.

Science had steadily advanced the span of life. When Alpha was born
Omega was two hundred years old, but that was only middle age. Thalma
was twenty-five years his junior. The human birth-rate had decreased
with the passing of the centuries and nature now demanded the most
exacting conditions for the propagation of the human species. Thalma at
her age could not afford to wait longer. Alpha's mate must be provided
forthwith.

"Alpha wants to play a while before going in," Thalma continued
presently. "I will remain with him."

"Very well, dear," said Omega. "I will go on and prepare dinner."

So saying he set his face toward the cottage, but before he had taken a
dozen steps he was startled by a piercing scream from Thalma. He turned
swiftly, then stood paralyzed with terror and amazement. Out of the
cloud curtain surrounding the lake protruded the ugly scale-covered head
and neck of the monster he had believed dead! And the horrible, swaying
head was darting down toward the playing boy! The monster's jaws were
spread wide, its black tongue was leaping out and in like lightning, the
sickening saliva was dripping upon the sand, and its awful eyes were
blazing like coals. And then in a twinkling the huge jaws seized the
child, the head reared back, the jaws closed, stifling the lad's
screams, and it started to draw back into the cloud.

       *       *       *       *       *

But, after the first onrush of horror, life came again to Omega's numbed
senses. He darted forward with a mad cry, and as he swung through the
air rather than ran, he seized a stone and hurled it at the brute's
head. His aim was true and the stone struck the great brute on the bony
hood above the right eye. It did not harm, but it maddened the monster.
Hissing horribly it swung Alpha high in the air and with a fling dashed
him down upon the rocks. Then with a hoarse bellow it turned upon Omega.
With its first forward lunge it seemed about to crush Thalma, who was
between it and its intended victim. But the sight of her mangled child
and the danger to her lord roused all the latent fury and courage in her
soul and made of her a fighting demon. Like Omega she grabbed the first
weapon at hand--a stone the size of a man's fist--and with the hot
breath of the monster in her face she hurled the stone with all her
strength straight into the red, gaping mouth.

With a blood-curdling scream the brute halted, reared backward, then ran
its head back and forth over the rocks. Its loathsome body threshed
about in the lake, throwing water far up on the beach. Then in its
contortions it wallowed up out of the lake as it swung its terrible head
about in agony, all the while hissing its challenge.

Terror-stricken, unable to move, Omega and Thalma watched it and could
not understand its writhings. But as it continued to writhe and groan
they understood at last--the stone had lodged firmly in its throat and
was choking it to death.

Then they sprang to Alpha's side. Omega gathered him up in his arms, but
he saw with one agonized glance that he was dead. His skull was crushed
and it appeared that every bone in his body was broken.

Omega's heart was bursting, but he did not cry out. Holding the crushed
body of his son, he raised his eyes to that God who throughout the ages
had hidden His face from man, and smiled a brave smile of humility and
resignation. While Thalma, understanding all, looked on dumb and
dry-eyed.

Leaving the monster floundering about in its death agony, they took
their beloved son to the cottage and there injected those chemicals
which would forever arrest decay. Then they placed him on his cot that
he might be with them to the end of life. It was then that Thalma,
broken in spirit, found refuge and relief in tears which have always
been woman's solace and savior.

And Omega, gazing out toward the lake, saw that the monster lay still.
They had won their long battle, but at an awful cost. Omega realized
that the gigantic creature, probably deep in a water cavern, had been
only stunned by the electric charges.

       *       *       *       *       *

Thalma refused to be comforted. Day after day she wept above the
lifeless form of her boy. All Omega's words of consolation, all his
reasoning and faith in the wisdom and justice of all things, failed to
soothe her torn heart. Nor did the promise of another child, rouse her
from her sorrow. She steadfastly refused to consider another child. Life
had lost its last hold on her soul, and now she was ready to surrender
to that cruel fate which had given them mirages of promise and mocked
their misery. In vain Omega explained that it was their duty to fight
on; that they, the last of a once noble race, must not show the white
feather of cowardice. He mentioned the great consolation they had of
having their beloved son ever near them, though lifeless. But Thalma
longed for the presence of the soul, for those words of endearment and
love that had thrilled her mother heart.

Before the embalmment it would have been possible for Omega to restore
life to his boy. Man had mastered all the secrets of biology and life.
He could have mended the broken bones and tissues, revitalized the heart
and lungs and cleared the brain. Alpha would have walked with them
again. But his personality would not have been there. That mysterious
something, men call the soul, had fled forever, and so far mankind had
not been able to create its counterpart. To have brought life again to
Alpha would have been a travesty on the brilliant mind they had known.
Omega recalled many pathetic examples of such resuscitation where the
living had walked in death.

Omega foresaw the end, but he smiled in the face of it all. He was the
same kind and loving companion Thalma had always known, her every want
his command and law. But no more she realized its inspiration and love.
He seldom left her side any more, but sometimes overcome with sorrow he
would soar up above the peaks and commune alone with the past.

So to-day he had risen higher than usual. The red sun beat upon his body
as he hovered in the hot air, his eyes fixed on the distant sky line. He
gazed like a famished animal, for it seemed to him that at last a cloud
must appear above that hopeless shore of land and sky and bring renewed
life to him and his. Yet he fully realized the impossibility of such a
thing. Slowly his great, dark eyes roved around the horizon. He loathed
its dreary monotony, and still it fascinated him. Beyond that dead line
of land and sky lay nothing but ghastly death. His many voyages in the
airship and the reflecting Mirror told him that, but still he hoped on.

When at last he glided down to the cottage the sun was low. Having
registered the time in his mind when he left Thalma--for countless
generations man had dispensed with time-keeping devices--he realized
that he had been gone just three hours. Reproaching himself for his
negligence he entered the doorway, then stared aghast.

Upon Thalma's wide couch facing a painting of the ancient, green world,
she had placed the body of Alpha, then lain down by his side. Her glazed
eyes were fixed upon the picture, and for the first time in many weeks
there was a smile about her lips.

Omega knelt by her side, took her cold hands in his and feverishly
kissed her brow. With a grief too deep for tears he smiled at death,
thankful for the love she had borne him. Nor did he censure the Plan of
the Creator, the Plan that had led him, Omega, scion of the world's
great, up to the zenith of life and now left him alone, the sole
representative of its power. Thalma had passed on, and in the first
crushing moments of his agony Omega was tempted to join her. Without
effort and without fear or pain, his was the power to check the
machinery of life.

       *       *       *       *       *

Crushed and broken, Omega sat by his dead, while the shadows of night
entered the valley and wrapped all in their soft embrace. When would his
own hour strike? He might retard or hasten that time, but the real
answer lay in that little lake out there under the stars, daily
shrinking despite the cloud curtain. There was nothing more to live for,
yet he determined to live, to go down fighting like a valiant knight of
old, to set an example for the sons of other worlds.

But despite his brave resolution his grief for a while seemed likely to
master him. Heart-broken he finally went out into the cold dusk and
gazed up at the heavens appealingly.

"Alone!" he whispered as an overwhelming sense of his isolation tore his
spirit. "Alone in a dead world--the sole survivor of its vanished life!"

He slumped to the ground and buried his face in the cold dust. His
thoughts were jumbled in a maze of pain and sorrow. He could neither
pray nor think. Gasping, dying a thousand deaths, he lay there groveling
in the dust. But at last he rose, dashed the dust from his eyes and
again faced the sky. He would accept the cruel mandate of nature. He
would live on and try to conquer all--even death.

He cast his eyes along the shore of the lake, and there in the starlight
loomed the form of the dead monster which, but for Thalma's unerring
aim, would have been the last of earth's creatures. Omega sighed and
turned back to his dead.

But despite his resolution to live the loneliness was sapping Omega's
spirit. During the following weeks in a mood of recklessness and despair
he allowed the cloud curtain to dissolve above the lake. Once more the
sun's hot rays poured down unhindered and the lake receded rapidly.

As time went on Omega grew more restless. Only by taking many voyages
around the world was he able to endure the appalling silence. He was the
last traveler to visit the ancient marts of man, he was the last hope
and despair of life. Sometimes he talked aloud to himself, but his words
sounded hollow and ghostly in that deep silence, which only added to his
misery.

And then one day in a fit of desperation he rebelled. He cursed the fate
that had selected him to drink the last bitter dregs of life. In this
desperate frame of mind he evolved a daring plan. He would not drink
those dregs alone!

       *       *       *       *       *

In the chemical laboratory of the ship were all the elements of creative
force and life known to man. From the four corners of the earth they had
been garnered, and some had come from sister planets. Here were the
ingredients of creation. For thousands of years man had been able to
create various forms of life. He had evolved many pulsing, squirming
things. He had even made man-like apes possessing the instinct of
obedience, and which he used for servants, and much of his animal food
also had been created in this manner.

Being skilled in all branches of biology and chemistry Omega would
create a comrade to share his long wait for death. So he set to work and
the task eased the pain in his heart. He placed his chemicals in the
test tube and watched the cell evolve until it pulsated with life.
Carefully nursing the frail embryo he added other plasms, then
fertilized the whole with warm spermatozoa and placed it in the
incubator over which glowed a violet, radio-active light.

The young life developed quickly and soon began to take form within the
glass walls. In a month it half-filled the incubator, and at the end of
six weeks he released it, but it still grew amazingly.

At first Omega was appalled by the monstrosity he had created, for it
was a loathsome, repulsive creature. Its head was flat and broad and sat
upon its sloping shoulders without a connecting neck. Its legs were
short, but its arms were long, and when standing erect it carried them
well in front of an enormous torso. Its short hands and feet were webbed
like those of a duck. It had no visible ears, and its nostrils were mere
holes above a wide, grinning, thin-lipped mouth, which was always spread
in a grin. Its large, round, red eyes had no gleam of intelligence, and
its hairless skin, covered with minute, sucker-like scales, lay in
loose, ugly folds across its great chest. Most of its movements were
slow and uncertain, and it hopped about over the floor like a giant
toad, uttering guttural sounds deep within its chest. Omega had set out
to create an ape-man, but this thing was neither man nor beast, bird or
reptile, but a travesty on all--an unspeakable horror from the dead womb
of the past.

Yet hideous as this creature was Omega looked upon it with a certain
degree of gratitude. It was a companion at least, and it seemed to
reciprocate the respect of its creator by fawning upon him and licking
his hand. Its red tongue always hung from its slavering mouth like that
of a panting dog. Omega named it The Grinner, because of its habitual
and ghastly smile. He took it to the cottage that it might wait on him
through the long hours of solitude. That night it slept by his side,
content and motionless. But the next morning after this first night of
incongruous companionship Omega was awakened by its stertorous
breathing and the touch of a cold, clammy sweat which was oozing from
its pores and dropping upon the floor.

       *       *       *       *       *

Throughout the day Omega marveled at this phenomenon. He noticed that
the weird thing went often to the drinking fountain and wrapped its
tongue about the water jet. That night he awakened at midnight to find
The Grinner gone. He did not bother to look for him and mid-forenoon he
returned. His rotund form seemed to have grown even larger, and as he
ambled about on all fours the sweat trickled from his repulsive skin and
trailed across the floor. It was a strange thing and Omega was at a loss
to account for it, but his wonder was eclipsed by his appreciation of
The Grinner's companionship. The Grinner was often absent for hours at a
time, but he always returned of his own free will. Omega often saw him
ambling among the rocks or stretched out in the sun on the beach. He
formed the habit of letting him have his way, which was that of extreme
laziness. But during all this time he was growing prodigiously. In three
months he had become a monster weighing well over half a ton, but he
still retained his amiable nature and affection for his master.

       *       *       *       *       *

Omega seldom left the cottage. Determined to live as long as
possible--for the age-old urge of life still persisted--to do nothing to
hasten his end, he, nevertheless, was doing nothing to defer it. His
soul in the past, he desired only to be near his dear ones. For hours he
would sit gazing on their peaceful features, pouring into their heedless
ears the love songs of his heart. Living for them, patiently awaiting
the day when he, too, could enter into rest, he paid less and less
attention to The Grinner, only noticing that he grew more horrible and
repulsive as his size increased.

Lonely and despondent Omega at last left the cottage only to go to the
airship for supplies. He seldom even looked toward the lake. It was a
long time since he had walked about its shores, but one afternoon the
impulse came to wander that way again. He was amazed that the water was
disappearing so rapidly. The body of the monster now lay more than
fifteen rods from the water's edge, though it had been killed on the
edge of the lake.

With an indifferent and melancholy gaze Omega looked across the lake.
Suddenly his stare became fixed and wild, like that of one stricken
dumb. About twenty rods out the water was suddenly agitated as though by
the movement of some great bulk along its bottom, and then for a
fleeting instant he glimpsed a dark, shining form heave above the
surface, then sink out of sight before he could grasp its details.

"My God," he exclaimed hoarsely, "there is another sea-monster! Likely
it is the mate of the one Thalma killed. I might have known there would
be a mate. We were dealing with two of the beasts all that time. And now
this thing disputes my right to the water!"

Omega's face grew grim and stern as he glared out over the water and his
heart-beats quickened. The latent combativeness of humanity was once
more aroused in him. He had considered himself the last representative
of life on earth. He should remain the last. No beast should claim that
honor. He would kill it.

Then for two weeks he waited and watched for it to reappear, waited with
all the terrible atomic weapons at hand, but he saw it no more. The
Grinner sleeping in the sand was the only form of life to be seen, and
at last he became weary of the hunt. He figured that some day he would
charge the lake, but there was no hurry.

At last Omega lost all interest in the things about him. The Grinner
came and went unhindered and almost unnoticed. He continued to grow, but
Omega gave him little thought. Even the treasures in the airship had
lost their lure for him. Disconsolate and hopeless, yet clinging grimly
to life, he passed his time in the company of his dead.

He had not left the cottage for several weeks, when one cold morning
after a sleepless night, something impelled him to go in search of The
Grinner who had been absent all night. As this had become a frequent
occurrence during the past two months Omega's curiosity was aroused. As
he glided toward the lake he wondered why his interest in his
surroundings had been aroused by thoughts of The Grinner, and once more
he thought of killing that other sea-monster in the lake. The lake! He
stopped and stared and stared. The lake was gone! Only a pool of an acre
or two remained, and in its center, disporting himself in glee was--not
the monster he was looking for--but The Grinner! The bloated creature
was rolling about in the water with all the abandonment of a
mud-wallowing hog.

       *       *       *       *       *

Omega gazed in astonishment, then a shrill laugh escaped him. He had
mistaken The Grinner for another monster of the deep. It was the last
joke of life, and it was on him.

Then he realized that this grotesque child of his hands, having in its
system the combined thirst of the dry ages--man, animal, plant, bird
and reptile--was sucking up the lake, absorbing it through his pores,
then sweating it out only to repeat the process. Water was his element
and food. From the dim, dry past had come nature's cry for water to find
expression in this monster of Omega's making. That which he had created
for a companion had grown into a terrible menace, which was rapidly
exhausting his remaining stronghold of life. But, somehow, Omega did not
care, and as he watched the monstrous thing finally flounder its way to
the shore and lie down panting in the sun, he was glad that it was not
another monster of the deep.

For a moment Omega's eyes rested on the drying form of the dead beast on
the slope above him, then with a shudder he turned to The Grinner.

He went up close and stared into its terrible eyes which blinked back at
him as its mouth spread in a leer. Already the sweat was coursing along
the slimy folds of its skin and dripping off to be swallowed by the
thirsty ground. It was a huge water sucker. It took water in enormous
quantities, fed upon its organisms, then discharged it through its skin.
Assisted by the rays of the sun it was rapidly drying up the lake.

Now, as Omega stood regarding it in awe and wonder, it showed signs of
distress. It began to writhe and utter hoarse cries of pain. Its eyes
rolled horribly, its great, barrel-like body heaved and trembled, and it
waved its long arms and threshed its feet upon the ground. Omega
realized that it was the victim of its own abnormal appetite. With the
relish of a gormandizer it had taken more of its peculiar food than even
its prodigious maw could assimilate. Soon its struggles became fiercer.
It rolled over and over in contortions of agony, the sweat streaming
from its body, while a pitiful moaning came from its horrid mouth. But
at last it became quiet, its moanings trailed off into silence, it
jerked spasmodically and lay still.

Omega approached and placed his hand over its heart. There was no
pulsation. The Grinner was dead.

With a sigh Omega turned back to the cottage. Although he was now alone
once more, he did not care. All he had to do was to prepare himself for
the Great Adventure, which despite all man's god-like achievements,
still remained a mystery.

Now that the lake was almost gone it again drew his attention. The
sickly grass had long since given up trying to follow the retreating
water and now was only a dead and melancholy strip of yellow far back
from the shore. Every day Omega went to the little pool and calmly
watched it fade away, watched without qualms of fear or heartache. He
was ready. But even now, hot and weary, he refused adequately to slake
his thirst. He must fight on to the last, for such was the prerogative
and duty of the human race. He must conserve that precious fluid.

       *       *       *       *       *

At last there came a morning when Omega, gazing from his doorway, looked
in vain for the shining pool. Nothing but a brown expanse of rock and
sand met his view where the lake had been. Already the salt crystals
were glinting in the sun. A long, lingering sigh escaped him. It had
come at last! The last water of those mighty seas which once had covered
nearly the whole earth, had departed leaving him alone with the dead of
ages.

Hot and feverish he glided over the dry bed of the lake. Finally in the
lowest depression on earth he found, in a little hollow of rock, a mere
cupful of water. Like a thirst-maddened animal he sucked it up in great
gulps, then licked the rock dry. IT WAS THE LAST DROP!

Omega rose, his face calm and resigned. With a smile of gratitude he
looked up at the sky. The water was bitter, but he was thankful he had
been given the final cup.

Then he went to the airship and shot up into the blue and on around the
world in a voyage of farewell. In a few hours he was back. Reverently he
set the airship down on its landing place. He was through with it now.
Its usefulness was gone, its great, pulsing motors forever silent, soon
to be covered with the dust of ages, he would leave it a monument to
mankind. For a little while he wandered among the treasures of the ship.
Sacred as they were they still mocked him with their impotency to stay
the hand of death. But he loved them all. Thalma had loved them and they
had been Alpha's playmates, and their marvelous powers had been his hope
and inspiration. With loving caresses and a full heart he bade good bye
to these treasures of his fathers, soon to become the keepsakes of
death.

At last having completed the rounds he let himself out into the still
air. Resolutely he set his face toward home.

The hot noonday sun, beating fiercely down on the dead world, entered
the cottage and fell in a flood of glory about the couch where Omega,
the last man, lay between his loved ones. His great eyes were set and
staring, but on his features rested a smile of peace--the seal of life's
last dream.

"The rest is silence."


THE END




Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from _Amazing Stories_ January 1963 and was
    first published in _Amazing Stories_ January 1933. Extensive
    research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S. copyright on
    this publication was renewed. Minor spelling and typographical
    errors have been corrected without note. Significant typesetting
    amendments have been made based on the original 1933 publication,
    courtesy of www.booksfromthecrypt.com.







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Omega, the Man, by Lowell Howard Morrow

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK OMEGA, THE MAN ***

***** This file should be named 26882.txt or 26882.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/6/8/8/26882/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
