The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Jameson Satellite, by Neil Ronald Jones

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Jameson Satellite

Author: Neil Ronald Jones

Release Date: October 13, 2008 [EBook #26906]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE JAMESON SATELLITE ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









THE JAMESON SATELLITE

By NEIL R. JONES

    _The mammoths of the ancient world have been wonderfully preserved
    in the ice of Siberia. The cold, only a few miles out in space, will
    be far more intense than in the polar regions and its power of
    preserving the dead body would most probably be correspondingly
    increased. When the hero-scientist of this story knew he must die,
    he conceived a brilliant idea for the preservation of his body, the
    result of which even exceeded his expectations. What, how, and why
    are cleverly told here._




PROLOGUE

_The Rocket Satellite_


In the depths of space, some twenty thousand miles from the earth, the
body of Professor Jameson within its rocket container cruised upon an
endless journey, circling the gigantic sphere. The rocket was a
satellite of the huge, revolving world around which it held to its
orbit. In the year 1958, Professor Jameson had sought for a plan whereby
he might preserve his body indefinitely after his death. He had worked
long and hard upon the subject.

Since the time of the Pharaohs, the human race had looked for a means by
which the dead might be preserved against the ravages of time. Great had
been the art of the Egyptians in the embalming of their deceased, a
practice which was later lost to humanity of the ensuing mechanical age,
never to be rediscovered. But even the embalming of the Egyptians--so
Professor Jameson had argued--would be futile in the face of millions of
years, the dissolution of the corpses being just as eventual as
immediate cremation following death.

The professor had looked for a means by which the body could be
preserved perfectly forever. But eventually he had come to the
conclusion that nothing on earth is unchangeable beyond a certain limit
of time. Just as long as he sought an earthly means of preservation, he
was doomed to disappointment. All earthly elements are composed of atoms
which are forever breaking down and building up, but never destroying
themselves. A match may be burned, but the atoms are still unchanged,
having resolved themselves into smoke, carbon dioxide, ashes, and
certain basic elements. It was clear to the professor that he could
never accomplish his purpose if he were to employ one system of atomic
structure, such as embalming fluid or other concoction, to preserve
another system of atomic structure, such as the human body, when all
atomic structure is subject to universal change, no matter how slow.

[Illustration: It glowed in a haze of light, the interior clearly
revealed.]

He had then soliloquized upon the possibility of preserving the human
body in its state of death until the end of all earthly time--to that
day when the earth would return to the sun from which it had sprung.
Quite suddenly one day he had conceived the answer to the puzzling
problem which obsessed his mind, leaving him awed with its wild, uncanny
potentialities.

He would have his body shot into space enclosed in a rocket to become a
satellite of the earth as long as the earth continued to exist. He
reasoned logically. Any material substance, whether of organic or
inorganic origin, cast into the depths of space would exist
indefinitely. He had visualized his dead body enclosed in a rocket
flying off into the illimitable maw of space. He would remain in perfect
preservation, while on earth millions of generations of mankind would
live and die, their bodies to molder into the dust of the forgotten
past. He would exist in this unchanged manner until that day when
mankind, beneath a cooling sun, should fade out forever in the chill,
thin atmosphere of a dying world. And still his body would remain intact
and as perfect in its rocket container as on that day of the far-gone
past when it had left the earth to be hurled out on its career. What a
magnificent idea!

At first he had been assailed with doubts. Suppose his funeral rocket
landed upon some other planet or, drawn by the pull of the great sun,
were thrown into the flaming folds of the incandescent sphere? Then the
rocket might continue on out of the solar system, plunging through the
endless seas of space for millions of years, to finally enter the solar
system of some far-off star, as meteors often enter ours. Suppose his
rocket crashed upon a planet, or the star itself, or became a captive
satellite of some celestial body?

It had been at this juncture that the idea of his rocket becoming the
satellite of the earth had presented itself, and he had immediately
incorporated it into his scheme. The professor had figured out the
amount of radium necessary to carry the rocket far enough away from the
earth so that it would not turn around and crash, and still be not so
far away but what the earth's gravitational attraction would keep it
from leaving the vicinity of the earth and the solar system. Like the
moon, it would forever revolve around the earth.

He had chosen an orbit sixty-five thousand miles from the earth for his
rocket to follow. The only fears he had entertained concerned the huge
meteors which careened through space at tremendous rates of speed. He
had overcome this obstacle, however, and had eliminated the
possibilities of a collision with these stellar juggernauts. In the
rocket were installed radium repulsion rays which swerved all
approaching meteors from the path of the rocket as they entered the
vicinity of the space wanderer.

The aged professor had prepared for every contingency, and had set down
to rest from his labors, reveling in the stupendous, unparalleled
results he would obtain. Never would his body undergo decay; and never
would his bones bleach to return to the dust of the earth from which all
men originally came and to which they must return. His body would remain
millions of years in a perfectly preserved state, untouched by the hoary
palm of such time as only geologists and astronomers can conceive.

His efforts would surpass even the wildest dreams of H. Rider Haggard,
who depicted the wondrous, embalming practices of the ancient nation of
Kor in his immortal novel, "She," wherein Holly, under the escort of the
incomparable Ayesha, looked upon the magnificent, lifelike masterpieces
of embalming by the long-gone peoples of Kor.

With the able assistance of a nephew, who carried out his instructions
and wishes following his death, Professor Jameson was sent upon his
pilgrimage into space within the rocket he himself had built. The nephew
and heir kept the secret forever locked in his heart.

       *       *       *       *       *

Generation after generation had passed upon its way. Gradually humanity
had come to die out, finally disappearing from the earth altogether.
Mankind was later replaced by various other forms of life which
dominated the globe for their allotted spaces of time before they too
became extinct. The years piled up on one another, running into
millions, and still the Jameson Satellite kept its lonely vigil around
the earth, gradually closing the distance between satellite and planet,
yielding reluctantly to the latter's powerful attraction.

Forty million years later, its orbit ranged some twenty thousand miles
from the earth while the dead world edged ever nearer the cooling sun
whose dull, red ball covered a large expanse of the sky. Surrounding
the flaming sphere, many of the stars could be perceived through the
earth's thin, rarefied atmosphere. As the earth cut in slowly and
gradually toward the solar luminary, so was the moon revolving ever
nearer the earth, appearing like a great gem glowing in the twilight
sky.

The rocket containing the remains of Professor Jameson continued its
endless travel around the great ball of the earth whose rotation had now
ceased entirely--one side forever facing the dying sun. There it pursued
its lonely way, a cosmic coffin, accompanied by its funeral cortege of
scintillating stars amid the deep silence of the eternal space which
enshrouded it. Solitary it remained, except for the occasional passing
of a meteor flitting by at a remarkable speed on its aimless journey
through the vacuum between the far-flung worlds.

Would the satellite follow its orbit to the world's end, or would its
supply of radium soon exhaust itself after so many eons of time,
converting the rocket into the prey of the first large meteor which
chanced that way? Would it some day return to the earth as its nearer
approach portended, and increase its acceleration in a long arc to crash
upon the surface of the dead planet? And when the rocket terminated its
career, would the body of Professor Jameson be found perfectly preserved
or merely a crumbled mound of dust?




CHAPTER I

_40,000,000 Years After_


Entering within the boundaries of the solar system, a long, dark,
pointed craft sped across the realms of space towards the tiny point of
light which marked the dull red ball of the dying sun which would some
day lie cold and dark forever. Like a huge meteor it flashed into the
solar system from another chain of planets far out in the illimitable
Universe of stars and worlds, heading towards the great red sun at an
inconceivable speed.

Within the interior of the space traveler, queer creatures of metal
labored at the controls of the space flyer which juggernauted on its way
towards the far-off solar luminary. Rapidly it crossed the orbits of
Neptune and Uranus and headed sunward. The bodies of these queer
creatures were square blocks of a metal closely resembling steel, while
for appendages, the metal cube was upheld by four jointed legs capable
of movement. A set of six tentacles, all metal, like the rest of the
body, curved outward from the upper half of the cubic body. Surmounting
it was a queer-shaped head rising to a peak in the center and equipped
with a circle of eyes all the way around the head. The creatures, with
their mechanical eyes equipped with metal shutters, could see in all
directions. A single eye pointed directly upward, being situated in the
space of the peaked head, resting in a slight depression of the cranium.

These were the Zoromes of the planet Zor which rotated on its way around
a star millions of light years distant from our solar system. The
Zoromes, several hundred thousand years before, had reached a stage in
science, where they searched for immortality and eternal relief from
bodily ills and various deficiencies of flesh and blood anatomy. They
had sought freedom from death, and had found it, but at the same time
they had destroyed the propensities for birth. And for several hundred
thousand years there had been no births and few deaths in the history of
the Zoromes.

This strange race of people had built their own mechanical bodies, and
by operation upon one another had removed their brains to the metal
heads from which they directed the functions and movements of their
inorganic anatomies. There had been no deaths due to worn-out bodies.
When one part of the mechanical men wore out, it was replaced by a new
part, and so the Zoromes continued living their immortal lives which saw
few casualties. It was true that, since the innovation of the machines,
there had been a few accidents which had seen the destruction of the
metal heads with their brains. These were irreparable. Such cases had
been few, however, and the population of Zor had decreased but little.
The machine men of Zor had no use for atmosphere, and had it not been
for the terrible coldness of space, could have just as well existed in
the ether void as upon some planet. Their metal bodies, especially their
metal-encased brains, did require a certain amount of heat even though
they were able to exist comfortably in temperatures which would
instantly have frozen to death a flesh-and-blood creature.

The most popular pastime among the machine men of Zor was the
exploration of the Universe. This afforded them a never ending source of
interest in the discovery of the variegated inhabitants and conditions
of the various planets on which they came to rest. Hundreds of space
ships were sent out in all directions, many of them being upon their
expeditions for hundreds of years before they returned once more to the
home planet of far-off Zor.

This particular space craft of the Zoromes had entered the solar system
whose planets were gradually circling in closer to the dull red ball of
the declining sun. Several of the machine men of the space craft's crew,
which numbered some fifty individuals, were examining the various
planets of this particular planetary system carefully through telescopes
possessing immense power.

These machine men had no names and were indexed according to letters and
numbers. They conversed by means of thought impulses, and were neither
capable of making a sound vocally nor of hearing one uttered.

"Where shall we go?" queried one of the men at the controls questioning
another who stood by his side examining a chart on the wall.

"They all appear to be dead worlds, 4R-3579," replied the one addressed,
"but the second planet from the sun appears to have an atmosphere which
might sustain a few living creatures, and the third planet may also
prove interesting for it has a satellite. We shall examine the inner
planets first of all, and explore the outer ones later if we decide it
is worth the time."

"Too much trouble for nothing," ventured 9G-721. "This system of planets
offers us little but what we have seen many times before in our travels.
The sun is so cooled that it cannot sustain the more common life on its
planets, the type of life forms we usually find in our travels. We
should have visited a planetary system with a brighter sun."

"You speak of common life," remarked 25X-987. "What of the uncommon
life? Have we not found life existent on cold, dead planets with no
sunlight and atmosphere at all?"

"Yes, we have," admitted 9G-721, "but such occasions are exceedingly
rare."

"The possibility exists, however, even in this case," reminded 4R-3579,
"and what if we do spend a bit of unprofitable time in this one
planetary system--haven't we all an endless lifetime before us? Eternity
is ours."

"We shall visit the second planet first of all," directed 25X-987, who
was in charge of this particular expedition of the Zoromes, "and on the
way there we shall cruise along near the third planet to see what we can
of the surface. We may be able to tell whether or not it holds anything
of interest to us. If it does, after visiting the second planet, we
shall then return to the third. The first world is not worth bothering
with."

       *       *       *       *       *

The space ship from Zor raced on in a direction which would take it
several thousand miles above the earth and then on to the planet which
we know as Venus. As the space ship rapidly neared the earth, it
slackened its speed, so that the Zoromes might examine it closely with
their glasses as the ship passed the third planet.

Suddenly, one of the machine men ran excitedly into the room where
25X-987 stood watching the topography of the world beneath him.

"We have found something!" he exclaimed.

"What?"

"Another space ship!"

"Where?"

"But a short distance ahead of us on our course. Come into the foreport
of the ship and you can pick it up with the glass."

"Which is the way it's going?" asked 25X-987.

"It is behaving queerly," replied the machine man of Zor. "It appears to
be in the act of circling the planet."

"Do you suppose that there really is life on that dead
world--intelligent beings like ourselves, and that this is one of their
space craft?"

"Perhaps it is another exploration craft like our own from some other
world," was the suggestion.

"But not of ours," said 25X-987.

Together, the two Zoromes now hastened into the observation room of the
space ship where more of the machine men were excitedly examining the
mysterious space craft, their thought impulses flying thick and fast
like bodiless bullets.

"It is very small!"

"Its speed is slow!"

"The craft can hold but few men," observed one.

"We do not yet know of what size the creatures are," reminded another.
"Perhaps there are thousands of them in that space craft out there. They
may be of such a small size that it will be necessary to look twice
before finding one of them. Such beings are not unknown."

"We shall soon overtake it and see."

"I wonder if they have seen us?"

"Where do you suppose it came from?"

"From the world beneath us," was the suggestion.

"Perhaps."




CHAPTER II

_The Mysterious Space Craft_


The machine men made way for their leader, 25X-987, who regarded the
space craft ahead of them critically.

"Have you tried communicating with it yet?" he asked.

"There is no reply to any of our signals," came the answer.

"Come alongside of it then," ordered their commander. "It is small
enough to be brought inside our carrying compartment, and we can see
with our penetration rays just what manner of creatures it holds. They
are intelligent, that is certain, for their space ship does imply as
much."

The space flyer of the Zoromes slowed up as it approached the mysterious
wanderer of the cosmic void which hovered in the vicinity of the dying
world.

"What a queer shape it has," remarked 25X-987. "It is even smaller than
I had previously calculated."

A rare occurrence had taken place among the machine men of Zor. They
were overcome by a great curiosity which they could not allow to remain
unsatiated. Accustomed as they were to witnessing strange sights and
still stranger creatures, meeting up with weird adventures in various
corners of the Universe, they had now become hardened to the usual run
of experiences which they were in the habit of encountering. It took a
great deal to arouse their unperturbed attitudes. Something new,
however, about this queer space craft had gripped their imaginations,
and perhaps a subconscious influence asserted to their minds that here
they have come across an adventure radically unusual.

"Come alongside it," repeated 25X-987 to the operator as he returned to
the control room and gazed through the side of the space ship in the
direction of the smaller cosmic wanderer.

"I'm trying to," replied the machine man, "but it seems to jump away a
bit every time I get within a certain distance of it. Our ship seems to
jump backward a bit too."

"Are they trying to elude us?"

"I don't know. They should pick up more speed if that is their object."

"Perhaps they are now progressing at their maximum speed and cannot
increase their acceleration any more."

"Look!" exclaimed the operator. "Did you just see that? The thing has
jumped away from us again!"

"Our ship moved also," said 25X-987. "I saw a flash of light shoot from
the side of the other craft as it jumped."

Another machine man now entered and spoke to the commander of the Zorome
expedition.

"They are using radium repellent rays to keep us from approaching," he
informed.

"Counteract it," instructed 25X-987.

The man left, and now the machine man at the controls of the craft tried
again to close with the mysterious wanderer of the space between
planets. The effort was successful, and this time there was no glow of
repulsion rays from the side of the long metal cylinder.

They now entered the compartment where various objects were transferred
from out the depths of space to the interplanetary craft. Then patiently
they waited for the rest of the machine men to open the side of their
space ship and bring in the queer, elongated cylinder.

"Put it under the penetration ray!" ordered 25X-987. "Then we shall see
what it contains!"

The entire group of Zoromes were assembled about the long cylinder,
whose low nickel-plated sides shone brilliantly. With interest they
regarded the fifteen-foot object which tapered a bit towards its base.
The nose was pointed like a bullet. Eight cylindrical protuberances were
affixed to the base while the four sides were equipped with fins such as
are seen on aerial bombs to guide them in a direct, unswerving line
through the atmosphere. At the base of the strange craft there projected
a lever, while in one side was a door which, apparently opened outward.
One of the machine men reached forward to open it but was halted by the
admonition of the commander.

"Do not open it up yet!" he warned. "We are not aware of what it
contains!"

Guided by the hand of one of the machine men, a series of lights shone
down upon the cylinder. It became enveloped in a haze of light which
rendered the metal sides of the mysterious space craft dim and
indistinct while the interior of the cylinder was as clearly revealed as
if there had been no covering. The machine men, expecting to see at
least several, perhaps many, strange creatures moving about within the
metal cylinder, stared aghast at the sight they beheld. There was but
one creature, and he was lying perfectly still, either in a state of
suspended animation or else of death. He was about twice the height of
the mechanical men of Zor. For a long time they gazed at him in a
silence of thought, and then their leader instructed them.

"Take him out of the container."

The penetration rays were turned off, and two of the machine men stepped
eagerly forward and opened the door. One of them peered within at the
recumbent body of the weird-looking individual with the four appendages.
The creature lay up against a luxuriously upholstered interior, a strap
affixed to his chin while four more straps held both the upper and lower
appendages securely to the insides of the cylinder. The machine man
released these, and with the help of his comrade removed the body of the
creature from the cosmic coffin in which they had found it.

"He is dead!" pronounced one of the machine men after a long and careful
examination of the corpse. "He has been like this for a long time."

"There are strange thought impressions left upon his mind," remarked
another.

One of the machine men, whose metal body was of a different shade than
that of his companions, stepped forward, his cubic body bent over that
of the strange, cold creature who was garbed in fantastic accoutrements.
He examined the dead organism a moment, and then he turned to his
companions.

"Would you like to hear his story?" he asked.

"Yes!" came the concerted reply.

"You shall, then," was the ultimatum. "Bring him into my laboratory. I
shall remove his brain and stimulate the cells into activity once more.
We shall give him life again, transplanting his brain into the head of
one of our machines."

With these words he directed two of the Zoromes to carry the corpse into
the laboratory.

As the space ship cruised about in the vicinity of this third planet
which 25X-987 had decided to visit on finding the metal cylinder with
its queer inhabitant, 8B-52, the experimenter, worked unceasingly in his
laboratory to revive the long-dead brain cells to action once more.
Finally, after consummating his desires and having his efforts crowned
with success, he placed the brain within the head of a machine. The
brain was brought to consciousness. The creature's body was discarded
after the all-important brain had been removed.




CHAPTER III

_Recalled to Life_


As Professor Jameson came to, he became aware of a strange feeling. He
was sick. The doctors had not expected him to live; they had frankly
told him so--but he had cared little in view of the long, happy years
stretched out behind him. Perhaps he was not to die yet. He wondered how
long he had slept. How strange he felt--as if he had no body. Why
couldn't he open his eyes? He tried very hard. A mist swam before him.
His eyes had been open all the time but he had not seen before. That was
queer, he ruminated. All was silent about his bedside. Had all the
doctors and nurses left him to sleep--or to die?

Devil take that mist which now swam before him, obscuring everything in
line of vision. He would call his nephew. Vainly he attempted to shout
the word "Douglas," but to no avail. Where was his mouth? It seemed as
if he had none. Was it all delirium? The strange silence--perhaps he had
lost his sense of hearing along with his ability to speak--and he could
see nothing distinctly. The mist had transferred itself into a confused
jumble of indistinct objects, some of which moved about before him.

He was now conscious of some impulse in his mind which kept questioning
him as to how he felt. He was conscious of other strange ideas which
seemed to be impressed upon his brain, but this one thought concerning
his indisposition clamored insistently over the lesser ideas. It even
seemed just as if someone was addressing him, and impulsively he
attempted to utter a sound and tell them how queer he felt. It seemed as
if speech had been taken from him. He could not talk, no matter how hard
he tried. It was no use. Strange to say, however, the impulse within his
mind appeared to be satisfied with the effort, and it now put another
question to him. Where was he from? What a strange question--when he was
at home. He told them as much. Had he always lived there? Why, yes, of
course.

The aged professor was now becoming more astute as to his condition. At
first it was only a mild, passive wonderment at his helplessness and the
strange thoughts which raced through his mind. Now he attempted to
arouse himself from the lethargy.

Quite suddenly his sight cleared, and what a surprise! He could see all
the way around him without moving his head! And he could look at the
ceiling of his room! His room? Was it his room! No-- It just couldn't
be. Where was he? What were those queer machines before him? They moved
on four legs. Six tentacles curled outward from their cubical bodies.
One of the machines stood close before him. A tentacle shot out from the
object and rubbed his head. How strange it felt upon his brow.
Instinctively he obeyed the impulse to shove the contraption of metal
from him with his hands.

His arms did not rise, instead six tentacles projected upward to force
back the machine. Professor Jameson gasped mentally in surprise as he
gazed at the result of his urge to push the strange, unearthly looking
machine-caricature from him. With trepidation he looked down at his own
body to see where the tentacles had come from, and his surprise turned
to sheer fright and amazement. His body was like the moving machine
which stood before him! Where was he? What ever had happened to him so
suddenly? Only a few moments ago he had been in his bed, with the
doctors and his nephew bending over him, expecting him to die. The last
words he had remembered hearing was the cryptic announcement of one of
the doctors.

"He is going now."

But he hadn't died after all, apparently. A horrible thought struck him!
Was this the life after death? Or was it an illusion of the mind? He
became aware that the machine in front of him was attempting to
communicate something to him. How could it, thought the professor, when
he had no mouth. The desire to communicate an idea to him became more
insistent. The suggestion of the machine man's question was in his mind.
Telepathy, thought he.

The creature was asking about the place whence he had come. He didn't
know; his mind was in such a turmoil of thoughts and conflicting ideas.
He allowed himself to be led to a window where the machine with waving
tentacle pointed towards an object outside. It was a queer sensation to
be walking on the four metal legs. He looked from the window and he saw
that which caused him to nearly drop over, so astounded was he.

The professor found himself gazing out from the boundless depths of
space across the cosmic void to where a huge planet lay quiet. Now he
was sure it was an illusion which made his mind and sight behave so
queerly. He was troubled by a very strange dream. Carefully he examined
the topography of the gigantic globe which rested off in the distance.
At the same time he could see back of him the concourse of mechanical
creatures crowding up behind him, and he was aware of a telepathic
conversation which was being carried on behind him--or just before him.
Which was it now? Eyes extended all the way around his head, while there
existed no difference on any of the four sides of his cubed body. His
mechanical legs were capable of moving in any of four given directions
with perfect ease, he discovered.

The planet was not the earth--of that he was sure. None of the familiar
continents lay before his eyes. And then he saw the great dull red ball
of the dying sun. That was not the sun of his earth. It had been a great
deal more brilliant.

"Did you come from that planet?" came the thought impulse from the
mechanism by his side.

"No," he returned.

He then allowed the machine men--for he assumed that they were machine
men, and he reasoned that, somehow or other they had by some marvelous
transformation made him over just as they were--to lead him through the
craft of which he now took notice for the first time. It was an
interplanetary flyer, or space ship, he firmly believed.

25X-987 now took him to the compartment which they had removed him to
from the strange container they had found wandering in the vicinity of
the nearby world. There they showed him the long cylinder.

"It's my rocket satellite!" exclaimed Professor Jameson to himself,
though in reality every one of the machine men received his thoughts
plainly. "What is it doing here?"

"We found your dead body within it," answered 25X-987. "Your brain was
removed to the machine after having been stimulated into activity once
more. Your carcass was thrown away."

Professor Jameson just stood dumfounded by the words of the machine man.

"So I did die!" exclaimed the professor. "And my body was placed within
the rocket to remain in everlasting preservation until the end of all
earthly time! Success! I have now attained unrivaled success!"

He then turned to the machine man.

"How long have I been that way?" he asked excitedly.

"How should we know?" replied the Zorome. "We picked up your rocket only
a short time ago, which, according to your computation, would be less
than a day. This is our first visit to your planetary system and we
chanced upon your rocket. So it is a satellite? We didn't watch it long
enough to discover whether or not it was a satellite. At first we
thought it to be another traveling space craft, but when it refused to
answer our signals we investigated."

"And so that was the earth at which I looked," mused the professor. "No
wonder I didn't recognize it. The topography has changed so much. How
different the sun appears--it must have been over a million years ago
when I died!"

"Many millions," corrected 25X-987. "Suns of such size as this one do
not cool in so short a time as you suggest."

Professor Jameson, in spite of all his amazing computations before his
death, was staggered by the reality.

"Who are you?" he suddenly asked.

"We are the Zoromes from Zor, a planet of a sun far across the
Universe."

25X-987 then went on to tell Professor Jameson something about how the
Zoromes had attained their high stage of development and had instantly
put a stop to all birth, evolution and death of their people, by
becoming machine men.




CHAPTER IV

_The Dying World_


"And now tell us of yourself," said 25X-987, "and about your world."

Professor Jameson, noted in college as a lecturer of no mean ability and
perfectly capable of relating intelligently to them the story of the
earth's history, evolution and march of events following the birth of
civilization up until the time when he died, began his story. The mental
speech hampered him for a time, but he soon became accustomed to it so
as to use it easily, and he found it preferable to vocal speech after a
while. The Zoromes listened interestedly to the long account until
Professor Jameson had finished.

"My nephew," concluded the professor, "evidently obeyed my instructions
and placed my body in the rocket I had built, shooting it out into space
where I became the satellite of the earth for these many millions of
years."

"Do you really want to know how long you were dead before we found you?"
asked 25X-987. "It would be interesting to find out."

"Yes, I should like very much to know," replied the professor.

"Our greatest mathematician, 459C-79, will tell it to you." The
mathematician stepped forward. Upon one side of his cube were many
buttons arranged in long columns and squares.

"What is your unit of measuring?" he asked.

"A mile."

"How many times more is a mile than is the length of your rocket
satellite?"

"My rocket is fifteen feet long. A mile is five thousand two hundred and
eighty feet."

The mathematician depressed a few buttons.

"How far, or how many miles from the sun was your planet at that time?"

"Ninety-three million miles," was the reply.

"And your world's satellite--which you call moon from your
planet--earth?"

"Two hundred and forty thousand miles."

"And your rocket?"

"I figured it to go about sixty-five thousand miles from the earth."

"It was only twenty thousand miles from the earth when we picked it up,"
said the mathematician, depressing a few more buttons. "The moon and
sun are also much nearer your planet now."

       *       *       *       *       *

Professor Jameson gave way to a mental ejaculation of amazement.

"Do you know how long you have cruised around the planet in your own
satellite?" said the mathematician. "Since you began that journey, the
planet which you call the earth has revolved around the sun over forty
million times."

"Forty--million--years!" exclaimed Professor Jameson haltingly.
"Humanity must then have all perished from the earth long ago! I'm the
last man on earth!"

"It is a dead world now," interjected 25X-987.

"Of course," elucidated the mathematician, "those last few million years
are much shorter than the ones in which you lived. The earth's orbit is
of less diameter and its speed of revolution is greatly increased, due
to its proximity to the cooling sun. I should say that your year was
some four times as long as the time in which it now takes your old
planet to circumnavigate the sun.

"How many days were there in your year?"

"Three hundred and sixty-five."

"The planet has now ceased rotating entirely."

"Seems queer that your rocket satellite should avoid the meteors so
long," observed 459C-79, the mathematician.

"Automatic radium repulsion rays," explained the professor.

"The very rays which kept us from approaching your rocket," stated
25X-987, "until we neutralized them."

"You died and were shot out into space long before any life occurred on
Zor," soliloquized one of the machine men. "Our people had not yet even
been born when yours had probably disappeared entirely from the face of
the earth."

"Hearken to 72N-4783," said 25X-987, "he is our philosopher, and he just
loves to dwell on the past life of Zor when we were flesh and blood
creatures with the threat of death hanging always over our heads. At
that time, like the life you knew, we were born, we lived and died, all
within a very short time, comparatively."

"Of course, time has come to mean nothing to us, especially when we are
out in space," observed 72N-4783. "We never keep track of it on our
expeditions, though back in Zor such accounts are accurately kept. By
the way, do you know how long we stood here while you recounted to us
the history of your planet? Our machine bodies never get tired, you
know."

       *       *       *       *       *

"Well," ruminated Professor Jameson, giving a generous allowance of
time. "I should say about a half a day, although it seemed scarcely as
long as that."

"We listened to you for four days," replied 72N-4783.

Professor Jameson was really aghast.

"Really, I hadn't meant to be such a bore," he apologized.

"That is nothing," replied the other. "Your story was interesting, and
if it had been twice as long, it would not have mattered, nor would it
have seemed any longer. Time is merely relative, and in space actual
time does not exist at all, any more than your forty million years'
cessation of life seemed more than a few moments to you. We saw that it
was so when your first thought impressions reached us following your
revival."

"Let us continue on to your planet earth," then said 25X-987. "Perhaps
we shall find more startling disclosures there."

As the space ship of the Zoromes approached the sphere from which
Professor Jameson had been hurled in his rocket forty million years
before, the professor was wondering how the earth would appear, and what
radical changes he would find. Already he knew that the geographical
conditions of the various continents were changed. He had seen as much
from the space ship.

A short time later the earth was reached. The space travelers from Zor,
as well as Professor Jameson, emerged from the cosmic flyer to walk upon
the surface of the planet. The earth had ceased rotating, leaving
one-half its surface always toward the sun. This side of the earth was
heated to a considerable degree, while its antipodes, turned always away
from the solar luminary, was a cold, frigid, desolate waste. The space
travelers from Zor did not dare to advance very far into either
hemisphere, but landed on the narrow, thousand-mile strip of territory
separating the earth's frozen half from its sun-baked antipodes.

As Professor Jameson emerged from the space ship with 25X-987, he stared
in awe at the great transformation four hundred thousand centuries had
wrought. The earth's surface, its sky and the sun were all so changed
and unearthly appearing. Off to the east the blood red ball of the
slowly cooling sun rested upon the horizon, lighting up the eternal day.
The earth's rotation had ceased entirely, and it hung motionless in the
sky as it revolved around its solar parent, its orbit slowly but surely
cutting in toward the great body of the sun. The two inner planets,
Mercury and Venus, were now very close to the blood red orb whose
scintillating, dazzling brilliance had been lost in its cooling process.
Soon, the two nearer planets would succumb to the great pull of the
solar luminary and return to the flaming folds, from which they had been
hurled out as gaseous bodies in the dim, age-old past, when their
careers had just begun.

The atmosphere was nearly gone, so rarefied had it become, and through
it Professor Jameson could view with amazing clarity without discomfort
to his eyes the bloated body of the dying sun. It appeared many times
the size he had seen it at the time of his death, on account of its
relative nearness. The earth had advanced a great deal closer to the
great star around which it swung.

The sky towards the west was pitch black except for the iridescent
twinkle of the fiery stars which studded that section of the heavens. As
he watched, a faint glow suffused the western sky, gradually growing
brighter, the full moon majestically lifted itself above the horizon,
casting its pale, ethereal radiance upon the dying world beneath. It was
increased to many times the size Professor Jameson had ever seen it
during his natural lifetime. The earth's greater attraction was drawing
upon the moon just as the sun was pulling the earth ever nearer itself.

This cheerless landscape confronting the professor represented the state
of existence to which the earth had come. It was a magnificent spread of
loneliness which bore no witness to the fact that it had seen the
teeming of life in better ages long ago. The weird, yet beautiful scene,
spread in a melancholy panorama before his eyes, drove his thoughts into
gloomy abstraction with its dismal, depressing influence. Its funereal,
oppressive aspect smote him suddenly with the chill of a terrible
loneliness.

25X-987 aroused Professor Jameson from his lethargic reverie. "Let us
walk around and see what we can find. I can understand how you feel in
regard to the past. It is quite a shock--but it must happen to all
worlds sooner or later--even to Zor. When that time comes, the Zoromes
will find a new planet on which to live. If you travel with us, you will
become accustomed to the sight of seeing dead, lifeless worlds as well
as new and beautiful ones pulsating with life and energy. Of course,
this world being your own, holds a peculiar sentimental value to you,
but it is really one planet among billions."

Professor Jameson was silent.

"I wonder whether or not there are any ruins here to be found?" queried
25X-987.

"I don't believe so," replied the professor. "I remember hearing an
eminent scientist of my day state that, given fifty thousand years,
every structure and other creation of man would be obliterated entirely
from off the earth's surface."

"And he was right," endorsed the machine man of Zor. "Time is a great
effacer."

For a long time the machine men wandered over the dreary surface of the
earth, and then 25X-987 suggested a change of territory to explore. In
the space ship, they moved around the earth to the other side, still
keeping to the belt of shadowland which completely encircled the globe
like some gigantic ring. Where they now landed arose a series of cones
with hollow peaks.

"Volcanoes!" exclaimed the professor.

"Extinct ones," added the machine man.

Leaving the space ship, the fifty or more machine men, including also
Professor Jameson, were soon exploring the curiously shaped peaks. The
professor, in his wanderings had strayed away from the rest, and now
advanced into one of the cup-like depressions of the peak, out of sight
of his companions, the Zoromes.




CHAPTER V

_Eternity or Death_


He was well in the center of the cavity when the soft ground beneath him
gave way suddenly and he catapulted below into the darkness. Through the
Stygian gloom he fell in what seemed to be an endless drop. He finally
crashed upon something hard. The thin crust of the volcano's mouth had
broken through, precipitating him into the deep, hollow interior.

It must have been a long ways to fall--or so it had seemed. Why was he
not knocked senseless or killed? Then he felt himself over with three
tentacles. His metal legs were four broken, twisted masses of metal,
while the lower half of his cubic body was jammed out of shape and
split. He could not move, and half of his six tentacles were paralyzed.

How would he ever get out of there? he wondered. The machine men of Zor
might never find him. What would happen to him, then? He would remain in
this deathless, monotonous state forever in the black hole of the
volcano's interior unable to move. What a horrible thought! He could not
starve to death; eating was unknown among the Zoromes, the machines
requiring no food. He could not even commit suicide. The only way for
him to die would be to smash the strong metal head, and in his present
immovable condition, this was impossible.

It suddenly occurred to him to radiate thoughts for help. Would the
Zoromes receive his messages? He wondered how far the telepathic
messages would carry. He concentrated the powers of his mind upon the
call for help, and repeatedly stated his position and plight. He then
left his mind clear to receive the thought answers of the Zoromes. He
received none. Again he tried. Still he received no welcoming answer.
Professor Jameson became dejected.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was hopeless. The telepathic messages had not reached the machine men
of Zor. They were too far away, just as one person may be out of earshot
of another's voice. He was doomed to a terrible fate of existence! It
were better that his rocket had never been found. He wished that the
Zoromes had destroyed him instead of bringing him back to life--back to
this!

His thoughts were suddenly broken in upon.

"We're coming!"

"Don't give up hope!"

If the professor's machine body had been equipped with a heart, it would
have sung for joy at these welcome thought impressions. A short time
later there appeared in the ragged break of the volcano's mouth, where
he had fallen through, the metal head of one of the machine men.

"We shall have you out of there soon," he said.

       *       *       *       *       *

The professor never knew how they managed it for he lost consciousness
under some strange ray of light they projected down upon him in his
prison. When he came to consciousness once more, it was to find himself
inside the space ship.

"If you had fallen and had smashed your head, it would have been all
over with you," were the first thought impulses which greeted him. "As
it is, however, we can fix you up first rate."

"Why didn't you answer the first time I called to you?" asked the
professor. "Didn't you hear me?"

"We heard you, and we answered, but you didn't hear us. You see, your
brain is different than ours, and though you can send thought waves as
far as we can you cannot receive them from such a great distance."

"I'm wrecked," said the professor, gazing at his twisted limbs,
paralyzed tentacles and jammed body.

"We shall repair you," came the reply. "It is your good fortune that
your head was not crushed."

"What are you going to do with me?" queried the professor. "Will you
remove my brains to another machine?"

"No, it isn't necessary. We shall merely remove your head and place it
upon another machine body."

The Zoromes immediately set to work upon the task, and soon had
Professor Jameson's metal head removed from the machine which he had
wrecked in his fall down the crater. All during the painless operation,
the professor kept up a series of thought exchanges in conversation with
the Zoromes, and it seemed but a short time before his head surmounted a
new machine and he was ready for further exploration. In the course of
his operation, the space ship had moved to a new position, and now as
they emerged 25X-987 kept company with Professor Jameson.

"I must keep an eye on you," he said. "You will be getting into more
trouble before you get accustomed to the metal bodies."

But Professor Jameson was doing a great deal of thinking. Doubtlessly,
these strange machine men who had picked up his rocket in the depths of
space and had brought him back to life, were expecting him to travel
with them and become adopted into the ranks of the Zoromes. Did he want
to go with them? He couldn't decide. He had forgotten that the machine
men could read his innermost thoughts.

"You wish to remain here alone upon the earth?" asked 25X-987. "It is
your privilege if you really want it so."

"I don't know," replied Professor Jameson truthfully.

       *       *       *       *       *

He gazed at the dust around his feet. It had probably been the
composition of men, and had changed from time to time into various other
atomic structures--of other queer forms of life which had succeeded
mankind. It was the law of the atom which never died. And now he had
within his power perpetual existence. He could be immortal if he wished!
It would be an immortality of never-ending adventures in the vast,
endless Universe among the galaxy of stars and planets.

A great loneliness seized him. Would he be happy among these machine men
of another far-off world--among these Zoromes? They were kindly and
solicitous of his welfare. What better fate could he expect? Still, a
longing for his own kind arose in him--the call of humanity. It was
irresistible. What could he do? Was it not in vain? Humanity had long
since disappeared from the earth--millions of years ago. He wondered
what lay beyond the pales of death--the real death, where the body
decomposed and wasted away to return to the dust of the earth and assume
new atomic structures.

He had begun to wonder whether or not he had been dead all these forty
millions of years--suppose he had been merely in a state of suspended
animation. He had remembered a scientist of his day, who had claimed
that the body does not die at the point of official death. According to
the claims of this man, the cells of the body did not die at the moment
at which respiration, heart beats and the blood circulation ceased, but
it existed in the semblance of life for several days afterward,
especially in the cells of the bones, which died last of all.

Perhaps when he had been sent out into space in his rocket right after
his death, the action of the cosmic void was to halt his slow death of
the cells in his body, and hold him in suspended animation during the
ensuing millions of years. Suppose he should really die--destroying his
own brain? What lay beyond real death? Would it be a better plane of
existence than the Zoromes could offer him? Would he rediscover
humanity, or had they long since arisen to higher planes of existence or
reincarnation? Did time exist beyond the mysterious portals of death? If
not, then it was possible for him to join the souls of the human race.
Had he really been dead all this time? If so, he knew what to expect in
case he really destroyed his own brain. Oblivion!

Again the intense feeling of loneliness surged over him and held him
within its melancholy grasp. Desperately, he decided to find the nearest
cliff and jump from it--head-first! Humanity called; no man lived to
companion him. His four metal limbs carried him swiftly to the summit of
a nearby precipice. Why not gamble on the hereafter? 25X-987,
understanding his trend of thought, did not attempt to restrain him.
Instead, the machine man of Zor waited patiently.

As Professor Jameson stood there meditating upon the jump which would
hurl him now into a new plane of existence--or into oblivion, the
thought transference of 25X-987 reached him. It was laden with the
wisdom born of many planets and thousands of centuries' experience.

"Why jump?" asked the machine man. "The dying world holds your
imagination within a morbid clutch. It is all a matter of mental
condition. Free your mind of this fascinating influence and come with us
to visit other worlds, many of them are both beautiful and new. You will
then feel a great difference.

"Will you come?"

The professor considered for a moment as he resisted the impulse to dive
off the declivity to the enticing rocks far below. An inspiration seized
him. Backing away from the edge of the cliff, he joined 25X-987 once
more.

"I shall come," he stated.

He would become an immortal after all and join the Zoromes in their
never-ending adventures from world to world. They hastened to the space
ship to escape the depressing, dreary influence of the dying world,
which had nearly driven Professor Jameson to take the fatal leap to
oblivion.


THE END




Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from _Amazing Stories_ April 1956 and was
    first published in _Amazing Stories_ July 1931. Extensive research
    did not uncover any evidence that the U.S. copyright on this
    publication was renewed. Minor spelling and typographical errors
    have been corrected without note.





End of Project Gutenberg's The Jameson Satellite, by Neil Ronald Jones

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE JAMESON SATELLITE ***

***** This file should be named 26906.txt or 26906.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/6/9/0/26906/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
