The Project Gutenberg EBook of A Place in the Sun, by C.H. Thames

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: A Place in the Sun

Author: C.H. Thames

Release Date: October 19, 2008 [EBook #26966]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A PLACE IN THE SUN ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Barbara Tozier and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net





    This etext was produced from _Amazing Stories_ October 1956.
    Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed.




A "JOHNNY MAYHEM" ADVENTURE




A PLACE IN THE SUN



By C. H. THAMES


    _Mayhem, the man of many bodies, had been given some weird
    assignments in his time, but saving The Glory of the Galaxy
    wasn't difficult--it was downright impossible!_


The SOS crackled and hummed through subspace at a speed which left
laggard light far behind. Since subspace distances do not coincide with
normal space distances, the SOS was first picked up by a Fomalhautian
freighter bound for Capella although it had been issued from a point in
normal space midway between the orbit of Mercury and the sun's corona in
the solar system.

    [Illustration: The terrible weapon blasted death and carnage
    through the ship.]

The radioman of the Fomalhautian freighter gave the distress signal to
the Deck Officer, who looked at it, blinked, and bolted 'bove decks to
the captain's cabin. His face was very white when he reached the door
and his heart pounded with excitement. As the Deck Officer crossed an
electronic beam before the door a metallic voice said: "The Captain is
asleep and will be disturbed for nothing but emergency priority."

Nodding, the Deck officer stuck his thumb in the whorl-lock of the door
and entered the cabin. "Begging your pardon, sir," he cried, "but we
just received an SOS from--"

       *       *       *       *       *

The Captain stirred groggily, sat up, switched on a green night light
and squinted through it at the Deck Officer. "Well, what is it? Isn't
the Eye working?"

"Yes, sir. An SOS, sir...."

"If we're close enough to help, subspace or normal space, take the usual
steps, lieutenant. Surely you don't need me to--"

"The usual steps can't be taken, sir. Far as I can make out, that ship
is doomed. She's bound on collision course for Sol, only twenty million
miles out now."

"That's too bad, lieutenant," the Captain said with genuine sympathy in
his voice. "I'm sorry to hear that. But what do you want me to do about
it?"

"The ship, sir. The ship that sent the SOS--hold on to your hat, sir--"

"Get to the point now, will you, young man?" the Captain growled
sleepily.

"The ship which sent the SOS signal, the ship heading on collision
course for Sol, is the _Glory of the Galaxy_!"

For a moment the Captain said nothing. Distantly, you could hear the hum
of the subspace drive-unit and the faint whining of the stasis
generator. Then the Captain bolted out of bed after unstrapping himself.
In his haste he forgot the ship was in weightless deep space and went
sailing, arms flailing air, across the room. The lieutenant helped him
down and into his magnetic-soled shoes.

"My God," the Captain said finally. "Why did it happen? Why did it have
to happen to the _Glory of the Galaxy_?"

"What are you going to do, sir?"

"_I_ can't do anything. I won't take the responsibility. Have the
radioman contact the Hub at once."

"Yes, sir."

_The Glory of the Galaxy_, the SOS ship heading on collision course with
the sun, was making its maiden run from the assembly satellites of Earth
across the inner solar system via the perihelion passage which would
bring it within twenty-odd million miles of the sun, to Mars which now
was on the opposite side of Sol from Earth. Aboard the gleaming new ship
was the President of the Galactic Federation and his entire cabinet.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Fomalhautian freighter's emergency message was received at the Hub
of the Galaxy within moments after it had been sent, although the normal
space distance was in the neighborhood of one hundred thousand light
years. The message was bounced--in amazingly quick time--from office to
office at the hub, cutting through the usual red tape because of its top
priority. And--since none of the normal agencies at the Hub could handle
it--the message finally arrived at an office which very rarely received
official messages of any kind. This was the one unofficial, extra-legal
office at the Hub of the Galaxy. Lacking official function, the office
had no technical existence and was not to be found in any Directory of
the Hub. At the moment, two young men were seated inside. Their sole job
was to maintain liaison with a man whose very existence was doubted by
most of the human inhabitants of the Galaxy but whose importance could
not be measured by mere human standards in those early days when the
Galactic League was becoming the Galactic Federation.

The name of the man with whom they maintained contact was Johnny Mayhem.

"Did you read it?" the blond man asked.

"I read it."

"If it got down here, that means they can't handle it anywhere else."

"Of course they can't. What the hell could normal slobs like them or
like us do about it?"

"Nothing, I guess. But wait a minute! You don't mean you're going to
send Mayhem, without asking him, without telling--"

"We can't ask him now, can we?"

"Johnny Mayhem's _elan_ is at the moment speeding from Canopus to Deneb,
where on the fourth planet of the Denebian system a dead body is waiting
for him in cold storage. The turnover from League to Federation status
of the Denebian system is causing trouble in Deneb City, so Mayhem--"

"Deneb City will probably survive without Mayhem. Well, won't it?"

"I guess so, but--"

"I know. The deal is we're supposed to tell Mayhem where he's going and
what he can expect. The deal also is, every inhabited world has a body
waiting for his _elan_ in cold storage. But don't you think if we could
talk to Mayhem now--"

"It isn't possible. He's in transit."

"Don't you think if we could talk to him now he would agree to board the
_Glory of the Galaxy_?"

"How should I know? I'm not Johnny Mayhem."

"If he doesn't board her, it's certain death for all of them."

"And if he does board her, what the hell can he do about it? Besides,
there isn't any dead body awaiting his _elan_ on that ship or any ship.
He wouldn't make a very efficacious ghost."

"But there are live people. Scores of them. Mayhem's _elan_ is quite
capable of possessing a living host."

"Sure. Theoretically it is. But damn it all, what would the results be?
We've never tried it. It's liable to damage Mayhem. As for the host--"

"The host might die. I know it. But he'll die anyway. The whole shipload
of them is heading on collision course for the sun."

"Does the SOS say why?"

"No. Maybe Mayhem can find out and do something about it."

       *       *       *       *       *

"Yeah, maybe. That's a hell of a way to risk the life of the most
important man in the Galaxy. Because if Mayhem boards that ship and
can't do anything about it, he'll die with the rest of them."

"Why? We could always pluck his _elan_ out again."

"_If_ he were inhabiting a dead one. In a live body, I don't think so.
The attraction would be stronger. There would be forces of cohesion--"

"That's true. Still, Mayhem's our only hope."

"I'll admit it's a job for Mayhem, but he's too important."

"Is he? Don't be a fool. What, actually, is Johnny Mayhem's importance?
His importance lies in the very fact that he is expendable. His
life--for the furtherance of the new Galactic Federation."

"But--"

"And the President is aboard that ship. Maybe he can't do as much for
the Galaxy in the long run as Mayhem can, but don't you see, man, he's a
figurehead. Right now he's the most important man in the Galaxy, and if
we could talk to him I'm sure Mayhem would agree. Mayhem would want to
board that ship."

"It's funny, we've been working with Mayhem all these years and we never
even met the guy."

"Would you know him if you saw him?"

"Umm-mm, I guess not. Do you think we really can halt his _elan_ in
subspace and divert it over to the _Glory of the Galaxy_?"

"I take it you're beginning to see things my way. And the answer to your
question is yes."

"Poor Mayhem. You know, I actually feel sorry for the guy. He's had more
adventures than anyone since Homer wrote the _Odyssey_ and there won't
ever be any rest for him."

"Stop feeling sorry for him and start hoping he succeeds."

"Yeah."

"And let's see about getting a bead on his _elan_."

The two young men walked to a tri-dim chart which took up much of the
room. One of them touched a button and blue light glowed within the
chart, pulsing brightly and sharply where space-sectors intersected.

"He's in C-17 now," one of the men said as a gleaming whiteness was
suddenly superimposed at a single point on the blue.

"Can you bead him?"

"I think so. But I still feel sorry for Mayhem. He's expecting to wake
up in a cold-storage corpse on Deneb IV but instead he'll come to in a
living body aboard a spaceship on collision course for the sun."

"Just hope he--"

"I know. Succeeds. I don't even want to think of the possibility he
might fail."

In seconds, the gleaming white dot crawled across the surface of the
tri-dim chart from sector C-17 to sector S-1.

       *       *       *       *       *

The _Glory of the Galaxy_ was now nineteen million miles out from the
sun and rushing through space at a hundred miles per second, normal
space drive. The _Glory of the Galaxy_ thus moved a million miles closer
to fiery destruction every three hours--but since the sun's
gravitational force had to be added to that speed, the ship was slated
to plunge into the sun's corona in little more than twenty-four hours.

Since the ship's refrigeration units would function perfectly until the
outer hull reached a temperature of eleven hundred degrees Fahrenheit,
none of its passengers knew that anything was wrong. Even the members of
the crew went through all the normal motions. Only the _Glory of the
Galaxy's_ officers in their bright new uniforms and gold braid knew the
grim truth of what awaited the gleaming two-thousand ton spaceship less
than twenty-four hours away at the exact center of its perihelion
passage.

Something--unidentified as yet--in all the thousands of intricate things
that could go wrong on a spaceship, particularly a new one making its
maiden voyage, had gone wrong. The officers were checking their
catalogues and their various areas of watch meticulously--and not
because their own lives were at stake. In spaceflight, your own life
always is at stake. There are too many imponderables: you are, to a
certain degree, expendable. The commissioned contingent aboard the
_Glory of the Galaxy_ was a dedicated group, hand-picked from all the
officers in the solar system.

       *       *       *       *       *

But they could find nothing. And do nothing.

Within a day, their lives along with the lives of the enlisted men
aboard the _Glory of the Galaxy_ and the passengers on its maiden run,
would be snuffed out in a brilliant burst of solar heat.

And the President of the Galactic Federation would die because some
unknown factor had locked the controls of the spaceship, making it
impossible to turn or use forward rockets against the gravitational pull
of the sun.

Nineteen million miles. In normal space, a considerable distance. A
hundred miles a second--a very considerable normal space speed.
Increasing....

       *       *       *       *       *

Ever since they had left Earth's assembly satellites, Sheila Kelly had
seen a lot of a Secret Serviceman named Larry Grange, who was a member
of the President's corps of bodyguards. She liked Larry, although there
was nothing serious in their relationship. He was handsome and charming
and she was naturally flattered with his attentions. Still, although he
was older than Sheila, she sensed that he was a boy rather than a man
and had the odd feeling that, faced with a real crisis, he would confirm
this tragically.

It was night aboard the _Glory of the Galaxy_. Which was to say the
blue-green night lights had replaced the white day lights in the
companionways and public rooms of the spaceship, since its ports were
sealed against the fierce glare of the sun. It was hard to believe,
Sheila thought, that they were only nineteen million miles from the sun.
Everything was so cool--so comfortably air-conditioned....

She met Larry in the Sunside Lounge, a cabaret as nice as any terran
nightclub she had ever seen. There were stylistic Zodiac drawings on the
walls and blue-mirrored columns supporting the roof. Like everything
else aboard the _Glory of the Galaxy_, the Sunside Lounge hardly seemed
to belong on a spaceship. For Sheila Kelly, though--herself a third
secretary with the department of Galactic Economy--it was all very
thrilling.

"Hello, Larry," she said as the Secret Serviceman joined her at their
table. He was a tall young man in his late twenties with crewcut blond
hair; but he sat down heavily now and did not offer Sheila his usual
smile.

"Why, what on earth is the matter?" Sheila asked him.

"Nothing. I need a drink, that's all."

The drinks came. Larry gulped his and ordered another. His complete
silence baffled Sheila, who finally said:

"Surely it isn't anything I did."

"You? Don't be silly."

"Well! After the way you said that I don't know if I should be glad or
not."

"Just forget it. I'm sorry, kid. I--" He reached out and touched her
hand. His own hand was damp and cold.

"Going to tell me, Larry?"

"Listen. What's a guy supposed to do if he overhears something he's not
supposed to overhear, and--"

"How should I know unless you tell me what you overheard? It is you
you're talking about, isn't it?"

"Yeah. I was going off duty, walking by officer quarters and ... oh,
forget it. I better not tell you."

"I'm a good listener, Larry."

"Look, Irish. You're a good anything--and that's the truth. You have
looks and you have brains and I have a hunch through all that Emerald
Isle sauciness you have a heart too. But--"

"But you don't want to tell me."

"It isn't I don't want to, but no one's supposed to know, not even the
President."

"You sure make it sound mysterious."

"Just the officers. Oh, hell. I don't know. What good would it do if I
told you?"

"I guess you'd just get it off your chest, that's all."

"I can't tell anyone official, Sheila. I'd have my head handed to me.
But I've got to think and I've got to tell someone. I'll go crazy, just
knowing and not doing anything."

"It's important, isn't it?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Larry downed another drink quickly. It was his fourth and Sheila had
never seen him take more than three or four in the course of a whole
evening. "You're damned right it's important." Larry leaned forward
across the postage-stamp table. A liquor-haze clouded his eyes as he
said: "It's so important that unless someone does something about it,
we'll all be dead inside of twenty-four hours. Only trouble is, there
isn't anything anyone can do about it."

"Larry--you're a little drunk."

"I know it. I know I am. I want to be a lot drunker. What the hell can a
guy do?"

"What do you know, Larry? What have you heard?"

"I know they have the President of the Galactic Federation aboard this
ship and that he ought to be told the truth."

"No. I mean--"

"They sent out an SOS, kid. Controls are locked. Lifeboats don't have
enough power to get us out of the sun's gravitational pull. We're all
going to roast, I tell you!"

Sheila felt her heart throb wildly. Even though he was well on the way
to being thoroughly drunk, Larry was telling the truth. Instinctively,
she knew that--was certain of it. "What are you going to do?" she said.

He shrugged. "I guess because I can't do a damned thing I'm going to get
good and drunk. That's what I'm going to do. Or maybe--who the hell
knows?--maybe in one minute I'm going to jump up on this table and tell
everyone what I overheard. Maybe I ought to do that, huh?"

"Larry, Larry--if it's as bad as you say, maybe you ought to think
before you do anything."

"Who am I to think? I'm one of the muscle men. That's what they pay me
for, isn't it?"

"Larry. You don't have to shout."

"Well, isn't it?"

"If you don't calm down I'll have to leave."

"You can sit still. You can park here all night. _I'm_ leaving."

"What are you going to do?"

"Oh ... that." Larry got up from the table. He looked suddenly green and
Sheila thought it was because he had too much to drink. "You don't have
to worry about that, Sheila. Not now you don't. I all of a sudden don't
feel so good. Headache. Man, I never felt anything like it. Better go to
my cabin and lie down. Maybe I'll wake up and find out all this was a
dream, huh?"

"Do you need any help?" Sheila demanded, real concern in her voice.

"No. 'Sall right. Man, this headache really snuck up on me. Pow! Without
any warning."

"Let me help you."

"No. Just leave me alone, will you?" Larry staggered off across the
crowded dance floor. He drew angry glances and muttered comments as he
disturbed the dancers waltzing to Carlotti's _Danube in Space_.

Why don't you admit it, Grange, Larry thought as he staggered through
the companionway toward his cabin. That's what you always wanted, isn't
it--a place of importance?

A place in the sun, they call it.

"You're going to get a place in the sun, all right," he mumbled aloud.
"Right smack in the middle of the sun with everyone else aboard this
ship!"

The humor of it amused him perversely. He smiled--but it was closer to a
leer--and lunged into his cabin. What he said to Sheila was no joke. He
really did have a splitting headache. It had come on suddenly and it was
like no headache he had ever known. It pulsed and throbbed and beat
against his temples and held red hot needles to the backs of his
eyeballs, almost blinding him. It sapped all his strength, leaving him
physically weak. He was barely able to close the door behind him and
stagger to the shower.

An ice cold shower, he thought would help. He stripped quickly and got
under the needle spray. By that time he was so weak he could barely
stand.

A place in the sun, he thought....

Something grabbed his mind and wrenched it.

       *       *       *       *       *

Johnny Mayhem awoke.

Awakening came slowly, as it always did. It was a rising through
infinite gulfs, a rebirth for a man who had died a hundred times and
might die a thousand times more as the years piled up and became
centuries. It was a spinning, whirling, flashing ascent from blackness
to coruscating colors, brightness, giddiness.

And suddenly, it was over.

A needle spray of ice-cold water beat down upon him. He shuddered and
reached for the water-taps, shutting them. Dripping, he climbed from the
shower.

And floated up--quite weightless--toward the ceiling.

Frowning with his new and as yet unseen face, Johnny Mayhem propelled
himself to the floor. He looked at his arms. He was naked--at least that
much was right.

But obviously, since he was weightless, he was not on Deneb IV. During
his transmigration he had been briefed for the trouble on Deneb IV. Then
had a mistake been made somehow? It was always possible--but it had
never happened before.

Too much precision and careful planning was involved.

Every world which had an Earthman population and a Galactic League--now,
Galactic Federation--post, must have a body in cold storage, waiting for
Johnny Mayhem if his services were required. No one knew when Mayhem's
services might be required. No one knew exactly under what circumstances
the Galactic Federation Council, operating from the Hub of the Galaxy,
might summon Mayhem. And only a very few people, including those at the
Hub and the Galactic League Firstmen on civilized worlds and Observers
on frontier planets, knew the precise mechanics of Mayhem's coming.

       *       *       *       *       *

Johnny Mayhem, a bodiless sentience. Mayhem--Johnny Marlow then--who
had been chased from Earth a pariah and a criminal seven years ago, who
had been mortally wounded on a wild planet deep within the Sagittarian
Swarm, whose life had been saved--after a fashion--by the white magic
of that planet. Mayhem, doomed now to possible immortality as a
bodiless sentience, an _elan_, which could occupy and activate a corpse
if it had been preserved properly ... an _elan_ doomed to wander
eternally because it could not remain in one body for more than a month
without body and _elan_ perishing. Mayhem, who had dedicated his
strange, lonely life to the services of the Galactic League--now the
Galactic Federation--because a normal life and normal social relations
were not possible to him....

It did not seem possible, Mayhem thought now, that a mistake could be
made. Then--a sudden change in plans?

It had never happened before, but it was entirely possible. Something,
Mayhem decided, had come up during transmigration. It was terribly
important and the people at the Hub had had no opportunity to brief him
on it.

But--what?

       *       *       *       *       *

His first shock came a moment later. He walked to a mirror on the wall
and approved of the strong young body which would house his sentience
and then scowled. A thought inside his head said:

_So this is what it's like to have schizophrenia._

_What the hell was that?_ Mayhem thought.

_I said, so this is what it's like to have schizophrenia. First the
world's worst headache and then I start thinking like two different
people._

_Aren't you dead?_

_Is that supposed to be a joke, alter ego? When do the men in the white
suits come?_

_Good Lord, this was supposed to be a dead body!_

At that, the other sentience which shared the body with Mayhem snickered
and lapsed into silence. Mayhem, for his part, was astounded.

_Don't get ornery now_, Mayhem pleaded. _I'm Johnny Mayhem. Does that
mean anything to you?_

_Oh, sure. It means I'm dead. You inhabit dead bodies, right?_

_Usually. Listen--where are we?_

Glory of the Galaxy--_bound from Earth to Mars on perihelion._

_And there's trouble?_

_How do you know there's trouble?_

_Otherwise they wouldn't have diverted me here._

_We've got the president aboard. We're going to hit the sun._ Then,
grudgingly, Larry went into the details. When he finished he thought
cynically: _Now all you have to do is go outside yelling have no fear,
Mayhem is here and everything will be all right, I suppose._

Mayhem didn't answer. It would be many moments yet before he could
adjust to this new, unexpected situation. But in a way, he thought, it
would be a boon. If he were co-inhabiting the body of a living man who
belonged on the _Glory of the Galaxy_, there was no need to reveal his
identity as Johnny Mayhem to anyone but his host....

       *       *       *       *       *

"I tell ya," Technician First Class Ackerman Boone shouted, "the
refrigeration unit's gone on the blink. You can't feel it yet, but I
ought to know. I got the refrigs working full strength and we gained a
couple of degrees heat. Either she's on the blink or we're too close to
the sun, I tell you!"

Ackerman Boone was a big man, a veteran spacer with a squat, very strong
body and arms like an orangutan. Under normal circumstances he was a
very fine spacer and a good addition to any crew, but he bore an
unreasonable grudge against the officer corps and would go out of his
way to make them look bad in the eyes of the other enlisted men. A large
crowd had gathered in the hammock-hung crew quarters of the _Glory of
the Galaxy_ as Boone went on in his deep, booming voice: "So I asked the
skipper of the watch, I did. He got shifty-eyed, like they always do.
You know. He wasn't talking, but sure as my name's Ackerman Boone,
something's wrong."

"What do you think it is, Acky?" one of the younger men asked.

"Well, I tell ya this: I know what it _isn't_. I checked out the refrigs
three times, see, and came up with nothing. The refrigs are in jig
order, and if I know it then you know it. So, if the refrigs are in jig
order, there's only one thing it can be: we're getting too near the
sun!" Boone clamped his mouth shut and stood with thick, muscular arms
crossed over his barrel chest.

       *       *       *       *       *

A young technician third class said in a strident voice, "You mean you
think maybe we're plunging into the sun, Acky?"

"Well, now, I didn't say that. Did I, boy? But we _are_ too close and if
we are too close there's got to be a reason for it. If we stay too close
too long, O.K. Then we're plunging into the sun. Right now, I dunno."

They all asked Ackerman Boone, who was an unofficial leader among them,
what he was going to do. He rubbed his big fingers against the thick
stubble of beard on his jaw and you could hear the rasping sound it
made. Then he said, "Nothing, until we find out for sure. But I got a
hunch the officers are trying to pull the wool over the eyes of them
politicians we got on board. That's all right with me, men. If they want
to, they got their reasons. But I tell ya this: they ain't going to pull
any wool over Acky Boone's eyes, and that's a fact."

Just then the squawk box called: "Now hear this! Now hear this! Tech/1
Ackerman Boone to Exec's office. Tech/1 Boone to Exec."

"You see?" Boone said, smiling grimly. As yet, no one saw. His face
still set in a grim smile, Ackerman Boone headed above decks.

       *       *       *       *       *

"That, Mr. President," Vice Admiral T. Shawnley Stapleton said gravely,
"is the problem. We would have come to you sooner, sir, but frankly--"

"I know it, Admiral," the President said quietly. "I could not have
helped you in any way. There was no sense telling me."

"We have one chance, sir, and one only. It's irregular and it will
probably knock the hell out of the _Glory of the Galaxy_, but it may
save our lives. If we throw the ship suddenly into subspace we could
pass right through the sun's position and--"

"I'm no scientist, Admiral, but wouldn't that put tremendous stress not
only on the ship but on all of us aboard?"

"It would, sir. I won't keep anything from you, of course. We'd all be
subjected to a force of twenty-some gravities for a period of several
seconds. Here aboard the _Glory_, we don't have adequate G-equipment.
It's something like the old days of air flight, sir: as soon as
airplanes became reasonably safe, passenger ships didn't bother to carry
parachutes. Result over a period of fifty years: thousands of lives
lost. We'd all be bruised and battered, sir. Bones would be broken.
There might be a few deaths. But I see no other way out, sir."

"Then there was no need to check with me at all, I assure you, Admiral
Stapleton. Do whatever you think is best, sir."

The Admiral nodded gravely. "Thank you, Mr. President. I will say this,
though: we will wait for a miracle."

"I'm afraid I don't follow you."

"Well, I don't expect a miracle, but the switchover to subspace so
suddenly is bound to be dangerous. Therefore, we'll wait until the last
possible moment. It will grow uncomfortably warm, let me warn you, but
as long as the subspace drive is in good working order--"

"I see what you mean, Admiral. You have a free hand, sir; let me repeat
that. I will not interfere in any way and I have the utmost confidence
in you." The President mopped his brow with an already damp
handkerchief. It _was_ growing warm, come to think of it. Uncomfortably
warm.

As if everyone aboard the _Glory of the Galaxy_ was slowly being broiled
alive....

       *       *       *       *       *

Ackerman Boone entered the crew quarters with the same smile still on
his lips. At first he said nothing, but his silence drew the men like a
magnet draws iron filings. When they had all clustered about him he
spoke.

"The Exec not only chewed my ears off," he boomed. "He all but spit them
in my face! I was right, men. He admitted it to me after he saw how he
couldn't get away with anything in front of Ackerman Boone. Men, we're
heading on collision course with the sun!"

A shocked silence greeted his words and Ackerman Boone, instinctively a
born speaker, paused dramatically to allow each man the private horror
of his own thoughts for a few moments. Then he continued: "The Admiral
figures we have one chance to get out of this alive, men. He figures--"

"What is it, Acky?"

"What will he do?"

"How will the Admiral get us out of this?"

Ackerman Boone spat on the polished, gleaming floor of the crew
quarters. "He'll never get us out alive, let me tell you. He wants to
shift us into subspace at the last possible minute. Suddenly. Like
this--" and Ackerman Boone snapped his fingers.

"There'd be a ship full of broken bones!" someone protested. "We can't
do a thing like that."

"He'll kill us all!" a very young T/3 cried hysterically.

"Not if I can help it, he won't," shouted Ackerman Boone. "Listen, men.
This ain't a question of discipline. It's a question of living or dying
and I tell you that's more important than doing it like the book says or
discipline or anything like that. We got a chance, all right: but it
ain't what the Admiral thinks it is. We ought to abandon the _Glory_ to
her place in the sun and scram out of here in the lifeboats--every last
person aboard ship."

"But will they have enough power to get out of the sun's gravitational
pull?" someone asked.

Ackerman Boone shrugged. "Don't look at me," he said mockingly. "I'm
only an enlisted man and they don't give enlisted men enough math to
answer questions like that. But reckoning by the seat of my pants I
would say, yes. Yes, we could get away like that--if we act fast.
Because every minute we waste is a minute that brings us closer to the
sun and makes it harder to get away in the lifeboats. If we act, men, we
got to act fast."

"You're talking mutiny, Boone," a grizzled old space veteran said. "You
can count me out."

"What's the matter, McCormick? Yellow?"

"I'm not yellow. I say it takes guts to maintain discipline in a real
emergency. I say _you're_ yellow, Boone."

"You better be ready to back that up with your fists, McCormick," Boone
said savagely.

"I'm ready any time you're ready, you yellow mutinous bastard!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Ackerman Boone launched himself at the smaller, older man, who stood his
ground unflinchingly although he probably knew he would take a sound
beating. But four or five crewmen came between them and held them apart,
one saying:

"Look who's talking, Boone. You say time's precious but you're all set
to start fighting. Every minute--"

"Every _second_," Boone said grimly, "brings us more than a hundred
miles closer to the sun."

"What can we do, Acky?"

Instead of answer, Ackerman Boone dramatically mopped the sweat from his
face. All the men were uncomfortably warm now. It was obvious that the
temperature within the _Glory of the Galaxy_ had now climbed fifteen or
twenty degrees despite the fact that the refrigs were working at full
capacity. Even the bulkheads and the metal floor of crew quarters were
unpleasantly warm to the touch. The air was hot and suddenly very dry.

"I'll tell you what we ought to do," Ackerman Boone said finally.
"Admiral Stapleton or no Admiral Stapleton, President of the Galactic
Federation or no President of the Galactic Federation, we ought to take
over this ship and man the life boats for everyone's good. If they don't
want to save their lives and ours--let's us save our lives and theirs!"

Roars of approval greeted Boone's words, but Spacer McCormick and some
of the other veterans stood apart from the loud speech-making which
followed. Actually, Boone's wild words--which he gambled with after the
first flush of enthusiasm for his plan--began to lose converts. One by
one the men drifted toward McCormick's silent group until, finally,
Boone had lost almost his entire audience.

Just then a T/2 rushed into crew quarters and shouted: "Hey, is Boone
around? Has anyone seen Boone?"

This brought general laughter. Under the circumstances, the question was
not without its humorous aspect.

"What'll you have?" Boone demanded.

"The refrigs, Boone! They are on the blink. Overstrained themselves and
burned themselves out. Inside of half an hour this ship's going to be an
oven hot enough to kill us all!"

"Half an hour, men!" Ackerman Boone cried. "Now, do we take over the
ship and man those lifeboats or don't we!"

The roar which followed his words was a decidedly affirmative one.

       *       *       *       *       *

"These are the figures," Admiral Stapleton said. "You can see, Mr.
President, that we have absolutely no chance whatever if we man the
lifeboats. We would perish as assuredly as we would if we remained with
the _Glory of the Galaxy_ in normal space."

"Admiral, I have to hand it to you. I don't know how you can think--in
all this heat."

"Have to, sir. Otherwise we all die."

"The air temperature--"

"Is a hundred and thirty degrees and rising. We've passed salt tablets
out to everyone, sir, but even then it's only a matter of time before
we're all prostrated. If you're sure you give your permission, sir--"

"Admiral Stapleton, you are running this ship, not I."

"Very well, sir. I've sent our subspace officer, Lieutenant Ormundy, to
throw in the subspace drive. We should know in a few moments--"

"No crash hammocks or anything?"

"I'm sorry, sir."

"It isn't your fault, Admiral. I was merely pointing out a fact."

The squawk box blared: "Now hear this! Now hear this! T/3 Ackerman Boone
to Admiral Stapleton. Are you listening, Admiral?"

Admiral Stapleton's haggard, heat-worn face bore a look of astonishment
as he listened. Ackerman said, "We have Lieutenant Ormundy, Admiral.
He's not killing us all by putting us into subspace in minutes when it
ought to take hours, you understand. We have Ormundy and we have the
subspace room. A contingent of our men is getting the lifeboats ready.
We're going to abandon ship, Admiral, all of us, including you and the
politicians even if we have to drag you aboard the lifeboats at
N--gunpoint."

Admiral Stapleton's face went ashen. "Let me at a radio!" he roared. "I
want to answer that man and see if he understands exactly what mutiny
is!"

While Ackerman Boone was talking over the squawk box, the temperature
within the _Glory of the Galaxy_ rose to 145° Fahrenheit.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Fifteen minutes," Larry Grange said. "In fifteen minutes the heat will
have us all unconscious." Only it wasn't Larry alone who was talking. It
was Larry and Johnny Mayhem. In a surprisingly short time the young
Secret Serviceman had come to accept the dual occupation of his own
mind. It was there: it was either dual occupation or insanity and if the
voice which spoke inside his head said it was Johnny Mayhem, then it was
Johnny Mayhem. Besides, Larry felt clear-headed in a way he had never
felt before, despite the terrible, sapping heat. It was as if he had
matured suddenly--the word matured came to him instinctively--in the
space of minutes. Or, as if a maturing influence were at work on his
mind.

"What can we do?" Sheila said. "The crew has complete control of the
ship."

"Secret Service chief says we're on our own. There's no time for
co-ordinated planning, but somehow, within a very few minutes, we've got
to get inside the subspace room and throw the ship out of normal space
or we'll all be roasted."

"Some of your men are there now, aren't they?"

"In the companionway outside the subspace room, yeah. But they'll never
force their way in time. Not with blasters and not with N-guns, either.
Not in ten minutes, they won't."

"Larry, all of a sudden I--I'm scared. We're all going to die, Larry. I
don't want--Larry, what are you going to do?"

They had been walking in a deserted companionway which brought them to
one of the aft escape hatches of the _Glory of the Galaxy_. Their
clothing was plastered to their bodies with sweat and every breath was
agonizing, furnace hot.

"I'm going outside," Larry said quietly.

"Outside? What do you mean?"

"Spacesuit, outside. There's a hatch in the subspace room. If their
attention is diverted to the companionway door, I may be able to get in.
It's our only chance--ours, and everyone's."

"But the spacesuit--"

"I know," Larry said even as he was climbing into the inflatable vacuum
garment. It was Larry--and it wasn't Larry. He felt a certain
confidence, a certain sense of doing the right thing--a feeling which
Larry Grange had never experienced before in his life. It was as if the
boy had become a man in the final moments of his life--or, he thought
all at once, it was as if Johnny Mayhem who shared his mind and his body
with him was somehow transmitting some of his own skills and confidence
even as he--Mayhem--had reached the decision to go outside.

"I know," he said. "The spacesuit isn't insulated sufficiently. I'll
have about three minutes out there. Three minutes to get inside.
Otherwise, I'm finished."

"But Larry--"

"Don't you see, Sheila? What does it matter? Who wants the five or ten
extra minutes if we're all going to die anyway? This way, there's a
chance."

He buckled the spacesuit and lifted the heavy fishbowl helmet, preparing
to set it on his shoulders.

"Wait," Sheila said, and stood on tiptoes to take his face in her hands
and kiss him on the lips. "You--you're different," Sheila said. "You're
the same guy, a lot of fun, but you're a--man, too. This is for what
might have been, Larry," she said, and kissed him again. "This is
because I love you."

Before he dropped the helmet in place, Larry said. "It isn't for what
might have been, Sheila. It's for what will be."

The helmet snapped shut over the shoulder ridges of the spacesuit.
Moments later, he had slipped into the airlock.

       *       *       *       *       *

"I say you're a fool, Ackerman Boone!" one of the enlisted men rasped at
the leader of the mutiny. "I say now we've lost our last chance. Now
it's too late to get into the lifeboats even if we wanted to. Now all we
can do is--die!"

There were still ten conscious men in the subspace room. The others had
fallen before heat prostration and lay strewn about the floor, wringing
wet and oddly flaccid as if all the moisture had been wrung from their
bodies except for the sweat which covered their skins.

"All right," Ackerman Boone admitted. "All right, so none of us knows
how to work the subspace mechanism. You think that would have helped? It
would have killed us all, I tell you."

"It was a chance, Boone. Our last chance and you--"

"Just shut up!" Boone snarled. "I know what you're thinking. You're
thinking we ought to let them officers and Secret Servicemen to ram home
the subspace drive. But use your head, man. Probably they'll kill us
all, but if they don't--"

"Then you admit there's a chance!"

"Yeah. All right, a chance. But if they don't kill us all, if they save
us by ramming home the subspacer, what happens? We're all taken in on a
mutiny charge. It's a capital offense, you fool!"

"Well, it's better than sure death," the man said, and moved toward the
door.

"Allister, wait!" Boone cried. "Wait, I'm warning you. Any man who tries
to open that door--"

Outside, a steady booming of blaster fire could be heard, but the
assault-proof door stood fast.

"--is going to get himself killed!" Boone finished.

Grimly, Allister reached the door and got his already blistered fingers
on the lock mechanism.

Ackerman Boone shot him in the back with an N-gun.

       *       *       *       *       *

Larry's whole body felt like one raw mass of broken blisters as, flat on
his belly, he inched his way along the outside hull of the _Glory of the
Galaxy_. He had no idea what the heat was out here, but it radiated off
the hot hull of the _Glory_ in scalding, suffocating waves which swept
right through the insulining of the spacesuit. If he didn't find the
proper hatch, and in a matter of seconds....

       *       *       *       *       *

"Anyone else?" Ackerman Boone screamed. "Anyone else like Allister?"

But one by one the remaining men were dropping from the heat.
Finally--alone--Ackerman Boone faced the door and stared defiantly at
the hot metal as if he could see his adversaries through it. On the
other side, the firing became more sporadic as the officers and Secret
Servicemen collapsed. His mind crazed with the heat and with fear,
Ackerman Boone suddenly wished he could see the men through the door,
wished he could see them die....

       *       *       *       *       *

It was this hatch or nothing. He thought it was the right one, but
couldn't be sure. He could no longer see. His vision had gone
completely. The pain was a numb thing now, far away, hardly a part of
himself. Maybe Mayhem was absorbing the pain-sensation for him, he
thought. Maybe Mayhem took the pain and suffered with it in the shared
body so he, Larry, could still think. Maybe--

His blistered fingers were barely able to move within the insulined
gloves, Larry fumbled with the hatch.

       *       *       *       *       *

Ackerman Boone whirled suddenly. He had been intent upon the
companionway door and the sounds behind him--which he had heard but not
registered as dangerous for several seconds--now made him turn.

The man was peeling off a space suit. Literally peeling it off in strips
from his lobster-red flesh. He blinked at Boone without seeing him.
Dazzle-blinded, Boone thought, then realized his own vision was going.

"I'll kill you if you go near that subspace drive!" Boone screamed.

"It's the only chance for all of us and you know it, Boone," the man
said quietly. "Don't try to stop me."

Ackerman Boone lifted his N-gun and squinted through the haze of heat
and blinding light. He couldn't see! He couldn't see....

Wildly, he fired the N-gun. Wildly, in all directions, spraying the room
with it--

Larry dropped blindly forward. Twice he tripped over unconscious men,
but climbed to his feet and went on. He could not see Boone, but he
could see--vaguely--the muzzle flash of Boone's N-gun. He staggered
across the room toward that muzzle-flash and finally embraced it--

And found himself fighting for his life. Boone was crazed now--with the
heat and with his own failure. He bit and tore at Larry with strong
claw-like fingers and lashed out with his feet. He balled his fists and
hammered air like a windmill, arms flailing, striking flesh often enough
to batter Larry toward the floor.

Grimly Larry clung to him, pulled himself upright, ducked his head
against his chest and struck out with his own fists, feeling nothing,
not knowing when they landed and when they did not, hearing nothing but
a far off roaring in his ears, a roaring which told him he was losing
consciousness and had to act--soon--if he was going to save anyone....

He stood and pounded with his fists.

Pounded--air.

He did not know that Boone had collapsed until his feet trod on the
man's inert body and then, quickly, he rushed toward the control board,
rushed blindly in its direction, or in the direction he thought it would
be, tripped over something, sprawled on the hot, blistering floor, got
himself up somehow, crawled forward, pulled himself upright....

There was no sensation in his fingers. He did not know if he had
actually reached the control board but abruptly he realized that he had
not felt Mayhem's presence in his mind for several minutes. Was Mayhem
conserving his energy for a final try, letting Larry absorb the
punishment now so he--

Yes, Larry remembered thinking vaguely. It had to be that. For Mayhem
knew how to work the controls, and he did not. Now his mind receded into
a fog of semi-consciousness, but he was aware that his blistered fingers
were fairly flying across the control board, aware then of an inward
sigh--whether of relief or triumph, he was never to know--then aware,
abruptly and terribly, of a wrenching pain which seemed to strip his
skin from his flesh, his flesh from his bones, the marrow from....

       *       *       *       *       *

"Can you see?" the doctor asked.

"Yes," Larry said as the bandages were removed from his eyes. Three
people were in the room with the doctor--Admiral Stapleton, the
President--and Sheila. Somehow, Sheila was most important.

"We are now in subspace, thanks to you," the Admiral said. "We all have
minor injuries as a result of the transfer, but there were only two
fatalities, I'm happy to say. And naturally, the ship is now out of
danger."

"What gets me, Grange," the President said, "is how you managed to work
those controls. What the devil do you know about sub-space, my boy?"

"The two fatalities," the Admiral said, "were Ackerman Boone and the man
he had killed." Then the Admiral grinned. "Can't you see, Mr. President,
that he's not paying any attention to us? I think, at the moment, the
hero of the hour only has eyes for Miss Kelly here."

"Begging your pardons, sirs, yes," Larry said happily.

Nodding and smiling, the President of the Galactic Federation and
Admiral Stapleton left the dispensary room--with the doctor.

"Well, hero," Sheila said, and smiled.

Larry realized--quite suddenly--that, inside himself, he was alone.
Mayhem had done his job--and vanished utterly.

"You know," Sheila said, "it's as if you--well, I hope this doesn't get
you sore at me--as if you grew up overnight."

Before he kissed her Larry said: "Maybe you're right. Maybe I'll tell
you about it someday. But you'd never believe me."




THE END


  Transcriber's Note: A few typographical errors have been repaired.
      cornea CHANGED TO corona (2 places)
      The squack box blared: CHANGED TO The squawk box blared:
      _bead_ on his elan CHANGED TO bead on his _elan_
      liason CHANGED TO liaison (1 place)






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of A Place in the Sun, by C.H. Thames

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A PLACE IN THE SUN ***

***** This file should be named 26966-8.txt or 26966-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/6/9/6/26966/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Barbara Tozier and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
