The Project Gutenberg EBook of Summer Snow Storm, by Adam Chase

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Summer Snow Storm

Author: Adam Chase

Illustrator: Llewellyn

Release Date: October 19, 2008 [EBook #26968]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SUMMER SNOW STORM ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









 SUMMER
     SNOW STORM

 By ADAM CHASE


    _Snow in summer is of course impossible. Any weather expert will
    tell you so. Weather Bureau Chief Botts was certain no such
    absurdity could occur. And he would have been right except for one
    thing. It snowed that summer._


It was, as the expression goes, raining cats and dogs. Since the Weather
Bureau had predicted fair and warmer, the Weather Bureau was not
particularly happy about the meteorological state of affairs. No one,
however was shocked.

Until it started to snow.

This was on the twenty-fifth of July in the U.S.A....

Half an hour before the fantastic meteorological turn of events, Bureau
Chief Botts dangled the forecast sheet before Johnny Sloman's bloodshot
eyes and barked, "It's all over the country by now, you dunderhead!"
Then, as an afterthought: "Did you write this?"

"Yes," said Sloman miserably.

Slowly, Botts said, "Temperature, eighty degrees. Precipitation
expected: snow. _Snow_, Sloman. Well, that's what it says."

"It was a mistake, Chief. Just--heh-heh--a mistake."

"The prediction should have been for fair and warmer!" Botts screamed.

"But it's raining," Sloman pointed out.

"We make mistakes," said Botts in a suddenly velvety voice. Then, as if
_that_ had been a mistake, bellowed: "But not this kind of mistake,
Sloman! Snow in July! We have a reputation to maintain! If not for
accuracy, at least for credulity."

"Yes, sir," said Johnny Sloman. One of the troubles was, he had a
hangover. Although, actually, that was a consequence of the real
trouble. The real trouble was his fiancee. Make that his ex-fiancee.
Because last night Jo-Anne had left him. "You--you're just going no
place at all, Johnny Sloman," she had said. "You're on a treadmill
and--not even running very fast." She had given him back the
quarter-carat ring tearfully, but Johnny hadn't argued. Jo-Anne had a
stubborn streak and he knew when Jo-Anne's mind was made up. So Johnny
had gone and gotten drunk for the first time since the night after
college graduation, not too many years ago, and the result was a
nationally-distributed forecast of snow.

Chief Botts' first flush of anger had now been replaced by self-pity.
His red, loose-jowled face was sagging and his eyes became watery as he
said, "At least you could have double-checked it. As a member of this
Bureau you only have to fill out the forecast once every ten days. Is
that so hard? Is there any reason why you should predict snow for July
25th?" His voice became silky soft as he added, "You realize, of course,
Sloman, that if this was anything but a civil service job you'd be out
on your ear for a stunt like this! Well, there are other ways. I can
pass over you for promotion. I _intend_ to pass over you until the
crack of doom. You'll be a GS-5 the rest of your working life. Are you
satisfied, Sloman? Snow in July ..." Chief Botts' voice trailed off, the
Chief following it.

Johnny sat with his head in his hands until Harry Bettis, the GS-5
weatherman who shared his small office with him, came in. Naturally,
hangover or no, Johnny had reported for work first. Johnny was always
first in the office, but it didn't seem to do any good. Now, Harry
Bettis could come in an hour late and read the funnies half the day and
flirt with the secretarial staff the other half and still be Chief
Botts' odds-on favorite for the promotion that was opening next month.
Harry Bettis was like that.

He came in and gave Johnny the full treatment. First the slow spreading
smile. Then the chuckle. Then the loud, roaring belly-laugh. "Gals
outside told me!" he shouted, loud enough so the girls outside would
know he knew they had told him. "Snow! Snow in July! Sloman, you kill
me! You really do!"

"Do you have to shout?" Johnny said.

"Do I? We all ought to shout this. To the rooftops! Sloman, my foot.
You have a new name, sonny. Snowman! Johnny Snowman."

[Illustration: Thick mud held him while terror ravened at his heels.]

Johnny groaned. Instinctively, he knew the name would stick.

"Hear you had a little trouble with the gal-friend this past p.m.,"
Harry Bettis clucked in a voice which managed to be both derisive and
sympathetic.

"How did you find out?" Johnny asked, but knew the answer at once.
Jo-Anne was a roommate of one of the Bureau Secretaries. It was how
Johnny had met her.

"You know how I found out, Snowman. Well, that's tough luck, kiddo. But
tell me, does that mean the field is wide open? I always thought your
gal-friend--your _ex_-gal-friend--had the cutest pair of--"

"I have nothing to do with whether the field is open or not open, I'm
afraid."

"Well, don't be. Afraid, I mean," Harry Bettis advised jovially. "If the
gal could make you pull a boner like that, you're better off without
her. But I forgot to ask Maxine: can I have little Jo-Anne's phone
number? Huh, boy?"

Before Johnny could answer, the three-girl staff of secretaries entered
the small office. Entered--and stared.

"That's all right, girls," Harry Bettis said. "You didn't have to follow
me in here. I'd have been right out."

But they weren't staring at Harry Bettis. They were staring at Johnny.
Their mouths had flapped open, their eyes were big and round. Johnny
didn't, but Harry Bettis knew that look on a girl's face. Without any
trouble at all, Johnny could have made any of those girls, right there,
right then, without even trying.

They gawked and gawked. One of them pointed at the window. The others
tried to, but their hands were trembling.

The one who was pointing squawked: "Look!"

The second one said, "Out the window!"

The third one said, "Will you!"

Outside the window on the twenty-fifth of July it was snowing.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was an hour later. Telephones were ringing. Long-distance calls from
all over the country now that the ticker had gone out with the
incredible fact that it was snowing in the Northeast in July. Most of
the calls, though, were from Washington. Chief Botts disconnected the
PBX and walked in a dazed, staggering fashion to Johnny, smiling weakly
and saying:

"Sloman, I misjudged you. Genius, right here, right now, in this office,
and we never knew it. Sloman, I have to admit I was wrong about you. But
how did you know? How did you ever know?"

"Hell's bells," Harry Bettis said before Johnny could say it was all a
mistake. "That's easy, Chief. Anyone knows that _all_ rain starts out as
snow. It's got to. You see, the droplets of moisture in the cold upper
regions of a cloud condense around dust particles because the air up
there is too cold to hold them as vapor. Since it's below freezing, snow
is formed--snow which warms up as it passes through hotter air en route
to the ground, and--"

"That will be quite enough, Bettis," Chief Botts said. "I am a
weatherman too, you know. You don't have to tell me the most elementary
of--"

"In this case, Chief," Bettis persisted, "the biggest inversion layer
you ever saw kept the surface air down and brought the cold upper air
very close to the surface. Result: the snowflakes didn't have a chance
to melt, not even to freezing rain. Result: snow!"

"The chances of that happening," said Chief Botts coldly, "are about one
in a billion. Aren't they, Sloman, dear fellow?"

"One in two billion," Johnny said.

"He _is_ modest," Chief Botts told the staff. "He seems so unconcerned."

Just then Maxine came into the little office. The look of awe on her
face had been replaced by one of sheer amazement. "Well, I checked it,
Chief," she said. "Wait until I tell Jo-Anne!"

"Won't you please tell us first?" Chief Botts asked.

"Yes, sir," said Maxine, and read from the memo pad in her hand. "Since
coming to work for the Bureau, Johnny Sloman has once every ten days
made our official forecast. I have checked back on his forecast, Chief,
as you directed. Johnny has made fifty-five forecasts. While only one of
them--startlingly--has called for snow in July--every single one of them
has been right."

There was a shocked silence. "But--but the Weather Bureau average is
only eighty-eight percent!" Harry Bettis gasped.

"You mean," Chief Botts corrected him, "eighty-eight percent is the
figure we try to foist on the unsuspecting public. Actually, the Weather
Bureau averages a bare seventy-five percent, and you know it."

"But Sloman's got a hundred percent accuracy--up to and including snow
in July," Harry Bettis said in a shocked voice.

"It was only an accident," Johnny said in a mild voice. "I didn't mean
to write snow."

"Accident, smaccident," said Harry Bettis. "It was no accident with a
record like that. You have the uncanny ability to forecast weather with
complete accuracy, Johnny-boy. You realize what that means, old pal?"

"I'd better call Washington and tell them," Chief Botts said, but Harry
Bettis held his arm while Johnny mused:

"I guess I realize what it means, Harry. That is, if you're right. No
more getting wet on picnics. Because I'd know. I'd know, Harry. No more
going to ball games and having them rained out on you. No more being
caught by a thunderstorm at the beach ..."

"Johnny!" Harry Bettis said. "Think, pal. Think!"

"I'm calling Washington," Chief Botts said. "This is too much for me."

But Harry Bettis was still holding his arm. "Now, just a minute, bucko,"
he said. "You're not calling anyone--not without his manager's
permission."

"Whose manager's permission?"

"Why, Mr. Sloman's manager's permission, of course. In a word, me."

"This is preposterous!" Chief Botts cried.

"Is it?" Bettis asked. "Listen, Johnny, don't let anyone sell you a bill
of goods--like the Civil Service Commission giving you a GS-8 rating and
sending you to Washington. Because stick with me, kid, and there'll be
great things in store for you, you'll see."

"Such," said Maxine dubiously, "as what?"

"Are you on our side?" Harry Bettis asked her suspiciously.

"I'm on Jo-Anne's side. If old Johnny here has something she ought to
have, I want to know it."

       *       *       *       *       *

"You mean, if she ought to change her mind and marry him? I'll admit it
even if I think Jo-Anne's a real cute trick: she'd be nuts if she
didn't." Women, Harry Bettis did not add, never came between Harry
Bettis and ten percent of a gold mine. But that's what he was thinking.
He went on: "Just think of it, Johnny. Drought in the Midwest. They call
Sloman. Sloman predicts rain. It rains. Have any idea what they'd pay
for a stunt like that? Or swollen rivers in New England, or California.
Looks like another big flood is on the way, but they call Sloman. Looks
like rain, kiddo? That don't matter. Predict a dry spell and it won't
rain. Do you know," Harry Bettis said in a devout whisper, "what a stunt
like that would be worth? Millions."

"Yeah, wise guy," said Maxine. "So what's in it for you?"

Harry Bettis did not look at Maxine when he answered. He looked at
Johnny and said, "I'll be frank, kiddo. You have the talent, but you
don't have the salesmanship to promote it. Do you want a mediocre job
while the weather boys exploit you for the rest of your life or--do you
want greatness, riches, and Jo-Anne?"

"Jo-Anne," Johnny said.

Harry Bettis nodded. "My price is twenty-five percent."

"Of Jo-Anne?" Maxine asked suspiciously.

"Of everything Johnny makes as the world's first _real_ Weather Man. Not
a forecaster--a commander. Because when my client forecasts the weather,
it happens. Brothers and sisters, it happens." He turned abruptly to
Johnny, said, "You have any money saved up?"

"A few hundred dollars, but--"

"An ad in the papers. Alongside the article telling how it snowed on
July twenty-fifth. Saying that your services are for hire. We're a
shoo-in, kid!"

"Well, if you say so," Johnny said doubtfully.

"So don't call D.C.," Bettis told Chief Botts.

"But Sloman's an employee of this Bureau."

"Was, you mean."

"What did you say?"

"Was an employee. He ain't an employee now. He's quitting--with his
manager," said Harry Bettis, and walked out of the office, steering a
dazed Johnny Sloman with him.

"Wait until I call Jo-Anne," Maxine said.

During the next six months, Johnny Sloman--known to the world as The
Weather Man--made fifty million dollars. Since it had taken a whole
lifetime for him to develop his remarkable talent, his lawyers were
trying to have capital gains declared on the earnings rather than
straight income tax. The odds seemed to be in their favor.

How had Johnny made his fifty million dollars? By predicting the
weather. He predicted:

A flood in the Texas panhandle--in time to save the dry lands from going
entirely arid.

An end of the snowstorms in northern Canada--which had trapped the five
hundred residents of a small uranium-mining town without food or
adequate drinking water.

The break-up of Hurricane Anita--which had threatened to be the most
destructive ever to strike the Carolina Coast.

No frost for Florida that winter--a prediction still to be ascertained,
but a foregone conclusion.

Every prediction had come true. In time, the world began to realize that
his predictions were not predictions at all: they were sure things. That
is, they predicted nothing--they _made_ things happen. Johnny was in
demand everywhere and naturally could not fill all engagements. Harry
Bettis hired a whole squad of corresponding secretaries, whose job it
was to turn down, with regret, some ninety percent of the jobs
requested. Johnny, in fact, was in such demand, that his engagement to
Jo-Anne--which, of course, had been reinstated at her insistence--remained
only an engagement. The nuptials were put off, and put off again.

This suited Harry Bettis, who saw to it that Johnny kept putting off the
marriage. Because, ultimately, Jo-Anne would reach the end of her
proverbial tether and decide that Harry's twenty-five percent, if it
could be shared as a wife, was better than Johnny's seventy-five
percent, if it could not.

Jo-Anne, though, was not that kind of girl. Harry Bettis, knowing no
other kind of girl, never understood that.

The scientists, meanwhile, had a field day with Johnny. His strange
talent obeyed no natural law, they said, and at first attributed it to
random chance. Soon, though, this became patently impossible. And so a
new natural law was sought. All types of hair-brained theories were
proposed, none of them accepted, until an osteopathic physician in
Duluth, Minn., hit upon the theory that staggered the world with its
simplicity and, eventually, was accepted as that which explained the
strange phenomenon of Johnny Sloman.

The osteopath, many of whose patients suffered from rheumatism which was
aggravated by the bitter Minnesota winters, suggested that Johnny Sloman
was a case of rheumatism in reverse. The weather, he pointed out, had an
adverse effect upon the symptoms of his patients. Conversely, why
couldn't some human being--a Johnny Sloman, for example--affect the
weather in precisely the same way that the weather invariably affected
his rheumatic patients?

It was clear, simple, lucid. It was the only theory which could not be
disproven by the weight of scientific knowledge. It thus became the
accepted theory.

       *       *       *       *       *

"The Under-Secretary of Defense to see you," Maxine said one day during
the winter following Johnny's July snowfall.

"Don't see him," Harry Bettis said. "You don't want to see him."

"But why not?" Johnny asked.

"Because they'll make you a dollar-a-year man and we're not in this to
make any stinking dollar a year," Harry Bettis said.

"Well, I think I ought to see him, anyway. At least see him." He turned
to Jo-Anne, who was sitting at the next desk, writing up some reports.
"What do you think, Jo?"

"If the country needs you, Johnny," she said, "it's your duty to help."

Johnny told Maxine, "Show the Under-Secretary in, please."

He was a small man with a big brief case. He spoke slowly, earnestly,
backing up his statements with reams of paper from the brief case. The
Defense Department had not contacted Johnny right away, he said, because
they wanted to compile all the facts. They had all the facts now.

Johnny Sloman could be the biggest single factor for peace the world had
ever known.

Item. In the event of aggression, he could so bog down the aggressor's
supply lines and troop movements with continuous rains and snowstorms
that it would be all but impossible for the aggressor to maintain
hostilities.

Item. In the event that such tactical weather-war failed, he could cause
a drought in the aggressor's food-producing regions, forcing the
aggressor to surrender or face starvation.

Item. He could always, conversely, see to it that the defensive force's
supply lines were never hampered by the weather and that the
precipitation over the defensive country's breadbasket was ideal.

Item. He could render aggressor communication difficult with heavy fog
and/or icy roads.

Item. He could cover defensive troop movements with low, dense clouds.

In short, concluded the Under-Secretary, Johnny Sloman could be a
one-man world police-force practically guaranteeing peace. He stopped
talking. He looked at Johnny. His eyes said, the call of duty is clear.

Harry Bettis said, "Well, thank you for your time, Mr. Secretary.
Naturally, we'll think about what you said."

"Think about it!" gasped the Under-Secretary. "Think about it!"

"My client is a busy man--the busiest man in his field," Harry Bettis
said.

The Under-Secretary smiled bleakly. "The only man in his field, you
mean. That's why we need him."

"We'll send you a report in a few weeks," Harry said indifferently,
"after we've had an opportunity to study the situation."

"But, Harry--" Johnny began.

"Johnny," Harry said. He did not have to finish the statement. It had
happened before--"Johnny, I've made you a tremendous success. I'm your
manager, aren't I? Let's leave it that way."

"If Johnny thinks he ought to help--" Jo-Anne said.

"Now, Jo-Anne," Harry Bettis scolded, and led the Under-Secretary to the
door.

       *       *       *       *       *

Three days later, the assistant chief of the F.B.I. came to see them.
"We regret this, Sloman," he said.

"You regret what?" Harry Bettis asked.

"Defense allowed a report on its findings out. That was unwise. We'll
have to give you around-the-clock protection, Sloman."

"Protection from what?" Johnny wanted to know.

"Enemy agents. The enemy is desperate. At all costs, according to their
intelligence reports, they're out to get you."

"Get him?" said Harry Bettis. "You mean, kill him?"

"I mean, get him. Get him on their side. Because everything Johnny could
do for the forces of peace and democracy, he could be made to do for
the forces of aggression. You see?"

"Yes," said Johnny.

"No," said Harry Bettis. "This sounds like a government trick--to make
Johnny go to work. To make him think it's his patriotic duty--"

"Well," said Jo-Anne sharply, "isn't it?"

Harry Bettis smiled. "When he gets as big as Universal Motors, he can
become patriotic."

"Mr. Sloman," the assistant F.B.I. chief said, "they will either try to
kidnap you outright, or work on you through someone you love. Therefore,
our bodyguards--"

"Well, let them keep their distance, that's all," Bettis said. "Bad for
business. Nobody wants enemy agents hanging around."

"That's your final decision?" the F.B.I. man asked.

"Well--" began Johnny.

"Yes, it's our final decision," said Harry Bettis, showing the F.B.I.
man to the door.

"I don't think you should have done that," Johnny said after he had
gone.

"You just make the weather, Johnny-boy. I'll take care of business."

"Well--" said Johnny.

"Johnny!" cried Jo-Anne. "Oh, Johnny! Why don't you act like a man?" And
she ran from the room, slamming the door.

After that, Johnny didn't see her again.

She was gone.

Really gone, for certain, not simply walking off in a huff.

Two weeks later, Johnny got the letter--unofficial--from the Enemy.

       *       *       *       *       *

The F.B.I. was sympathetic, but the Chief said, "You can understand, Mr.
Sloman, how our hands are tied. It is not an official letter. We can't
prove anything. We don't doubt it for a minute, of course. The cold war
enemy has kidnapped your fiancee and taken her to their motherland.
But--we can't prove it. Not being able to prove it, we can't do a thing
about it. You're aware, of course, of how readily the rest of the world
condemns our actions. Not that they wouldn't be on our side if we could
prove that this kidnap letter was the real thing, but you realize we
won't be able to prove it at all."

"Oh," said Johnny. He went home. He saw Harry Bettis, who said he was
shocked. The note read:

    Mr. Johnny Sloman:

    We have Miss Jo-Anne Davis here in the motherland. The only way she
    can live a normal life here is if you join her and work for us. We
    believe you know what the other kind of life is like here.

Bettis said, "It stumps the hell out of me, Johnny."

"I'm just waking up," said Johnny slowly. "In a way, it's your fault."

"Now, don't be a jackass, Johnny."

Jackass or no, Johnny hit him. His knuckles went crunch and Harry
Bettis' nose went crunch and Bettis fell down. He lay there, his nose
not looking so good.

Now, when it was apparently too late, Johnny knew what his course of
action should have been. Get rid of the money-grubbing Bettis. Go to
work for the government unselfishly. Insure world peace.

Too late ... too late ...

Because unless he could somehow save Jo-Anne, he would never predict the
weather again--for anyone.

       *       *       *       *       *

"But what you ask is impossible!" the Secretary of Defense said a few
days later.

"If I come back, if I'm successful," Johnny said quietly, "I'm your
man, for as long as you want me, without pay."

"You mean that?" the Secretary asked slowly.

"I mean it."

The Secretary nodded grimly, touched a button on his desk. "Get me Air
Force Chief of Staff Burns," he said, and, a moment later: "Bernie?
Chuck here. We need a plane. A jet-transport to go you-know-where.
Cargo? One man, in a parachute. Can you manage it? Immediately, if not
sooner. Good boy, Bernie. No ... no, I'm sorry, I can't tell you a thing
about it." The Secretary cut the connection, turned to Johnny:

"You leave this afternoon, Sloman. You realize, of course, there isn't a
thing we can do to get you out. Not a thing."

"Yes," said Johnny.

"You're a very brave man, or very much in love."

Hours later, the jet transport took off with Johnny in it.

He came down near what had been the border of the motherland and Poland.
He began to walk. A farmer and his son spotted the parachute, came after
him. The son was a Red Army man on leave. The son had a gun. He fired
prematurely, and Johnny ran. It was hopeless, he decided. He would
never make it. He would never even reach the capital alive, where they
were holding Jo-Anne.

He ran.

He wished for rain. A blinding rainstorm. The clouds scudded in. The
rain fell in buckets. The farmer and his son soon lost sight of Johnny.

Just to make sure, Johnny ran and let it go on raining.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Floods in their motherland," the Secretary of Defense told the
President. "Naturally, their news broadcasts are trying to keep the
reports to a minimum, but these are the biggest floods we've ever heard
of over there."

"Our man is there?" the President asked.

"He was dropped by parachute, sir!"

       *       *       *       *       *

It was snowing when Johnny reached the capital. He had been parachuted
into the enemy's motherland, naturally, because propinquity alone
assured the success of his strange talent.

He was tired. His feet ached. He'd been the only one heading for the
capital. Hundreds of thousands had been fleeing from the floods ...

"There he is!" a voice cried in the enemy language. He didn't understand
the language, but he understood the tone. His picture had been flashed
across the length and breadth of the motherland. He had been spotted.

He ran. Down an alley, across a muddy yard, floundering to his knees,
then his thighs, in thick mud. They came floundering in pursuit. They
fired a warning volley of shots. He stumbled and fell face down in the
black, stinking mud.

They took him ...

       *       *       *       *       *

Dark room. One light, on his face. A voice: "We can kill you."

"Kill me," he said. "My last wish will be for rain. Rain, forever."

"We can torture you."

"And I will say, before you start, let it rain and go on raining. Let me
be powerless to prevent it. Rain!"

"We can kill the girl."

"Your country will float away."

A fist came at him out of the darkness. Hit him. It was tentative
torture. He sobbed and thought: rain, harder. Rain, rain, rain ...

Water seeped into the dungeon. This had never happened before. The fist
went away.

Outside it rained and rained.

       *       *       *       *       *

"What does he want, comrade?"

"We don't know, comrade."

"Give it to him--whatever it is. He has disrupted our entire economy. We
face economic disaster unless he--and his rain--leave us in peace."

"Perhaps that is what he wants. Peace."

"You fool! We are supposed to want peace. Shut up!"

"Yes, sir. Comrade."

"Better ask the party secretary."

"Yes, comrade."

The party secretary was asked. The party secretary sighed and nodded.

Johnny saw the light of day. And Jo-Anne.

       *       *       *       *       *

A month later, the Secretary of Defense told him. "Thanks to you, they
agreed to a German settlement, stopped sending arms to their Red ally in
Asia, withdrew their promise of aid to the Arab fanatics, and have
freed all foreigners held in their motherland illegally."

Johnny listened, smiling at Jo-Anne. They had been married two weeks.
Naturally, the enemy had been only too glad to see them leave.

"Just stay available, Sloman," the President beamed from alongside the
Secretary of Defense. "As long as they know we can always send you over
there again, they'll never try anything. Right?"

"Yes, sir," said Johnny.

They called him the Weather Man. They went on calling him the Weather
Man, although he retired more or less--except during cases of dire
emergency.

The world called him that, the Weather Man. And, because he had retired
to enjoy life with his new wife, they began to suspect, as could be
expected, that he had been a fraud.

But the enemy did not think so. Ever again.

And that was enough for Johnny.


THE END




Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from _Amazing Stories_ October 1956.
    Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed. Minor spelling and
    typographical errors have been corrected without note.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Summer Snow Storm, by Adam Chase

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SUMMER SNOW STORM ***

***** This file should be named 26968.txt or 26968.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/6/9/6/26968/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
