The Project Gutenberg EBook of Master of None, by Lloyd Neil Goble

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Master of None

Author: Lloyd Neil Goble

Release Date: December 2, 2008 [EBook #27383]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MASTER OF NONE ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Dave Lovelace, Stephen Blundell
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net









[Illustration]


MASTER OF NONE

BY NEIL GOBLE


    The advantages of specialization are so obvious that, today, we
    don't even know how to recognize a competent syncretist!


Freddy the Fish glanced at the folded newspaper beside him on the bench.
A little one-column headline caught his eye:

    MYSTERIOUS SIGNALS
     FROM OUTER SPACE

"Probably from Cygnus," he said.

Freddy mashed a peanut, popped the meat into his mouth, and tossed the
shell to the curb in front of his bench. He munched and idly watched two
sparrows arguing over the discarded delicacy; the victor flitted to the
head of a statue, let go a triumphant dropping onto the marble nose, and
hopped to a nearby branch.

"Serves him right," Freddy said. He yawned and rubbed the stubble on his
chin. Not yet long enough for scissors, he decided. He pulled his feet
up on the bench, twisting in an effort to get comfortable. The sun was
in his eyes, so he reclaimed the discarded newspaper and spread it over
his face. His eyes momentarily focused on MYSTERIOUS SIGNALS FROM OUTER
SPACE, right over his nose.

"Sure, Cygnus," he muttered, and closed his eyes and dropped off to
sleep.

When he was awakened, it was by an excited hand shaking his shoulder and
a panting, "Freddy! Freddy! Lookit the Extra just came out!"

Freddy slowly sat up, ascertained the identity of the intruder and the
fact that the sun was setting, and said, "Good evening, Willy. Please
stop rattling that paper in my face."

"But just read it, Freddy," Willy shrieked, waving the paper so
frantically that Freddy couldn't make out the big black headline.
"'Positive contact from another planet,' the guy was yellin'. They put
out an Extra so I snitched one from the boy. Read it to me, huh, Freddy?
I'm dyin' o' curious."

"So give it here and I'll read it for you. Quit shakin' it or you'll
tear it all up," Freddy snorted.

"Read it to me, huh, Freddy," Willy said, handing over the paper. "I
don't know no one else that reads so good."

Freddy studied the headline and the first paragraph silently, then
whistled lightly and lowered the paper.

"Y'know, Willy," he said, "the last thing I read before I dropped off a
while ago was about these signals. But the funny thing is, I'd just
assumed they were from Cygnus."

"What's a Cygnus, Freddy?" Willy asked, still pop-eyed. "A smoke? A
dame? Or you mean like from Hunger?"

"Cygnus, my boy," Freddy explained patronizingly, "is a constellation
within which there are two colliding galaxies. These colliding galaxies
produce the most powerful electromagnetic radiations in the universe--an
undecillion watts!"

"What's an undecillion?"

"An undecillion is ten raised to the 36th power," Freddy sighed, fearing
that he wasn't getting through to Willy.

"No foolin'? What's a watt ... aw, you're pullin' my leg again, Freddy,
talkin' riddles. Where'd ya ever learn to talk that way anyhow!"

"Harvard, Yale, Princeton, Oxford, Georgia Tech, Oklahoma. Picked up a
little here, a little there," Freddy said, reflecting on his
indiscriminate past.

"Aw, cut it out, Freddy! C'mon, read it to me. Betcha can't! Where'd ya
say it was from? Cygnus?"

"Not Cygnus. Ganymede." Freddy cleared his throat and rattled the
newspaper authoritatively. "Washington: White House sources declared
today that intelligent beings on a Jupiter moon have contacted the
United States government. While the contents of the message have been
made secret, the White House emphasized the message was friendly."

Freddy continued, "The signals, which were intercepted yesterday, were
decoded this morning by a team of government scientists and
cryptographers who had been at the task all night. While officials were
noncommittal about the nature of the message contained in the signals,
they declared, 'We are authorized to state that the received message was
friendly and appears to represent a sincere attempt by another race of
intelligent beings to contact the people of Earth. A reply message is
being formulated.' Officials further explained that the possibility of
the signal's being a hoax has been thoroughly investigated and that
there is no doubt whatsoever that the message is a genuine interspatial
communication from intelligent beings on Ganymede. Ganymede is one of
twelve moons of the planet Jupiter, and is larger than the planet
Mercury."

Freddy stopped.

"Ain't there any more?" Willy whined.

"The rest of it is about how far away Ganymede is, and its relative
density and mass and stuff. You wouldn't be interested, Willy."

"Oh. I guess not." Willy helped himself to a peanut. "What's it mean,
Freddy?"

"Nothing much, Willy. Just that there's people somewhere besides here on
Earth, and they called us on the phone."

"Whadd'ya know about that!" Willy gasped. "I didn't even know they was
other people!" He stared with disbelief at the paper.

"I don't suppose anyone knew."

"How d'ya suppose they knew?" Willy asked. "I mean, that we was here, if
we didn't know they was there?"

"I've been wondering about that, Willy. You know that last rocket we
shot?"

"From Cape Carnival you mean?"

"Yeh. It was supposed to go into orbit around Jupiter. I wouldn't be
surprised if maybe it didn't land on Ganymede; the people there could
have examined it, figured out where it came from, and then radioed us on
the same frequency the rocket transmitter used. Paper doesn't say that,
of course, but it's a reasonable hypothesis."

"Freddy, I think you must be a genius or sumpin'."

Freddy smiled and stretched out to sleep again as Willy wandered off,
staring blankly at the newspaper.

       *       *       *       *       *

Carlton Jones, America's Number One personnel specialist, scowled at the
pamphlet on his desk.

SECRET, it said in big red letters across the top and bottom. Special
Instructions for Operation Space Case, said the smaller letters across
the middle of the top sheet.

"Now I ask you, Dwindle," Jones said to his clerkish aide, "where, in
this worldful of specialists, am I going to find someone with a
well-rounded education? Much less one who'll take a chance on a flier
like this?"

"Gosh, Mr. Jones, I just wouldn't know," Dwindle blinked. "Have you
tried looking through your files?"

"Have I tried looking through my files," Jones sighed, looking at the
ceiling light. "Dwindle, my files include every gainfully employed
person in the United States of America and its possessions. Millions of
them. One doesn't just browse through the files looking for things."

"Oh," Dwindle said. "I'm kinda new at this specialty," he explained.

"Yes, Dwindle. However," Jones continued, "one does make IBM runouts to
find things."

"Hey, that's great!" Dwindle said, brightening. "Why don't you try
making an IBM runout?"

"I did, Dwindle. Please let me finish? Our instructions call for finding
a person with a well-rounded education. More specifically, a person who
is capable of intelligently discussing and explaining some two dozen
major 'fields of knowledge.' Plus, of course, at least a passing
acquaintance with some one or two hundred minor fields of knowledge.

"So I set Mathematics into the IBM sorter. Mathematics is one of the
major fields of knowledge, you see."

"Yeh," Dwindle acknowledged.

"So I took the few million mathematicians' cards which I got--good
mathematicians and bad mathematicians, but at least people who can get
their decimals in the right place. I set the IBM sorter for Biology, and
ran the mathematicians' cards through. So I got several thousand
mathematician-biologists."

"That's pretty sharp!" Dwindle exclaimed with a twinkle. "Whoever
thought of that!"

"Please, Dwindle," Jones moaned, pressing his palms to his eyes. "Next I
sorted according to Geology. Three hundred cards came through. Three
hundred people in America who know their math, biology and geology!"

"That doesn't sound like so many to me," Dwindle said hesitantly, as if
wondering what there was to get so excited about.

"And of those three hundred, do you know how many understand, even
vaguely, Electronics? Twelve. And of those twelve, guess how many have
an adequate background in History and Anthropology? Much less an
understanding of eighteen other fields?"

"Not very many, I'll bet," Dwindle replied smartly.

"None! Not even one! I tried running the cards through in every order
imaginable. We've bred a race of specialists and there's not a truly
educated man among us!"

"Say, you know what I bet? Even if you did find a guy who's like what
all you said ..."

"Go ahead, Dwindle."

"... I bet he wouldn't even go up there to Ganymede. I sure wouldn't!
I'd be scared to death," Dwindle chattered, waving his finger. "How's he
gonna get back, even if he gets there O.K.? Couldn't anyone fool me with
a bunch of pretty talk; I know the government doesn't have a rocket that
could take off again after it got there. Gotta have launching pads and
computers and all that stuff. Government ever think about that?"

Jones held his head in anguish. "Dwindle, why don't you be a good boy
and run along to the snack bar for a coffee break? And bring me some
aspirin when you come back."

       *       *       *       *       *

Freddy the Fish, Willy and Oscar Fronk were occupying the same bench, a
comradeship made necessary by the overpopulation of the park on such a
glorious day. Oscar was surveying the passing girls and scouting for
worthwhile cigarette stubs. Willy was admiring a hovering beetle's power
of flight, and Freddy was reading a discarded copy of _Scientific
American_.

The beetle landed on Willy's sleeve and promptly located a gaping tear
in the fabric, through which bare arm showed. Willy raised his other
hand menacingly.

"Don't," Freddy barked, causing Willy to jump with enough force to
dislodge the beetle.

"Aw, Freddy," Willy whined, "why dintcha lemme kill it? What good's a
stupid bug?"

"That would have been a rather unfortunate kill, Willy, by your bare
hand on your bare arm. You must learn to be cognizant of our insect
friends and insect enemies."

"So what's he, poison or sumpin'?"

"Unpleasant, at least," Freddy said. "That was a blister beetle; smash
it on your arm and you'll grow a nice welt. A member of the Meloidae
family."

"You mean bugs have families and all, too?" Willy asked.

"Beetle 'families' are groupings of similar species of insects," Freddy
explained. "Not actually kinfolk. For instance, this beetle is related
to the Lytta vesicatoria of southern Europe, more commonly known as
the--" Freddy glanced out of the corner of his eye at Oscar, hoping to
shield the next bit of information from his perverted brain, and
whispered the name.

Willy's eyes widened. "Hey, Oscar," he hollered, jumping up. "You hear
what Freddy said? That bug I almost swatted's practically a Spanish
Fly!"

"Which way'd he go?" Oscar squeaked, allowing his collection of stubs to
scatter as he hopped around, looking on and under and behind the bench
for the escaping insect.

"Hold it, hold it," Freddy commanded, trying to restore order. "I said
it's like it, not IS it. It doesn't have what it takes, so skip it,
huh?"

Willy and Oscar sat down again. "Freddy," Willy sighed with adoration,
"how'd ya ever get so smart? I mean, bein' a bum and all?"

"I keep telling you guys; I went to nothing but the finest universities.
Well, except toward the end, when I was getting desperate, I guess I
wasn't so choosy."

"Aw, g'wan now, Freddy. Collitches cost money, and you're as poor as the
rest of us. Bummin' for a cuppa coffee, and all the time talking about
Yale, and Oxford, and Hah-vad."

"What would you say, Willy, if I told you that once I belonged to the
richest family in Mississippi?"

"I'd say Mississippi was a pretty poor state," Willy said, and Oscar
giggled.

"I once was Frederik Van Smelt, spoiled son of the wealthy shrimp and
oyster scion. And there's nothing as bad, my father said, as spoiled
Smelt. He disowned me, of course. I owned six Cadillacs--one right after
the other, I wrecked them all. I traveled all over the world and
probably counteracted a billion dollars' worth of foreign aid. I was
kicked out of the best schools in the world."

"How come if you're so smart you flunked out of all them schools?" Oscar
asked.

"Me? Flunked out? I never made less than an A in any course I took
during my eight years at war with college. I was expelled from nine
schools and barely escaped the highway patrol when I was bootlegging at
Oklahoma University!"

"Freddy," Willy said, "you're lyin' like a dog, butcha make it sound s'
real!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Jones squirmed uncomfortably in his seat in the briefing room, phrasing
and rephrasing his thoughts. It seemed that no matter which arrangement
of words he chose, it still was going to be obvious that he'd flopped.
He re-examined his fingernails and selected one which was still long
enough to chew.

General Marcher concluded his current appraisal of the situation and
began calling on the various individuals with whom certain phases of
OPERATION SPACE CASE had been entrusted. Jones groaned as each arose and
gave favorable progress reports.

"The pod is completed and has been tested, sir. It will by no means be
plush, but it will be sufficiently comfortable even for the long voyage
to Ganymede."

"The guidance system is perfected to the extent that we need."

"There are no further deceleration problems to be solved."

"The crash program has been approved for the two-way rocket; it is on
the drawing board and current estimates are that the envoy can be
brought back in three years."

"Ganymede has replied to our last message; a suitable artificial
environment will be available for the envoy."

"Personnel Specialist Jones?"

Carlton gave his chin a final sweaty rub and slowly rose to his feet.
"General Marcher, sir," he choked, "I'm ... we're ... experiencing a
little difficulty finding a volunteer, so far--"

"Negative perspiration on that count, Jones," the Project Officer
interrupted. "The draft has never been abolished; we can grab anyone you
put your finger on! Now, who will it be?"

"Sir, it doesn't seem to be that so much as ... well ... sir, has any
consideration been given to perhaps sending a delegation rather than a
single envoy?"

The general smiled broadly. "Now, that is more like it! I take it you
mean you have a number of equally-qualified persons who have expressed
an intense desire to go to Ganymede, and there is no way to impartially
select one of these men over the others? This is commendable. However,
our space limitation clearly precludes sending more than one person. I'm
afraid you will just have to make your choice from a hat."

Jones turned a trifle redder. "That's not exactly the problem, either,
sir."

The general's smile wilted and became a frozen frown. "Just exactly what
are you trying to say, Jones?"

"There's no one who can meet the qualifications, sir," Jones said,
feeling sick at his stomach.

"Are you telling me that in the entire United States, there is not one
person who has a basic understanding of the twenty-four major fields?"

"I'm afraid that's right, sir."

"See me after the briefing, Jones. I'm certain that the Foremost
Personnel Specialist in the United States must have some further ideas
on this matter."

Jones sank slowly back into his seat and covered his face with his
hands. "I'm a goner," he whispered to himself. "Jones, you can be
replaced."

Dwindle, sitting on his left, suddenly punched him vigorously in the
ribs. "Say, Mr. Jones," he rattled, "I just thought of a great idea."

"Tell it to the general," Jones moaned. "Maybe then he'll realize what a
handicap I've been working under."

       *       *       *       *       *

"Hi ya, Freddy," Willy said, sitting down on the bench and helping
himself to some peanuts. "Workin' a crossword puzzle?"

Freddy pocketed his pencil stub and laid aside the newspaper. "Naw, not
this time. Just playing around with one of those 'We're looking for
bright young men' ads."

"Freddy! Y'ain't thinkin' a gettin' a JOB?"

"Nothing like that," Freddy laughed. "Just, exercising my mind. Filling
out one of those little tests they always have. Helps keep a fella
sharp, you know."

"Yeh, I seen the kind. Like what has pictures and you're supposed to
find things wrong in the picture like dames with beards and dogs with
six feet?"

"Kinda like that, only this one's all written and is a little tougher.
You're supposed to send the answers in and whoever has good answers gets
to take a tougher test and whoever does good on that test gets the job.
Probably selling neckties on the corner or something."

"No kiddin'. That what it says?"

"Just says 'handsome rewards,' but that's probably close to it."

"You gonna send it in?" Willy asked.

"Naw, I just fill 'em out for fun, like I said. Can you imagine me
peddling neckties on the corner?"

"Then how d'ya know if you got the right answers?"

"Hell, I know the answers," Freddy bragged. "Like I said, this is just
exercise. Mental gymnastics. Like this last one; it was pretty tough
compared to most of them. Had some questions about things I hadn't even
thought about since college, things I'd forgotten I knew. What good's an
education if you forget what things you know?"

"That's why I never bothered," Willy agreed. "'Cause I never could
remember things so good."

"No, Willy. You've got it all wrong. I still know it, I just didn't know
I know it."

"Aw, Freddy," Willy said unhappily. "You're pullin' my leg again!"

"Suit yourself," Freddy smiled. "Hold down the bench for me, O.K.? I'll
be right back."

Willy watched Freddy until he went into the little brick building in the
center of the park, and then grabbed Freddy's newspaper and scampered
over to Oscar's bench.

"Hey, you know how Freddy's always talkin' big about how much he knows,"
Willy said breathlessly. "I got an idea how to call his bluff. He filled
out one of these tests and says he knows all the answers. Let's send
it in and see if he's as smart as he says!"

"Yeh! That's great, Willy!" Then Oscar's face darkened. "Wonder where we
can steal a stamp?"

       *       *       *       *       *

"That was a pretty good idea of mine, about advertising in the paper,
wasn't it, Mr. Jones?" Dwindle, America's Number One Personnel
Specialist, asked his surly assistant.

"Yes, Dwindle."

Jones stared gloomily out the fourteenth story window into the park,
where the local bums were loafing and sleeping and feeding peanuts to
the pigeons. He was nauseated with the prospect of having to address his
new boss as "Mr. Dwindle," and was toying with the idea of abandoning
his specialty completely to join the ranks of the happy, carefree
unemployed. He watched as two uniformed policemen approached one of the
less wholesome-appearing characters.

"No, I don't suppose I could tolerate being in and out of jail every
week on a vagrancy charge," he told himself. But then he smiled bitterly
as he thought of the strange parallel between the policemen arresting
the bum and other officials, elsewhere in the United States, tapping
respectable citizens on the shoulder at this very moment.

"Dwindle, do you really think it was wise to issue warrants to arrest
all those persons who scored perfect on the first test? How many did you
say there were?"

"Only a hundred or so," Dwindle smiled sweetly. "And besides, they're
not being arrested. General Marcher explained to you that they are being
drafted into the service of the government. Honestly, sometimes I think
you worry too much."

Jones turned back to the window, brooding over Dwindle's transformation.
"Maybe so," he sighed, watching the newly-arrested vagrant pointing an
accusing finger toward one of the other bums.

       *       *       *       *       *

Willy strained and twisted, trying to reclaim his arm from the
policeman's grip.

"Honest, you guys. I didn't know it was against the law. Aw, I figgered
it was against the rules mebbe to send in somebody else's answers, but
we wuz only makin' a joke, Oscar 'n' me. Oscar's the one who actual put
it in the mailbox and stole the stamp! I bet he's the one you're after!"

"Now calm down, Willy," the beefy policeman coaxed. "No one's broken any
law. Nobody's under arrest. We just want to chat a minute with whoever
it was filled out that test."

"Yeh, Willy," the second policeman broke in, "if you didn't do it, and I
believe you when you say you didn't, then who did?"

"What's it to ya?" Willy asked, his mouth twitching nervously.

The first policeman glanced at the second and then back at Willy. "Well,
it's like this, Willy," he said. "Whoever filled out those answers got
every one of them right. The people who run the contest want to meet
the guy, see? And they asked us to help find him because we know you
people better than anyone else does. See? That's all!"

"Yeh," said the second. "That's all. Now who did it?"

Willy stood with his jaw drooping for a moment. "You mean he got ever'
last one of 'em right?" he asked. "Freddy was always braggin' about his
brains, but me 'n' Oscar figgered he was makin' most of it up."

"Freddy who? Freddy the Fish you mean?"

"Yeh, Freddy." Willy perked up and turned toward Freddy's bench. "Hey,
Freddy! Hey, you know that test you took in the newspaper that you
didn't know I sent in? You won the contest or sumpin'! Hey, that's
great!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Jones and Dwindle watched the draftees file into the examination room.

"I still don't see how this is going to solve the problem," Jones
frowned.

"I believe it will," Dwindle contradicted him. "Specialists in each of
the major fields have been consulted, and each provided fifty
questions."

"The hardest questions they could think up, I imagine."

"No, not at all. The purpose is to provide comprehensive coverage of
each field. And each question is of the type that, if the examinee knows
the answer, it can be reasonably assumed that he knows quite a bit in
that particular phase of the field. For instance, if he knows what
enzyme is associated with the stomach, he probably knows what enzyme is
associated with the liver."

"I know one big problem you're going to run into," Jones sulked. "Just
like the IBM cards. You're going to find one guy who clobbers the
Electronics part of the test but completely busts out in History and
everything else."

"I don't think so," Dwindle said. "The preliminary test will have taken
care of that. It was designed so that, in order to answer every question
right, a person would have to have at least a rudimentary knowledge of
all twenty-four major fields."

As Jones was considering whether it would be better to slit his own
throat or Dwindle's, General Marcher entered the room and approached.

"Excellent. Excellent," the general declared. "A very
distinguished-looking group you've assembled here, Dwindle. Hello,
Jones."

"Yes, sir," Dwindle said, "with the possible exception of the seedy chap
in the rear."

Jones looked to the rear of the room, and his eyes bugged.

Freddy the Fish, clean-shaven but tattered, was alternately wetting the
pencil lead in his mouth and eating peanuts.

"That's the bum who feeds sparrows in the park!" Jones gasped. "How did
he get out of jail so quick? I saw a couple of policemen haul him off
just a day or so ago."

"This is where they hauled him to," General Marcher said. "It just so
happens that he answered every question right on the preliminary
examination. He says his name's Freddy Smith, although I doubt that he
could prove it."

"He says he never had a father," Dwindle added. "Says his family was too
poor."

Jones stared at General Marcher, then stared at Dwindle, then turned and
stared at Freddy the Fish, who had just left his seat and was ambling
toward the trio.

"Looks like he's throwing in the towel," Jones, said happily. "He's
bringing his paper with him."

"Maybe he just wants clarification on a question," Dwindle said.

"I'm all done," Freddy said. "Who gets this?"

"Go ahead, Dwindle," Carlton Jones smirked. "Grade the man's paper. He's
all done."

Dwindle smiled uncertainly. "You're allowed all the time you need, Mr.
Smith."

"Oh, that's O.K. I'm done."

Dwindle produced his red pencil and the answer sheet which had 1,200
small circles punched in it. He sat down, placed the key over the test
paper, and began searching for white spaces showing through.

       *       *       *       *       *

"That's the last one, sir," Dwindle said six hours later as he added the
one hundred twelfth graded test to the neat stack at the left of his
desk. He stared through the thousand-plus holes in the answer key as if
expecting the holes to shift.

"And still no change in the standings?" General Marcher asked again.

"Mr. Smith still has the best grade," Dwindle answered.

"The percentages again?" the general asked.

"Over all, ninety-six per cent for Mr. Smith," Dwindle said for the
fourth time. "His lowest percentage in any one category was eighty per
cent. The next highest score was by Dr. Schmelling, who had
seventy-eight per cent, but he failed in six categories. The third
highest score was by Dr. Ranson, seventy-six per cent, failing in seven
categories. The fourth highest score was--"

"Enough. Enough," General Marcher interrupted. "I think we've found our
man, don't you, Dwindle?"

"I hope we don't have to use pressure, sir," Dwindle replied.

Jones turned from the window, from which he was observing the bums in
the park. "How can you possibly consider such a thing," he blurted, "as
to send a penniless, unemployed, dirty, ragged tramp to Ganymede as the
United States' Number One emissary?"

"Jones, perhaps I'd best clarify a point or two for you," General
Marcher said in measured tones. "We've been searching the nation over,
seeking a man who can fulfill our exacting requirements. We have found
that man. There is no doubt in my mind that Mr. Smith possesses the
greatest single store of knowledge about this planet and its people. So
far as I'm concerned, which is considerable, it doesn't matter that
this man has chosen the way of a philosopher instead of seeking an
occupation. It doesn't matter that he lacks the necessary status to be
listed on your IBM cards. It doesn't matter that you failed to find this
man, because Dwindle succeeded. And, it doesn't matter whether I ever
see you again!"

"Yes, sir," Jones said, and picked up his hat and left.

"Now, back to the business at hand, Dwindle. You say these prospects
don't know the reasons behind the test?"

"That is correct, sir. I feared there might be some temptation for the
prospects to not do their best, if they knew that success might result
in their being removed from the face of the Earth."

"Wise. Then I suggest we approach Mr. Smith on the idea, cautiously, to
determine his sentiments. If he doesn't want to go, of course, we've got
to draft him."

       *       *       *       *       *

Freddy cracked the peanut, put half in his mouth and tossed the other
half to the sparrows.

"I might be going away for a while, Willy," he said, ending a rather
long silence.

"You ain't gettin' a job, are ya Freddy?"

"Watch yer language," Oscar scolded.

"Naw, not really a job. At least not the kind you think of. Sort of an
all-expense-paid vacation, with a change of scenery."

"Ya ain't had a run-in with the bulls, have ya?" the stricken Willy
asked.

"Me? You know me better, Willy. Nothing like that. And I'm not even sure
the thing will pan out, but you know all those newspaper stories about
messages from another planet?"

"Yeh! Yeh! Ya read it to me!" Willy jabbered excitedly.

"And that test I took that you sent in and the fellas talked to me
about?"

"Yeh! Say, I hope that didn't make you trouble, Freddy, 'cuz me 'n'
Oscar was just kinda jokin', see, and--"

"It's O.K., Willy. Well, one of the fellas I talked to was General
Marcher, who's been mentioned in the newspaper stories in connection
with ... here, Willy, take these," he interrupted himself when he saw
the two men approaching. "See that new guy at the bench over yonder?
Give him these peanuts. I think he'd like to feed my sparrows while I'm
gone. Name's Jones, and he'll probably be around for a spell."

Freddy stood up to greet the two arrivals.

"Hello, general," he said, tipping his battered cap. "It's about the
trip to Ganymede, I suppose?"




Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from _Analog Science Fact and Science
    Fiction_ February 1962. Extensive research did not uncover any
    evidence that the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.
    Minor spelling and typographical errors have been corrected without
    note. Dialect spellings have been retained.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Master of None, by Lloyd Neil Goble

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MASTER OF NONE ***

***** This file should be named 27383.txt or 27383.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/7/3/8/27383/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Dave Lovelace, Stephen Blundell
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
