The Project Gutenberg EBook of Medal of Honor, by Dallas McCord Reynolds

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Medal of Honor

Author: Dallas McCord Reynolds

Illustrator: Bernklau

Release Date: December 2, 2008 [EBook #27393]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MEDAL OF HONOR ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









[Illustration]


 MEDAL
   OF
     HONOR

 By MACK REYNOLDS

 ILLUSTRATED by BERNKLAU


 _According to tradition,
 the man who held the
 Galactic Medal of Honor
 could do no wrong. In a
 strange way, Captain Don
 Mathers was to learn
 that this was true._


Don Mathers snapped to attention, snapped a crisp salute to his
superior, said, "Sub-lieutenant Donal Mathers reporting, sir."

The Commodore looked up at him, returned the salute, looked down at the
report on the desk. He murmured, "Mathers, One Man Scout V-102. Sector
A22-K223."

"Yes, sir," Don said.

The Commodore looked up at him again. "You've been out only five days,
Lieutenant."

"Yes, sir, on the third day I seemed to be developing trouble in my fuel
injectors. I stuck it out for a couple of days, but then decided I'd
better come in for a check." Don Mathers added, "As per instructions,
sir."

"Ummm, of course. In a Scout you can hardly make repairs in space. If
you have any doubts at all about your craft, orders are to return to
base. It happens to every pilot at one time or another."

"Yes, sir."

"However, Lieutenant, it has happened to you four times out of your last
six patrols."

Don Mathers said nothing. His face remained expressionless.

"The mechanics report that they could find nothing wrong with your
engines, Lieutenant."

"Sometimes, sir, whatever is wrong fixes itself. Possibly a spot of bad
fuel. It finally burns out and you're back on good fuel again. But by
that time you're also back to the base."

       *       *       *       *       *

The Commodore said impatiently, "I don't need a lesson in the
shortcomings of the One Man Scout, Lieutenant. I piloted one for nearly
five years. I know their shortcomings--and those of their pilots."

"I don't understand, sir."

The Commodore looked down at the ball of his thumb. "You're out in space
for anywhere from two weeks to a month. All alone. You're looking for
Kraden ships which practically never turn up. In military history the
only remotely similar situation I can think of were the pilots of World
War One pursuit planes, in the early years of the war, when they still
flew singly, not in formation. But even they were up there alone for
only a couple of hours or so."

"Yes, sir," Don said meaninglessly.

The Commodore said, "We, here at command, figure on you fellows getting
a touch of space cafard once in a while and, ah, _imagining_ something
wrong in the engines and coming in. But," here the Commodore cleared his
throat, "four times out of six? Are you sure you don't need a psych,
Lieutenant?"

Don Mathers flushed. "No, sir, I don't think so."

The Commodore's voice went militarily expressionless. "Very well,
Lieutenant. You'll have the customary three weeks leave before going out
again. Dismissed."

Don saluted snappily, wheeled and marched from the office.

Outside, in the corridor, he muttered a curse. What did that chairborne
brass hat know about space cafard? About the depthless blackness, the
wretchedness of free fall, the tides of primitive terror that swept you
when the animal realization hit that you were away, away, away from the
environment that gave you birth. That you were alone, alone, _alone_. A
million, a million-million miles from your nearest fellow human. Space
cafard, in a craft little larger than a good-sized closet! What did the
Commodore know about it?

Don Mathers had conveniently forgotten the other's claim to five years'
service in the Scouts.

       *       *       *       *       *

He made his way from Space Command Headquarters, Third Division, to
Harry's Nuevo Mexico Bar. He found the place empty at this time of the
day and climbed onto a stool.

Harry said, "Hi, Lootenant, thought you were due for a patrol. How come
you're back so soon?"

Don said coldly, "You prying into security subjects, Harry?"

"Well, gee, no Lootenant. You know me. I know all the boys. I was just
making conversation."

"Look, how about some more credit, Harry? I don't have any pay coming up
for a week."

"Why, sure. I got a boy on the light cruiser _New Taos_. Any spaceman's
credit is good with me. What'll it be?"

"Tequila."

Tequila was the only concession the Nuevo Mexico Bar made to its name.
Otherwise, it looked like every other bar has looked in every land and
in every era. Harry poured, put out lemon and salt.

Harry said, "You hear the news this morning?"

"No, I just got in."

"Colin Casey died." Harry shook his head. "Only man in the system that
held the Galactic Medal of Honor. Presidential proclamation, everybody
in the system is to hold five minutes of silence for him at two o'clock,
Sol Time. You know how many times that medal's been awarded, Lootenant?"
Before waiting for an answer, Harry added, "Just thirty-six times."

Don added dryly, "Twenty-eight of them posthumously."

"Yeah." Harry, leaning on the bar before his sole customer, added in
wonder, "But imagine. The Galactic Medal of Honor, the bearer of which
can do no wrong. Imagine. You come to some town, walk into the biggest
jewelry store, pick up a diamond bracelet, and walk out. And what
happens?"

Don growled, "The jewelry store owner would be over-reimbursed by
popular subscription. And probably the mayor of the town would write you
a letter thanking you for honoring his fair city by deigning to notice
one of the products of its shops. Just like that."

"Yeah." Harry shook his head in continued awe. "And, imagine, if you
shoot somebody you don't like, you wouldn't spend even a single night in
the Nick."

Don said, "If you held the Medal of Honor, you wouldn't have to shoot
anybody. Look, Harry, mind if I use the phone?"

"Go right ahead, Lootenant."

Dian Fuller was obviously in the process of packing when the screen
summoned her. She looked into his face and said, surprised, "Why, Don, I
thought you were on patrol."

"Yeah, I was. However, something came up."

She looked at him, a slight frown on her broad, fine forehead. "Again?"

He said impatiently, "Look, I called you to ask for a date. You're
leaving for Callisto tomorrow. It's our last chance to be together.
There's something in particular I wanted to ask you, Di."

She said, a touch irritated, "I'm packing, Don. I simply don't have time
to see you again. I thought we said our goodbyes five days ago."

"This is important, Di."

She tossed the two sweaters she was holding into a chair, or something,
off-screen, and faced him, her hands on her hips.

"No it isn't, Don. Not to me, at least. We've been all over this. Why
keep torturing yourself? You're not ready for marriage, Don. I don't
want to hurt you, but you simply aren't. Look me up, Don, in a few
years."

"Di, just a couple of hours this afternoon."

Dian looked him full in the face and said, "Colin Casey finally died of
his wounds this morning. The President has asked for five minutes of
silence at two o'clock. Don, I plan to spend that time here alone in my
apartment, possibly crying a few tears for a man who died for me and the
rest of the human species under such extreme conditions of gallantry
that he was awarded the highest honor of which man has ever conceived. I
wouldn't want to spend that five minutes while on a date with another
member of my race's armed forces who had deserted his post of duty."

Don Mathers turned, after the screen had gone blank, and walked stiffly
to a booth. He sank onto a chair and called flatly to Harry, "Another
tequila. A double tequila. And don't bother with that lemon and salt
routine."

       *       *       *       *       *

An hour or so later a voice said, "You Sub-lieutenant Donal Mathers?"

Don looked up and snarled. "So what? Go away."

There were two of them. Twins, or could have been. Empty of expression,
heavy of build. The kind of men fated to be ordered around at the
pleasure of those with money, or brains, none of which they had or would
ever have.

The one who had spoken said, "The boss wants to see you."

"Who the hell is the boss?"

"Maybe he'll tell you when he sees you," the other said, patiently and
reasonably.

"Well, go tell the boss he can go to the ..."

The second of the two had been standing silently, his hands in his
great-coat pockets. Now he brought his left hand out and placed a bill
before Don Mathers. "The boss said to give you this."

It was a thousand-unit note. Don Mathers had never seen a bill of that
denomination before, nor one of half that.

He pursed his lips, picked it up and looked at it carefully.
Counterfeiting was a long lost art. It didn't even occur to him that it
might be false.

"All right," Don said, coming to his feet. "Let's go see the boss, I
haven't anything else to do and his calling card intrigues me."

At the curb, one of them summoned a cruising cab with his wrist screen
and the three of them climbed into it. The one who had given Don the
large denomination bill dialed the address and they settled back.

"So what does the boss want with me?" Don said.

They didn't bother to answer.

The Interplanetary Lines building was evidently their destination. The
car whisked them up to the penthouse which topped it, and they landed on
the terrace.

Seated in beach chairs, an autobar between them, were two men. They were
both in their middle years. The impossibly corpulent one, Don Mathers
vaguely recognized. From a newscast? From a magazine article? The other
could have passed for a video stereotype villain, complete to the
built-in sneer. Few men, in actuality, either look like or sound like
the conventionalized villain. This was an exception, Don decided.

He scowled at them. "I suppose one of you is the boss," he said.

"That's right," the fat one grunted. He looked at Don's two escorts.
"Scotty, you and Rogers take off."

They got back into the car and left.

The vicious-faced one said, "This is Mr. Lawrence Demming. I am his
secretary."

Demming puffed, "Sit down, Lieutenant. What'll you have to drink? My
secretary's name is Rostoff. Max Rostoff. Now we all know each other's
names. That is, assuming you're Sub-lieutenant Donal Mathers."

Don said, "Tequila."

       *       *       *       *       *

Max Rostoff dialed the drink for him and, without being asked, another
cordial for his employer.

Don placed Demming now. Lawrence Demming, billionaire. Robber baron, he
might have been branded in an earlier age. Transportation baron of the
solar system. Had he been a pig he would have been butchered long ago;
he was going unhealthily to grease.

Rostoff said, "You have identification?"

Don Mathers fingered through his wallet, brought forth his I.D. card.
Rostoff handed him his tequila, took the card and examined it carefully,
front and back.

Demming huffed and said, "Your collar insignia tells me you pilot a
Scout. What sector do you patrol, Lieutenant?"

Don sipped at the fiery Mexican drink, looked at the fat man over the
glass. "That's military information, Mr. Demming."

       *       *       *       *       *

Demming made a move with his plump lips. "Did Scotty give you a
thousand-unit note?" He didn't wait for an answer. "You took it. Either
give it back or tell me what sector you patrol, Lieutenant."

Don Mathers was aware of the fact that a man of Demming's position
wouldn't have to go to overmuch effort to acquire such information,
anyway. It wasn't of particular importance.

He shrugged and said, "A22-K223. I fly the V-102."

Max Rostoff handed back the I.D. card to Don and picked up a Solar
System sector chart from the short-legged table that sat between the
two of them and checked it. He said, "Your information was correct, Mr.
Demming. He's the man."

Demming shifted his great bulk in his beach chair, sipped some of his
cordial and said, "Very well. How would you like to hold the Galactic
Medal of Honor, Lieutenant?"

Don Mathers laughed. "How would you?" he said.

Demming scowled. "I am not jesting, Lieutenant Mathers. I never jest.
Obviously, I am not of the military. It would be quite impossible for me
to gain such an award. But you are the pilot of a Scout."

"And I've got just about as much chance of winning the Medal of Honor as
I have of giving birth to triplets."

The transportation magnate wiggled a disgustingly fat finger at him,
"I'll arrange for that part of it."

Don Mathers goggled him. He blurted finally, "Like hell you will.
There's not enough money in the system to fiddle with the awarding of
the Medal of Honor. There comes a point, Demming, where even _your_
dough can't carry the load."

Demming settled back in his chair, closed his eyes and grunted, "Tell
him."

Max Rostoff took up the ball. "A few days ago, Mr. Demming and I flew in
from Io on one of the Interplanetary Lines freighters. As you probably
know, they are completely automated. We were alone in the craft."

"So?" Without invitation, Don Mathers leaned forward and dialed himself
another tequila. He made it a double this time. A feeling of excitement
was growing within him, and the drinks he'd had earlier had worn away.
Something very big, very, very big, was developing. He hadn't the
vaguest idea what.

"Lieutenant, how would you like to capture a Kraden light cruiser? If
I'm not incorrect, probably Miro class."

Don laughed nervously, not knowing what the other was at but still
feeling the growing excitement. He said, "In all the history of the war
between our species, we've never captured a Kraden ship intact. It'd
help a lot if we could."

"This one isn't exactly intact, but nearly so."

Don looked from Rostoff to Demming, and then back. "What in the hell are
you talking about?"

"In your sector," Rostoff said, "we ran into a derelict Miro class
cruiser. The crew--repulsive creatures--were all dead. Some thirty of
them. Mr. Demming and I assumed that the craft had been hit during one
of the actions between our fleet and theirs and that somehow both sides
had failed to recover the wreckage. At any rate, today it is floating,
abandoned of all life, in your sector." Rostoff added softly, "One has
to approach quite close before any signs of battle are evident. The ship
looks intact."

Demming opened his eyes again and said, "And you're going to capture
it."

Don Mathers bolted his tequila, licked a final drop from the edge of his
lip. "And why should that rate the most difficult decoration to achieve
that we've ever instituted?"

"Because," Rostoff told him, his tone grating mockery, "you're going to
radio in reporting a Miro class Kraden cruiser. We assume your superiors
will order you to stand off, that help is coming, that your tiny Scout
isn't large enough to do anything more than to keep the enemy under
observation until a squadron arrives. But you will radio back that they
are escaping and that you plan to attack. When your reinforcements
arrive, Lieutenant, you will have conquered the Kraden, single-handed,
against odds of--what would you say, fifty to one?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Don Mathers' mouth was dry, his palms moist. He said, "A One Man Scout
against a Miro class cruiser? At least fifty to one, Mr. Rostoff. At
least."

Demming grunted. "There would be little doubt of you getting the
Galactic Medal of Honor, Lieutenant, especially since Colin Casey is
dead and there isn't a living bearer of the award. Max, another drink
for the Lieutenant."

Don said, "Look. Why? I think you might be right about getting the
award. But why, and why me, and what's your percentage?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Demming muttered, "Now we get to the point." He settled back in his
chair again and closed his eyes while his secretary took over.

Max Rostoff leaned forward, his wolfish face very serious. "Lieutenant,
the exploitation of the Jupiter satellites is in its earliest stages.
There is every reason to believe that the new sources of radioactives on
Callisto alone may mean the needed power edge that can give us the
victory over the Kradens. Whether or not that is so, someone is going to
make literally billions out of this new frontier."

"I still don't see ..."

"Lieutenant Mathers," Rostoff said patiently, "the bearer of the
Galactic Medal of Honor is above law. He carries with him an unalienable
prestige of such magnitude that ... Well, let me use an example. Suppose
a bearer of the Medal of Honor formed a stock corporation to exploit
the pitchblende of Callisto. How difficult would it be for him to
dispose of the stock?"

Demming grunted. "And suppose there were a few, ah, crossed wires in the
manipulation of the corporation's business?" He sighed deeply. "Believe
me, Lieutenant Mathers, there are an incredible number of laws which
have accumulated down through the centuries to hamper the business man.
It is a continual fight to be able to carry on at all. The ability to do
no legal wrong would be priceless in the development of a new frontier."
He sighed again, so deeply as to make his bulk quiver. "Priceless."

Rostoff laid it on the line, his face a leer. "We are offering you a
three-way partnership, Mathers. You, with your Medal of Honor, are our
front man. Mr. Demming supplies the initial capital to get underway. And
I ..." He twisted his mouth with evil self-satisfaction. "I was present
when the Kraden ship was discovered, so I'll have to be cut in. I'll
supply the brains."

Demming grunted his disgust, but added nothing.

Don Mathers said slowly, looking down at the empty glass he was twirling
in his fingers, "Look, we're up to our necks in a war to the death with
the Kradens. In the long run it's either us or them. At a time like
this you're suggesting that we fake an action that will eventually
enable us to milk the new satellites to the tune of billions."

Demming grunted meaninglessly.

Don said, "The theory is that all men, all of us, ought to have our
shoulders to the wheel. This project sounds to me like throwing rocks
under it."

Demming closed his eyes.

Rostoff said, "Lieutenant, it's a dog-eat-dog society. If we eventually
lick the Kradens, one of the very reasons will be because we're a
dog-eat-dog society. Every man for himself and the devil take the
hindmost. Our apologists dream up some beautiful gobbledygook phrases
for it, such as free enterprise, but actually it's dog-eat-dog.
Surprisingly enough, it works, or at least has so far. Right now, the
human race needs the radioactives of the Jupiter satellites. In
acquiring them, somebody is going to make a tremendous amount of money.
Why shouldn't it be us?"

"Why not, if you--or we--can do it honestly?"

Demming's grunt was nearer a snort this time.

Rostoff said sourly, "Don't be naive, Lieutenant. Whoever does it, is
going to need little integrity. You don't win in a sharper's card game
by playing your cards honestly. The biggest sharper wins. We've just
found a joker somebody dropped on the floor; if we don't use it, we're
suckers."

Demming opened his pig eyes and said, "All this is on the academic side.
We checked your background thoroughly before approaching you, Mathers.
We know your record, even before you entered the Space Service. Just
between the three of us, wouldn't you like out? There are a full billion
men and women in our armed forces, you can be spared. Let's say you've
already done your share. Can't you see the potentialities in spending
the rest of your life with the Galactic Medal of Honor in your pocket?"

       *       *       *       *       *

It was there all right, drifting slowly. Had he done a more thorough job
of his patrol, last time, he should have stumbled upon it himself.

If he had, there was no doubt that he would have at first reported it as
an active enemy cruiser. Demming and Rostoff had been right. The Kraden
ship looked untouched by battle.

That is, if you approached it from the starboard and slightly abaft the
beam. From that angle, in particular, it looked untouched.

It had taken several circlings of the craft to come to that conclusion.
Don Mathers was playing it very safe. This thing wasn't quite so simple
as the others had thought. He wanted no slip-ups. His hand went to a
food compartment and emerged with a space thermo which should have
contained fruit juice, but didn't. He took a long pull at it.

Finally he dropped back into the position he'd decided upon, and flicked
the switch of his screen.

A base lieutenant's face illuminated it. He yawned and looked
questioningly at Don Mathers.

Don said, allowing a touch of excitement in his voice, "Mathers, Scout
V-102, Sector A22-K223."

"Yeah, yeah ..." the other began, still yawning.

"I've spotted a Kraden cruiser. Miro class, I think."

       *       *       *       *       *

The lieutenant flashed into movement. He slapped a button before him,
the screen blinked, to be lit immediately again.

A gray-haired Fleet Admiral looked up from papers on his desk.

"Yes?"

Don Mathers rapped, "Miro class Kraden in sector A22-K223, sir. I'm
lying about fifty miles off. Undetected thus far--I think. He hasn't
fired on me yet, at least."

The Admiral was already doing things with his hands. Two subalterns came
within range of the screen, took orders, dashed off. The Admiral was
rapidly firing orders into two other screens. After a moment, he looked
up at Don Mathers again.

"Hang on, Lieutenant. Keep him under observation as long as you can.
What're your exact coordinates?"

Don gave them to him and waited.

A few minutes later the Admiral returned to him. "Let's take a look at
it, Lieutenant."

Don Mathers adjusted the screen to relay the Kraden cruiser. His palms
were moist now, but everything was going to plan. He wished that he
could take another drink.

The Admiral said, "Miro class, all right. Don't get too close,
Lieutenant. They'll blast you to hell and gone. We've got a task force
within an hour of you. Just hang on."

"Yes, sir," Don said. An hour. He was glad to know that. He didn't have
much time in which to operate.

He let it go another five minutes, then he said, "Sir, they're
increasing speed."

"Damn," the Admiral said, then rapid fired some more into his other
screens, barking one order after another.

Don said, letting his voice go very flat, "I'm going in, sir. They're
putting on speed. In another five minutes they'll be underway to the
point where I won't be able to follow. They'll get completely clear."

The Admiral looked up, startled. "Don't be a fool."

"They'll get away, sir." Knowing that the other could see his every
motion, Don Mathers hit the cocking lever of his flakflak gun with the
heel of his right hand.

The Admiral snapped, "Let it go, you fool. You won't last a second."
Then, his voice higher, "That's an order, Lieutenant!"

Don Mathers flicked off his screen. He grimaced sourly and then
descended on the Kraden ship, his flakflak gun beaming it. He was going
to have to expend every erg of energy in his Scout to burn the other
ship up to the point where his attack would look authentic, and to
eliminate all signs of previous action.

       *       *       *       *       *

The awarding of the Galactic Medal of Honor, as always, was done in the
simplest of ceremonies.

Only the President and Captain Donal Mathers himself were present in the
former's office in the Presidential Palace.

However, as they both knew, every screen in the Solar System was tuned
into the ceremony.

Don Mathers saluted and stood to attention.

The President read the citation. It was very short, as Medal of Honor
citations were always.

_... for conspicuous gallantry far and beyond the call of duty, in which
you single-handedly, and against unbelievable odds, attacked and
destroyed an enemy cruiser while flying a Scout armed only with a
short-beam flakflak gun ..._

He pinned a small bit of ribbon and metal to Don Mathers' tunic. It was
an inconspicuous, inordinately ordinary medal, the Galactic Medal of
Honor.

Don said hoarsely, "Thank you, sir."

The President shook hands with him and said, "I am President of the
United Solar System, Captain Mathers, supposedly the highest rank to
which a man can attain." He added simply, "I wish I were you."

       *       *       *       *       *

Afterwards, alone in New Washington and wanting to remain alone, Don
Mathers strolled the streets for a time, bothered only occasionally when
someone recognized his face and people would stop and applaud.

He grinned inwardly.

He had a suspicion already that after a time he'd get used to it and
weary to death of it, but right now it was still new and fun. Who was
the flyer, way back in history, the one who first flew the Atlantic in a
propeller-driven aircraft? His popularity must have been something like
this.

He went into O'Donnell's at lunch time and as he entered the orchestra
broke off the popular tune they were playing and struck up the
Interplanetary Anthem. The manager himself escorted him to his table and
made suggestions as to the specialties and the wine.

When he first sat down the other occupants of the restaurant, men and
women, had stood and faced him and applauded. Don flushed. There could
be too much of a good thing.

After the meal, a fantastic production, Don finished his cigar and asked
the head waiter for his bill, reaching for his wallet.

The other smiled. "Captain, I am afraid your money is of no value in
O'Donnell's, not for just this luncheon but whenever you honor us." The
head waiter paused and added, "in fact, Captain, I doubt if there is a
restaurant in the Solar System where your money holds value. Or that
there will ever be."

Don Mathers was taken aback. He was only beginning to realize the
ramifications of his holding his Galactic Medal of Honor.

       *       *       *       *       *

At Space Command Headquarters, Third Division, Don came to attention
before the Commodore's desk and tossed the other a salute.

The Commodore returned it snappily and leaned back in his chair. "Take
a seat, Captain. Nice to see you again." He added pleasantly, "Where in
the world have you been?"

Don Mathers slumped into a chair, said wearily, "On a bust. The bust to
end all busts."

The Commodore chuckled. "Don't blame you," he said.

"It was quite a bust," Don said.

"Well," the Commodore chuckled again, "I don't suppose we can throw you
in the guardhouse for being A.W.O.L. Not in view of your recent
decoration."

There was nothing to say to that.

"By the way," the Commodore said, "I haven't had the opportunity to
congratulate you on your Kraden. That was quite a feat, Captain."

"Thank you, sir," Don added, modestly, "rather foolish of me, I
suppose."

"Very much so. On such foolishness are heroic deeds based, Captain." The
Commodore looked at him questioningly. "You must have had incredible
luck. The only way we've been able to figure it was that his detectors
were on the blink. That may be what happened."

"Yes, sir," Don nodded quickly. "That's the way I figure it. And my
first blast must have disrupted his fire control or something."

The Commodore said, "He didn't get in any return fire at all?"

"A few blasts. But by that time I was in too close and moving too fast.
Fact of the matter is, sir, I don't think they ever recovered from my
first beaming of them."

"No, I suppose not," the Commodore said musingly. "It's a shame you had
to burn them so badly. We've never recovered a Kraden ship in good
enough shape to give our techs something to work on. It might make a
basic difference in the war, particularly if there was something aboard
that'd give us some indication of where they were coming from. We've
been fighting this war in our backyard for a full century. It would help
if we could get into _their_ backyard for a change. It's problematical
how long we'll be able to hold them off, at this rate."

Don Mathers said uncomfortably, "Well, it's not as bad as all that, sir.
We've held them this far."

His superior grunted. "We've held them this far because we've been able
to keep out enough patrol ships to give us ample warning when one of
their task forces come in. Do you know how much fuel that consumes,
Captain?"

"Well, I know it's a lot."

"So much so that Earth's industry is switching back to petroleum and
coal. Every ounce of radioactives is needed by the Fleet. Even so, it's
just a matter of time."

Don Mathers pursed his lips. "I didn't know it was that bad."

The Commodore smiled sourly at him. "I'm afraid I'm being a wet blanket
thrown over your big bust of a celebration, Captain. Tell me, how does
it feel to hold the system's highest award?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Don shook his head, marveling. "Fantastic, sir. Of course, like any
member of the services I've always known of the Medal of Honor, but ...
well, nobody ever expects to get it." He added wryly, "Certainly not
while he's still alive and in health. Why, sir, do you realize that I
haven't been able to spend one unit of money since?" There was an
element of awe in his voice. "Sir, do you realize that not even a beggar
will take currency from me?"

The Commodore nodded in appreciation. "You must understand the position
you occupy, Captain. Your feat was inspiring enough, but that's not all
of it. In a way you combine a popular hero with an _Unknown Soldier_
element. Awarding you the Galactic Medal of Honor makes a symbol of you.
A symbol representing all the millions of unsung heroes and heroines who
have died fighting for the human species. It's not a light burden to
carry on your shoulders, Captain Mathers. I would imagine it a very
humbling honor."

"Well, yes, sir," Don said.

The Commodore switched his tone of voice. "That brings us to the
present, and what your next assignment is to be. Obviously, it wouldn't
do for you to continue in a Scout. Big brass seems to be in favor of
using you for morale and ..."

Don Mathers cleared his throat and interrupted. "Sir, I've decided to
drop out of the Space Service."

"Drop out!" The other stared at Mathers, uncomprehending. "We're at war,
Captain!"

Don nodded seriously. "Yes, sir. And what you just said is true. I
couldn't be used any longer in a Scout. I'd wind up selling bonds and
giving talks to old ladies' clubs."

"Well, hardly that, Captain."

"No, sir, I think I'd really be of more use out of the services. I'm
tendering my resignation and making arrangements to help in the
developing of Callisto and the other Jupiter satellites."

The Commodore said nothing. His lips seemed whiter than before.

Don Mathers said doggedly, "Perhaps my prestige will help bring
volunteers to work the new mines out there. If they see me, well,
sacrificing, putting up with the hardships ..."

The Commodore said evenly, "Mr. Mathers, I doubt if you will ever have
to put up with hardships again, no matter where you make your abode.
However, good luck. You deserve it."

       *       *       *       *       *

Outside headquarters, Don Mathers summoned a cab and dialed his hotel.
On the way over, he congratulated himself. It had gone easier than he
had expected, really. Although, come to think of it, there wasn't a damn
thing that the brass could do.

He had to laugh to himself.

Imagine if he'd walked in on the Commodore a month ago and announced
that he was going to _drop out_ of the Space Service. He would have been
dropped all right, all right. Right into the lap of a squadron of psycho
experts.

At the hotel he shucked his uniform, an action which gave him
considerable gratification, and dressed in one of the score of civilian
costumes that filled his closets to overflowing. He took pleasure in
estimating what this clothing would have cost in terms of months of
Space Service pay for a Sub-lieutenant or even a Captain. _Years, my
boy, years._

He looked at himself in the dressing-room mirror with satisfaction,
then turned to the autobar and dialed himself a stone-age-old Metaxa.
He'd lost his taste for the plebian tequila in the last few days.

He held the old Greek brandy to the light and wondered pleasurably what
the stuff cost, per pony glass. Happily, he'd never have to find out.

He tossed the drink down and whistling, took his private elevator to the
garages in the second level of the hotel's basement floors. He selected
a limousine and dialed the Interplanetary Lines building.

He left the car at the curb before the main entrance, ignoring all
traffic regulations and entered the building, still whistling softly and
happily to himself. He grinned when a small crowd gathered outside and
smiled and clapped their hands. He grinned and waved to them.

A receptionist hurried to him and he told her he wanted to see either
Mr. Demming or Mr. Rostoff, and then when she offered to escort him
personally he noticed her pixie-like cuteness and said, "What're you
doing tonight, Miss?"

Her face went pale. "Oh, anything, sir," she said weakly.

He grinned at her. "Maybe I'll take you up on that if I'm not too busy."

He had never seen anyone so taken aback. She said, all flustered, "I'm
Toni. Toni Fitzgerald. You can just call this building and ask for me.
Any time."

"Maybe I'll do that," he smiled. "But now, let's see Old Man Demming."

       *       *       *       *       *

That took her back too. Aside from being asked for a date--if asked
could be the term--by the system's greatest celebrity, she was hearing
for the first time the interplanetary tycoon being called _Old Man
Demming_.

She said, "Oh, right this way, Captain Mathers."

Don said, "Mr. Mathers now, I'm afraid. I have new duties."

She looked up into his face. "You'll always be Captain Mathers to me,
sir." She added, softly and irrelevantly, "My two brothers were lost on
the _Minerva_ in that action last year off Pluto." She took a deep
breath, which only stressed her figure. "I've applied six times for
Space Service, but they won't take me."

They were in an elevator now. Don said, "That's too bad, Toni. However,
the Space Service isn't as romantic as you might think."

"Yes, sir," Toni Fitzgerald said, her soul in her eyes. "You ought to
know, sir."

Don was somehow irritated. He said nothing further until they reached
the upper stories of the gigantic office building. He thanked her after
she'd turned him over to another receptionist.

Don Mathers' spirits had been restored by the time he was brought to the
door of Max Rostoff's office. His new guide evidently hadn't even
bothered to check on the man's availability, before ushering Mathers
into the other's presence.

Max Rostoff looked up from his desk, wolfishly aggressive-looking as
ever. "Why, Captain," he said. "How fine to see you again. Come right
in. Martha, that will be all."

       *       *       *       *       *

Martha gave the interplanetary hero one more long look and then turned
and left.

As soon as the door closed behind her, Max Rostoff turned and snarled,
"Where have you been, you rummy?"

He couldn't have shocked Don Mathers more if he'd suddenly sprouted a
unicorn's horn.

"We've been looking for you for a week," Rostoff snapped. "Out of one
bar, into another, our men couldn't catch up with you. Dammit, don't you
realize we've got to get going? We've got a dozen documents for you to
sign. We've got to get this thing underway, before somebody else does."

Don blurted, "You can't talk to me that way."

It was the other's turn to stare. Max Rostoff said, low and
dangerously, "No? Why can't I?"

Don glared at him.

Max Rostoff said, low and dangerously, "Let's get this straight,
Mathers. To everybody else, but Demming and me, you might be the biggest
hero in the Solar System. But you know what you are to us?"

Don felt his indignation seeping from him.

"To us," Max Rostoff said flatly, "you're just another demi-buttocked
incompetent on the make." He added definitely, "And make no mistake,
Mathers, you'll continue to have a good thing out of this only so long
as we can use you."

A voice from behind them said, "Let me add to that, period, end of
paragraph."

It was Lawrence Demming, who'd just entered from an inner office.

He said, even his voice seemed fat, "And now that's settled, I'm going
to call in some lawyers. While they're around, we conduct ourselves as
though we're three equal partners. On paper, we will be."

"Wait a minute, now," Don blurted. "What do you think you're pulling?
The agreement was we split this whole thing three ways."

Demming's jowls wobbled as he nodded. "That's right. And your share of
the loot is your Galactic Medal of Honor. That and the dubious
privilege of having the whole thing in your name. You'll keep your
medal, and we'll keep our share." He growled heavily, "You don't think
you're getting the short end of the stick, do you?"

Max Rostoff said, "Let's knock this off and get the law boys in. We've
got enough paper work to keep us busy the rest of the week." He sat down
again at his desk and looked up at Don. "Then we'll all be taking off
for Callisto, to get things under way. With any luck, in six months
we'll have every ounce of pitchblende left in the system sewed up."

       *       *       *       *       *

There was a crowd awaiting his ship at the Callisto Spaceport. A crowd
modest by Earth standards but representing a large percentage of the
small population of Jupiter's moon.

On the way out, a staff of the system's best speech writers, and two top
professional actors had been working with him.

Don Mathers gave a short preliminary talk at the spaceport, and then the
important one, the one that was broadcast throughout the system, that
night from his suite at the hotel. He'd been well rehearsed, and they'd
kept him from the bottle except for two or three quick ones immediately
before going on.

_The project at hand is to extract the newly discovered deposits of
pitchblende on these satellites of Jupiter._

He paused impressively before continuing.

_It's a job that cannot be done in slipshod, haphazard manner. The
system's need for radioactives cannot be overstressed._

_In short, fellow humans, we must allow nothing to stand in the way of
all out, unified effort to do this job quickly and efficiently. My
associates and I have formed a corporation to manage this crash program.
We invite all to participate by purchasing stock. I will not speak of
profits, fellow humans, because in this emergency we all scorn them.
However, as I say, you are invited to participate._

_Some of the preliminary mining concessions are at present in the hands
of individuals or small corporations. It will be necessary that these
turn over their holdings to our single all-embracing organization for
the sake of efficiency. Our experts will evaluate such holdings and
recompense the owners._

Don Mathers paused again for emphasis.

_This is no time for quibbling. All must come in. If there are those who
put private gain before the needs of the system, then pressures must be
found to be exerted against them._

_We will need thousands and tens of thousands of trained workers to
operate our mines, our mills, our refineries. In the past, skilled labor
here on the satellites was used to double or even triple the wage rates
on Earth and the settled planets and satellites. I need only repeat,
this is no time for personal gain and quibbling. The corporation
announces proudly that it will pay only prevailing Earth rates. We will
not insult our employees by "bribing" them to patriotism through higher
wages._

There was more, along the same lines.

It was all taken very well. Indeed, with enthusiasm.

       *       *       *       *       *

On the third day, at an office conference, Don waited for an opening to
say, "Look, somewhere here on Callisto is a young woman named Dian
Fuller. After we get me established in an office, I'd like her to be my
secretary."

Demming looked up from some reports he was scanning. He grunted to Max
Rostoff, "Tell him," and went back to the papers.

Max Rostoff, settled back into his chair. He said to the two bodyguards,
stationed at the door, "Scotty, Rogers, go and make the arrangements to
bring that damned prospector into line."

When they were gone, Rostoff turned back to Don Mathers. "You don't need
an office, Mathers. All you need is to go back to your bottles. Just
don't belt it so hard that you can't sign papers every time we need a
signature."

Don flushed angrily, "Look, don't push me, you two. You need me. Plenty.
In fact, from what I can see, this corporation needs me more than it
does you." He looked scornfully at Demming. "Originally, the idea was
that you put up the money. What money? We have fifty-one percent of the
stock in my name, but all the credit units needed are coming from sales
of stock." He turned to Rostoff. "You were supposed to put up the
brains. What brains? We've hired the best mining engineers, the best
technicians, to do their end, the best corporation executives to handle
that end. You're not needed."

Demming grunted amusement at the short speech, but didn't bother to look
up from his perusal.

Max Rostoff's face had grown wolfishly thin in his anger. "Look,
bottle-baby," he sneered, "you're the only one that's vulnerable in this
set-up. There's not a single thing that Demming and I can be held to
account for. You have no beefs coming, for that matter. You're getting
everything you ever wanted. You've got the best suite in the best hotel
on Callisto. You eat the best food the Solar System provides. And, most
important of all to a rummy, you drink the best booze and as much of it
as you want. What's more, unless either Demming or I go to the bother,
you'll never be exposed. You'll live your life out being the biggest
hero in the system."

It was Don Mathers' turn to sneer. "What do you mean, I'm the only one
vulnerable? There's no evidence against me, Rostoff, and you know it.
Who'd listen to you if you sounded off? I burned that Kraden cruiser
until there wasn't a sign to be found that would indicate it wasn't in
operational condition when I first spotted it."

Demming grunted his amusement again.

Max Rostoff laughed sourly. "Don't be an ass, Mathers. We took a series
of photos of that derelict when we stumbled on it. Not only can we prove
you didn't knock it out, we can prove that it was in good shape before
you worked it over. I imagine the Fleet technician would have loved to
have seen the inner workings of that Kraden cruiser--before you loused
it up."

Demming chuckled flatly. "I wonder what kind of a court martial they
give a hero who turns out to be a saboteur."

       *       *       *       *       *

He ran into her, finally, after he'd been on Callisto for nearly eight
months. Actually, he didn't remember the circumstances of their meeting.
He was in an alcoholic daze and the fog rolled out, and there she was
across the table from him.

Don shook his head, and looked about the room. They were in some sort of
night spot. He didn't recognize it.

       *       *       *       *       *

He licked his lips, scowled at the taste of stale vomit.

He slurred, "Hello, Di."

Dian Fuller said, "Hi, Don."

He said, "I must've blanked out. Guess I've been hitting it too hard."

She laughed at him. "You mean you don't remember all the things you've
been telling me the past two hours?" She was obviously quite sober. Dian
never had been much for the sauce.

Don looked at her narrowly. "What've I been telling you for the past two
hours?"

"Mostly about how it was when you were a little boy. About fishing, and
your first .22 rifle. And the time you shot the squirrel, and then felt
so sorry."

"Oh," Don said. He ran his right hand over his mouth.

There was a champagne bucket beside him, but the bottle in it was empty.
He looked about the room for a waiter.

Dian said gently, "Do you really think you need any more, Don?"

He looked across the table at her. She was as beautiful as ever. No,
that wasn't right. She was pretty, but not beautiful. She was just a
damn pretty girl, not one of these glamour items.

Don said, "Look, I can't remember. Did we get married?"

Her laugh tinkled. "Married! I only ran into you two or three hours
ago." She hesitated before saying further, "I had assumed that you were
deliberately avoiding me. Callisto isn't that big."

Don Mathers said slowly, "Well, if we're not married, let me decide when
I want another bottle of the grape, eh?"

Dian flushed. "Sorry, Don."

       *       *       *       *       *

The headwaiter approached bearing another magnum of vintage wine. He
beamed at Don Mathers. "Having a good time, sir?"

"Okay," Don said shortly. When the other was gone he downed a full
glass, felt the fumes almost immediately.

He said to Dian, "I haven't been avoiding you, Di. We just haven't met.
The way I remember, the last time we saw each other, back on Earth, you
gave me quite a slap in the face. The way I remember, you didn't think I
was hero enough for you." He poured another glass of the champagne.

Di's face was still flushed. She said, her voice low, "I misunderstood
you, Don. Even after your brilliant defeat of that Kraden cruiser, I
still, I admit, think I basically misunderstood you. I told myself that
it could have been done by any pilot of a Scout, given that one in a
million break. It just happened to be you, who made that suicide dive
attack that succeeded. A thousand other pilots might also have taken the
million to one suicide chance rather than let the Kraden escape."

"Yeah," Don said. Even in his alcohol, he was surprised at her words. He
said gruffly, "Sure anybody might've done it. Pure luck. But why'd you
change your mind about me, then? How come the switch of heart?"

"Because of what you've done since, darling."

He closed one eye, the better to focus.

"Since?"

He recognized the expression in her eyes. A touch of star gleam. That
little girl back on Earth, the receptionist at the Interplanetary Lines
building, she'd had it. In fact, in the past few months Don had seen it
in many feminine faces. And all for him.

Dian said, "Instead of cashing in on your prestige, you've been devoting
yourself to something even more necessary to the fight than bringing
down individual Kraden cruisers."

Don looked at her. He could feel a nervous tic beginning in his left
eyebrow. Finally, he reached for the champagne again and filled his
glass. He said, "You really go for this hero stuff, don't you?"

She said nothing, but the star shine was still in her eyes.

He made his voice deliberately sour. "Look, suppose I asked you to come
back to my apartment with me tonight?"

"Yes," she said softly.

"And told you to bring your overnight bag along," he added brutally.

Dian looked into his face. "Why are you twisting yourself, your
inner-self, so hard, Don? Of course I'd come--if that's what you
wanted."

"And then," he said flatly, "suppose I kicked you out in the morning?"

Dian winced, but she kept her eyes even with his, her own moist now.
"You forget," she whispered. "You have been awarded the Galactic Medal
of Honor, the bearer of which can do no wrong."

"Oh, God," Don muttered. He filled his glass, still again, motioned to a
nearby waiter.

"Yes, sir," the waiter said.

Don said, "Look, in about five minutes I'm going to pass out. See that I
get back to my hotel, will you? And that this young lady gets to her
home. And, waiter, just send my bill to the hotel too."

The other bowed. "The owner's instructions, sir, are that Captain
Mathers must never see a bill in this establishment."

Dian said, "_Don!_"

He didn't look at her. He raised his glass to his mouth and shortly
afterward the fog rolled in again.

       *       *       *       *       *

When it rolled out, the unfamiliar taste of black coffee was in his
mouth. He shook his head for clarity.

He seemed to be in some working class restaurant. Next to him, in a
booth, was a fresh-faced Sub-lieutenant of the--Don squinted at the
collar tabs--yes, of the Space Service. A Scout pilot.

Don stuttered, "What's ... goin' ... on?"

The pilot said apologetically, "Sub-lieutenant Pierpont, sir. You seemed
so far under the weather, I took over."

"Oh, you did, eh?"

"Well, yes, sir. You were, well, reclining in the gutter, sir. In spite
of your, well, appearance, your condition, I recognized you, sir."

"Oh." His stomach was an objecting turmoil.

The Lieutenant said, "Want to try some more of this coffee now, sir? Or
maybe some soup or a sandwich?"

Don groaned. "No. No, thanks. Don't think I could hold it down."

The pilot grinned. "You must've thrown a classic, sir."

"I guess so. What time is it? No, that doesn't make any difference.
What's the date?"

Pierpont told him.

It was hard to believe. The last he could remember he'd been with Di.
With Di in some nightclub. He wondered how long ago that had been.

He fumbled in his clothes for a smoke and couldn't find one. He didn't
want it anyway.

He growled at the Lieutenant, "Well, how go the One Man Scouts?"

Pierpont grinned back at him. "Glad to be out of them, sir?"

"Usually."

Pierpont looked at him strangely. "I don't blame you, I suppose. But it
isn't as bad these days as it used to be while you were still in the
Space Service, sir."

Don grunted. "How come? Two weeks to a month, all by yourself, watching
the symptoms of space cafard progress. Then three weeks of leave, to get
drunk in, and then another stretch in space."

The pilot snorted deprecation. "That's the way it used to be." He
fingered the spoon of his coffee cup. "That's the way it still should
be, of course. But it isn't. They're spreading the duty around now and I
spend less than one week out of four on patrol."

Don hadn't been listening too closely, but now he looked up. "What'd'ya
mean?"

Pierpont said, "I mean, sir, I suppose this isn't bridging security,
seeing who you are, but fuel stocks are so low that we can't maintain
full patrols any more."

There was a cold emptiness in Don Mathers' stomach.

He said, "Look, I'm still woozy. Say that again, Lieutenant."

The Lieutenant told him again.

Don Mathers rubbed the back of his hand over his mouth and tried to
think.

He said finally, "Look, Lieutenant. First let's get another cup of
coffee into me, and maybe that sandwich you were talking about. Then
would you help me to get back to my hotel?"

       *       *       *       *       *

By the fourth day, his hands weren't trembling any longer. He ate a good
breakfast, dressed carefully, then took a hotel limousine down to the
offices of the Mathers, Demming and Rostoff Corporation.

At the entrance to the inner sanctum the heavyset Scotty looked up at
his approach. He said, "The boss has been looking for you, Mr. Mathers,
but right now you ain't got no appointment, have you? Him and Mr.
Rostoff is having a big conference. He says to keep everybody out."

"That doesn't apply to me, Scotty," Don snapped. "Get out of my way."

Scotty stood up, reluctantly, but barred the way. "He said it applied to
everybody, Mr. Mathers."

Don put his full weight into a blow that started at his waist, dug deep
into the other's middle. Scotty doubled forward, his eyes bugging. Don
Mathers gripped his hands together into a double fist and brought them
upward in a vicious uppercut.

       *       *       *       *       *

Scotty fell forward and to the floor.

Don stood above him momentarily, watchful for movement which didn't
develop. The hefty bodyguard must have been doing some easy living
himself. He wasn't as tough as he looked.

Don knelt and fished from under the other's left arm a vicious-looking
short-barrelled scrambler. He tucked it under his own jacket into his
belt, then turned, opened the door and entered the supposedly barred
office.

Demming and Rostoff looked up from their work across a double desk.

Both scowled. Rostoff opened his mouth to say something and Don Mathers
rapped, "Shut up."

Rostoff blinked at him. Demming leaned back in his swivel chair. "You're
sober for a change," he wheezed, almost accusingly.

Don Mathers pulled up a stenographer's chair and straddled it, leaning
his arms on the back. He said coldly, "Comes a point when even the
lowest worm turns. I've been checking on a few things."

Demming grunted amusement.

Don said, "Space patrols have been cut far below the danger point."

Rostoff snorted. "Is that supposed to interest us? That's the problem of
the military--and the government."

"Oh, it interests us, all right," Don growled. "Currently, Mathers,
Demming and Rostoff control probably three-quarters of the system's
radioactives."

Demming said in greasy satisfaction, "More like four-fifths."

"Why?" Don said bluntly. "Why are we doing what we're doing?"

They both scowled, but another element was present in their expressions
too. They thought the question unintelligent.

Demming closed his eyes in his porcine manner and grunted, "Tell him."

Rostoff said, "Look, Mathers, don't be stupid. Remember when we told
you, during that first interview, that we wanted your name in the
corporation, among other reasons, because we could use a man who was
above law? That a maze of ridiculously binding ordinances have been laid
on business down through the centuries?"

"I remember," Don said bitterly.

"Well, it goes both ways. Government today is also bound, very strongly,
and even in great emergency, not to interfere in business. These
complicated laws balance each other, you might say. Our whole legal
system is based upon them. Right now, we've got government right where
we want it. This is free enterprise, Mathers, at its pinnacle. Did you
ever hear of Jim Fisk and his attempt to corner gold in 1869, the
so-called Black Friday affair? Well, Jim Fisk was a peanut peddler
compared to us."

"What's this got to do with the Fleet having insufficient fuel to ..."
Don Mathers stopped as comprehension hit him. "You're holding our
radioactives off the market, pressuring the government for a price rise
which it can't afford."

Demming opened his eyes and said fatly, "For triple the price, Mathers.
Before we're through, we'll corner half the wealth of the system."

Don said, "But ... but the species is ... at ... _war_."

Rostoff sneered, "You seem to be getting noble rather late in the game,
Mathers. Business is business."

Don Mathers was shaking his head. "We immediately begin selling our
radioactives at cost of production. I might remind you gentlemen that
although we're supposedly a three-way partnership, actually,
everything's in my name. You thought you had me under your thumb so
securely that it was safe--and you probably didn't trust each other.
Well, I'm blowing the whistle."

       *       *       *       *       *

Surprisingly fast for such a fat man, Lawrence Demming's hand flitted
into a desk drawer to emerge with a twin of the scrambler tucked in
Don's belt.

Don Mathers grinned at him, even as he pushed his jacket back to reveal
the butt of his own weapon. He made no attempt to draw it, however.

He said softly, "Shoot me, Demming, and you've killed the most popular
man in the Solar System. You'd never escape the gas chamber, no matter
how much money you have. On the other hand, if I shoot you ..."

He put a hand into his pocket and it emerged with a small, inordinately
ordinary bit of ribbon and metal. He displayed it on his palm.

The fat man's face whitened at the ramifications and his hand relaxed to
let the gun drop to the desk. "Listen, Don," he broke out. "We've been
unrealistic with you. We'll reverse ourselves and split, honestly--split
three ways."

Don Mathers laughed at him. "Trying to bribe me with money, Demming? Why
don't you realize, that I'm the only man in existence who has no need
for money, who can't spend money? That my fellow men--whom I've done
such a good job of betraying--have honored me to a point where money is
meaningless?"

Rostoff snatched up the fallen gun, snarling, "I'm calling your bluff,
you gutless rummy."

Don Mathers said, "Okay, Rostoff. There's just two other things I want
to say first. One--I don't care if I die or not. Two--you're only twenty
feet or so away, but you know what? I think you're probably a lousy
shot. I don't think you've had much practice. I think I can get my
scrambler out and cut you down before you can finish me." He grinned
thinly, "Wanta try?"

Max Rostoff snarled a curse and his finger whitened on the trigger.

Don Mathers fell sideward, his hand streaking for his weapon. Without
thought there came back to him the long hours of training in hand
weapons, in judo, in hand to hand combat. He went into action with cool
confidence.

       *       *       *       *       *

At the spaceport he took a cab to the Presidential Palace. It was an
auto-cab, of course, and at the Palace gates he found he had no money on
him. He snorted wearily. It was the first time in almost a year that
he'd had to pay for anything.

Four sentries were standing at attention. He said, "Do one of you boys
have some coins to feed into this slot? I'm fresh out."

A sergeant grinned, approached, and did the necessary.

Don Mathers said wearily, "I don't know how you go about this. I don't
have an appointment, but I want to see the President."

"We can turn you over to one of the assistant secretaries, Captain
Mathers," the sergeant said. "We can't go any further than that. While
we're waiting, what's the chances of getting your autograph, sir? I
gotta kid ..."

It wasn't nearly as complicated as he'd thought it was going to be. In
half an hour he was seated in the office where he'd received his
decoration only--how long ago was it, really less than a year?

He told the story briefly, making no effort to spare himself. At the end
he stood up long enough to put a paper in front of the other, then sat
down again.

"I'm turning the whole corporation over to the government...."

       *       *       *       *       *

The President said, "Wait a minute. My administration does not advocate
State ownership of industry."

"I know. When the State controls industry you only put the whole mess
off one step, the question then becomes, who controls the State?
However, I'm not arguing political economy with you, sir. You didn't let
me finish. I was going to say, I'm turning it over to the government to
untangle, even while making use of the inventories of radioactives.
There's going to be a lot of untangling to do. Reimbursing the
prospectors and small operators who were blackjacked out of their
holdings by our super-corporation. Reimbursing of the miners and other
laborers who were talked into accepting low pay in the name of
patriotism." Don Mathers cut it short. "Oh, it's quite a mess."

"Yes," the President said. "And you say Max Rostoff is dead?"

"That's right. And Demming off his rocker. I think he always was a
little unbalanced and the prospect of losing all that money, the
greatest fortune ever conceived of, tipped the scales."

The President said, "And what about you, Donal Mathers?"

Don took a deep breath. "I wish I was back in the Space Services,
frankly. Back where I was when all this started. However, I suppose that
after my court martial, there won't be ..."

The President interrupted gently. "You seem to forget, Captain Mathers.
You carry the Galactic Medal of Honor, the bearer of which can do no
wrong."

Don Mathers gaped at him.

The President smiled at him, albeit a bit sourly. "It would hardly do
for human morale to find out our supreme symbol of heroism was a phoney,
Captain. There will be no trial, and you will retain your decoration."

"But I don't want it!"

"I'm afraid that is the cross you'll have to bear the rest of your life,
Captain Mathers. I don't suppose it will be an easy one."

His eyes went to a far corner of the room, but unseeingly. He said after
a long moment, "However, I am not so very sure about your not deserving
your award, Captain."


THE END




Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from _Amazing Science Fiction Stories_
    November 1960. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
    the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed. Minor spelling
    and typographical errors have been corrected without note. Variant
    spellings have been retained.





End of Project Gutenberg's Medal of Honor, by Dallas McCord Reynolds

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MEDAL OF HONOR ***

***** This file should be named 27393.txt or 27393.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/7/3/9/27393/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
