The Project Gutenberg EBook of Lease to Doomsday, by Lee Archer

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Lease to Doomsday

Author: Lee Archer

Illustrator: Virgil Finlay

Release Date: December 2, 2008 [EBook #27392]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LEASE TO DOOMSDAY ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









 LEASE
 TO
 DOOMSDAY

 By LEE ARCHER


 _The twins were a rare team
 indeed. They wanted to build
 a printing plant on a garbage
 dump. When Muldoon asked them
 why, their answer was entirely
 logical:_

   _"Because we live here."_


It was the lack of sense in the ad that made him go back to it again. He
was having his breakfast coffee in the cafeteria next to the midtown
hotel where he lived. The classified section of the New York _Times_ was
spread before him.

    WANTED: Live wire Real Estate broker--No selling--30-40. Room 657
    Silvers Building--9-12 Monday morning.

The ad made no sense for several reasons. One: you just don't go around
advertising for brokers with four pages of them in the classified phone
book. Two: how can one be a live wire broker, without having to sell?
Kevin Muldoon shook his head. Just no damn sense. The Silvers
Building--H'm! Not too far off. He looked at his strap watch. Fifteen
minutes of nine. He could walk it in that time.

"Don't be a fool," he said to himself. "It's obviously a come-on of some
kind."

He got up, paid the check and went out. It wasn't till he was on Third
Ave. that he was conscious he had started to go crosstown when his
office was in the opposite direction. He smiled wryly. Might as well
investigate, he thought. Can't do any harm, and it won't take long.

There were four others waiting in the small anteroom. The outer door
bore no legend other than the room number, and the inner door was blank
altogether. Muldoon made a quick appraisal of those waiting. Three
were obviously past middle-age, the fourth about Muldoon's age. The
inner door opened and Muldoon looked up. A tall man came out first, a
man in his early sixties, perhaps. Immediately behind him came a
slightly shorter man, but very heavy and with a head that was bald as a
billiard ball. The older man marched straight to the door, opened it and
went out without a second look back. The fat man looked around, his face
beaming in a wide smile, eyes almost closed behind fleshy lids.

[Illustration: The weird machine clicked and clattered while the twins
dreamed of tomorrow.]

"And now, who's next?" he asked.

The one who was about Muldoon's age stepped forward. The fat man
motioned for the other to precede him. The door closed. Not more than a
minute went by, and the door opened again and the same act as before
with the older man was gone through.

"And now, who's next?" the fat man asked.

Muldoon noted even the inflection was the same.

So it went with the three who were left, until it was Muldoon's turn.
And now there were six others beside himself also waiting to be
interviewed.

It was a squarish room, simply furnished, with a couple of desks set
side-by-side with a narrow space between them. A chair was set up
facing the desks, obviously meant for the one to be interviewed. Seated
behind one of the desks was the twin of the man now coming to seat
himself at the other desk. Their smiles were identical as they waited
for Muldoon to make himself comfortable.

For a moment there was a blank silence. Muldoon studied them, and they,
smiling still, studied him. Muldoon broke the silence.

"You know," Muldoon said, "your ad didn't make sense to me."

The twins hunched forward slightly at their desks. Their eyes brightened
in anticipation. "No-o?..." said the one who had been waiting for
Muldoon. "Why?"

"With some four pages of brokers in the classified directory, you don't
have to advertise for one. And a live wire broker gets that reputation
as a salesman. Without selling, the wire is dead."

The twins beamed at each other.

"Evin," said the one to the left, "I think we've found our man. Will you
go out and tell those waiting?"

They waited for the twin to return.

"I am Robert Reeger, my brother Evin," said the first twin.

Muldoon introduced himself. There was no handshaking.

       *       *       *       *       *

"You are right about the ad," Robert Reeger said. "We worded it that way
for a reason. We wanted a man of quick intelligence. Mind you, now, we
do want a broker, and one who will do no selling. The 'live wire' part
was my brother Evin's thought. He does sometimes have clever ideas."

Robert stopped to beam at his twin. "Just now," Robert returned to
Muldoon, "I won't go into full discussion of our plans. Briefly,
however, we are buyers, buyers, we hope, of a particular area. Because
of what we have in mind to do we would rather it was done quietly and
without any publicity. Had we engaged the services of a large agency
this would not be possible, for, if I may coin a phrase, the trumpet
must blow strongly to announce the coming of genius." He smiled, stroked
his chin, looked up at the ceiling and his lips moved silently as if he
enjoyed repeating the phrase.

"I like that, Robert," Evin said.

"Yes, I thought it was good," Robert said.

They both looked to Muldoon.

Muldoon said nothing.

The twins sighed audibly, in unison.

Robert's lips came forward in a pout. The look of a pouting cherub,
Muldoon thought, one trying to look stern, and only succeeding in
looking naughty-childish. Muldoon suddenly knew of whom the twins
reminded him. Twin Charles Laughtons, without hair.

"You _are_ free to work for us?" Robert asked.

"_With_ you," Muldoon said. "_I_ have the license." He gave them a quick
smile, as if to lessen the sharpness of the tone he had used. "A broker
acts for a client in the purchase or sale of property. He can't be
employed by them."

"Of course," Robert said quickly. "I did not mean to imply any other
action. Now suppose you tell us briefly about yourself."

Muldoon gave them a thumbnail sketch of his career. He noted their
pleased look that he was a one-man agency. At the conclusion, Robert
stood up and came around the desk. He thrust a hand at Muldoon.

Like shaking hands with a piece of warm dough, Muldoon thought.

"I do believe," Robert said as he placed a heavy arm around Muldoon's
shoulder, and walked him to the door, "that we shall have a mutually
happy relationship. You will not be unrewarded, moneywise." He opened
the door, paused, still with his arm around Muldoon, and looked steadily
into Muldoon's eyes. "Yes, I think there will be mutual benefits in our
relationship. Now, in conclusion, will you pick us up at this office
tomorrow morning at nine?"

Muldoon nodded.

"Good! Then 'bye now, Mr. Muldoon, and thanks so much for coming by in
answer to our ad."

The answer to an irritating thought came to Muldoon while he was waiting
for an elevator to take him to the ground floor. He knew where he had
seen the same kind of look as was in Robert Reeger's eyes when they had
parted. In the eyes of a cat Muldoon had once seen toying with a mouse
the cat had caught....

Deena Savory was a redhead, a green-eyed redhead with a kind of
patrician look about her face that came off very well in the photographs
they took of her. Deena was a model, and made three times the money
Kevin Muldoon made.

It had always been a sore point between them, and more than once the
reason for their worst quarrels.

She was also the worst cook in New York.

Monday evenings were spent in Deena's small apartment on East
Fifty-Sixth Street, and she usually cooked dinner for Muldoon.
Invariably it was steak. Deena had no imagination when it came to food.
Even in restaurants she ordered one or another kind of steak.

They were together on the couch, she stretched full-length, her head in
Muldoon's lap. He was telling her about the Reeger twins and what had
happened that morning. His hands caressed her lightly as she spoke, now
across her cheeks, now more intimately.

"... I don't dig them, Honey," he said, as if in recapitulation. "The
Robert twin, f'r instance. 'You will not be unrewarded, moneywise.'
Madison Avenue and Nineteenth Century English...."

She gently took his hand from where he seemed to find most comfort, and
put it up to her cheek. "What's the difference?" she asked. "So long as
there's money in it?"

"Broker's commission," he said. "No more or less."

"You've been getting so much of that, lately?"

"N-no."

"Okay, then. Stop fighting it. What do you care what kind of English
they use? Or whether they used sign language. The buck, kid, the buck."

"Deena," Muldoon said gravely, "you have the grubbing soul of a
pawnbroker. Or real estate broker," he added. He bent his head and
kissed her lips.

Her lips opened to his with that familiar warmth, a hunger for him which
never failed to thrill. This time she did not remove his hand when it
returned.

"... Kevie, baby--darling ... oh, my darling," she whispered.

Strange, he thought, that at a moment like this, I should be thinking of
those fat twins....

       *       *       *       *       *

Muldoon hated the pirate prices of midtown parking lots, and so was
late. It had taken him ten minutes to find parking space for the
Plymouth. As he started to open the door of room 657 he heard the voice
of one of the twins. The words or sounds were in a language completely
foreign to him. He thought to knock, but changed his mind. To knock
would have made it obvious he had been listening. He barged right in.

The twins were in the anteroom. Muldoon got the impression they knew he
had heard them, and an even stronger impression, that the fact was of no
importance. That bothered him, for some reason.

"Ah, there you are," the twin to the left said. "Evin was wondering
whether you would show up, but I told him he was putting himself to
useless aggravation."

That damned mixed-up phrasing again, Muldoon thought. "Took a little
time to find parking space," he said.

"Shall we be off, then?" Robert asked.

"All right with me," Muldoon replied. There was another odd thing. Evin
Reeger seemed to have so very little to say.

Their destination was a place halfway down the Island. Muldoon's brow
had lifted when they gave him the area. So far as he knew there hadn't
been any development in the area. It was just a bit too far off the
highways and rail lines for housing developments, and even more badly
located for industrial requirements. He wondered what the devil they
had in mind out there.

Traffic was light and the drive took little more than an hour and a half
on the main highway, and another fifteen minutes of blacktop side road
before Evin told him to "Turn left here," onto a rutted path off the
blacktop. The path led through some scrub growth that ended on the edge
of an acre or so of dump heap. Rusted heaps of broken cars were
scattered about. A foul odor came from the left as though garbage, too,
had been dumped and left to rot. There was a flat one-storied wooden
shack close by to which Evin directed him to drive up to.

       *       *       *       *       *

Evin produced a key and opened the door to the shack. There was a
partition separating the place neatly into two sections. There were a
couple of straight-backed wooden chairs and a leather sofa in the near
room. The door to the other room was closed.

"Sit down, Muldoon," Robert Reeger said. He waited for Muldoon to make
himself comfortable on the sofa, then continued: "First time we've ever
been out here during the day. But Evin's sense of direction is
unfailing." He shook his head, smiled brightly. "Ah, well, we must each
have some factor to make for validity of existence, eh?"

"I don't follow," Muldoon said.

"No matter. Now, to the business at hand. I wanted you to see the area
involved. Evin, the plot plan, please."

To Muldoon's surprise Evin Reeger went into the next room and returned
after a moment with a plot plan of the lower third of the Island. He
gave it to Muldoon who spread it at his feet.

"That red-pencilled area I've marked off," Robert Reeger said, "is what
we'll be concerned with. As you notice, the dump and this shack are at
the approximate center. What I have in mind to do is buy all the land in
the marked-off area."

"_Buy_ it!..."

"You seem surprised."

"Shocked, would be the better word. Have you any idea what this could
cost? You've marked off an area of approximately a square mile. Even out
here that would run into millions. And once news got around that someone
was buying parcels of this size--well, you'd have more publicity than
you might want."

"About the cost we won't worry. There will be enough money. But the
attendant publicity could mean not being able to get the land we want.
Is that correct?"

"Could be. Suppose we get options, or leases on these pieces ..."

"That was a good phrase," Evin broke in unexpectedly. "Don't you think
so, Robert?"

"Yes!" Robert said sharply. He seemed to have suddenly lost his smile.
He gave Evin a hard look from under down-drawn brows. He turned to
Muldoon. "We are renting this, this tumbledown structure. A two-year
lease. H'mm! I see your point. Spending millions in a sudden buying move
would make unneeded difficulties. No! Options to buy, but lease for the
present. Evin, the list of names, please."

Evin didn't have to go anywhere for the list. He had it with him.
Muldoon looked it over. There were thirty-three names, including the
County and State.

"Well?" Robert said.

"I'll have to know what you want to lease it for, the name or names of
corporations, and so forth."

"Will my own name do?"

"It will. But you can go into the County Court and register a business
name under your own, what they call a D.B.A. name--doing business
as--name. Register as many as you wish. Doesn't cost a great deal. Or
form a corporation, you and your brother."

"No. Let the leases come under my own name. As for what I intend doing,
well, I intend to concrete surface the entire area."

"A square mile of concrete?..."

"Yes. There is a government plan to use this end of the Island for a
huge missile depot. They will have to come to me."

       *       *       *       *       *

Pretty shrewd, Muldoon thought. That is if it's true. "All right,"
Muldoon said. "When do you want me to start?"

"Right now. That was one reason for bringing you out here. Evin, will
you get the brief case, please?"

Once more Evin Reeger went into the other room. And closed the door
carefully behind him when he came out. He handed the brief case to
Muldoon.

"You may open it," Robert said.

Muldoon's fingers became suddenly nerveless, and he dropped the brief
case. It was crammed with money, packets of hundred-dollar bills.

"There are fifty packets of hundred-dollar bills, totalling a million
dollars," Robert said.

"What the hell did you want me to do, carry the case around with me?"
Muldoon asked.

"No. It will remain here. I merely wanted to show you I will be able to
stand behind any price you may have to meet. From now on report here, no
matter what time. And, since time has a definite value in this matter,
do not stand upon it."

"I like that," Evin said, suddenly. "That was good, Robert."

Muldoon nodded. Evin had a value, too. The same value any yes-man has.
But it bothered Muldoon. This just wasn't the way of twins. At least
none he knew. Well, one thing was certain; the Reegers had the ready
cash....

"This may take some time," Muldoon said. "Weeks, certainly, maybe
months. The County and State, alone ..."

       *       *       *       *       *

"We don't have that much time," Robert broke in. "Evin must return in
ten days...."

"Return? Where?" Muldoon asked.

It was as if Robert hadn't heard. "The State and County properties are
small areas, and on the very edge. Suppose we forget about them for the
time being. Work on the private parties."

"Anything you say. But it may still take weeks."

"Then don't quibble. Lease at any price. If a show of cash is necessary,
let me know. Now I think you'd better start. Good luck, Muldoon."

It was Wednesday night before Muldoon saw Deena Savory again. Nor had he
seen the Reeger twins since leaving them Monday morning. Deena and
Muldoon seldom saw each other during the middle of the week; they were
her busy days and she needed the nights for complete rest. But he had
called her and asked to see her. They were at dinner in a small Italian
place close to her apartment.

He had briefly brought her up to date on what had happened since she had
seen him last, and was at the moment finishing the last of the lasagna
he had ordered.

"They're phonies, honey, real phonies," he said. "I'll bet my last buck
on that."

She was looking at the last piece of steak on her plate. With an almost
defiant gesture she speared it and put it in her mouth.

"Atta girl," he said.

"Mind your own business," she said. "How do you mean they're phonies?"

"I spent all Monday investigating _them_!"

"A fine way to make a dollar," she said. "What do you care who they
are?"

He gave her a knowing smile. "That's my fat-headed girl. Like to visit
me in a nice jail, wouldn't you? One with a prestige address, of course.
Let me tell you. They rented that shack, and the dump heap next to it
for a pretty fancy figure. Robert Reeger said they were going to do
printing in that shack. They paid in full for the two years rental, in
nice crisp hundred-dollar bills...."

"I get it! They were phony," she exulted.

"How can you be so stupid? I know. For you it's easy. Of course the
bills were genuine. But the printing business--what were they going to
print with, typewriters? Another thing. There's no business record I
could find on them; they're not listed. So how did they get a million
dollars, and Robert said more. 'Report here, no matter what the time.' I
don't get it. I drove them out. There was no garage, no car I could see,
and the place is miles from food. How do they live out there?"

"Maybe they have friends who pick them up," Deena said.

"Maybe. Robert also said there was a rumor or something about the
government going to use the area for a missile depot. I tried to run it
down. Nothing."

"Which proves nothing," she said.

"True. But I couldn't even smell smoke. No, the whole thing just smells
bad. So I think I'm going back there and tell them to forget it."

"Oh, don't be an idiot," she said. "This is your big chance to make some
real money, get a reputation, and because you're chicken, you're going
to throw it up."

"I won't get into anything crooked!" his voice rose.

"The way you're thinking you couldn't follow a straight line."

"They can't draw a straight line."

"Well, you do what you want. Only, the next time I have to pay for a
dinner don't give me that martyred look."

"Okay. Okay. What do you want for dessert, spumoni?"

"After this, bicarbonate."

"Very funny."

And for the first time in several years she did not kiss him good night,
when they parted.

       *       *       *       *       *

He turned off the blacktop and started down the rutted path. He switched
the headlights off about halfway to the shack, and parked it a hundred
or so yards away from it and walked the rest. The shack was dark.

Instead of knocking, Muldoon walked around to the back and peered
through the single window at the rear. He could see nothing. Now isn't
this just dandy, he thought. Drive all the way out here, and nobody's at
home. Damn! He went around to the front and started back to the car. His
attention was caught by a greenish glow of light from the far end of the
dump heap.

His curiosity aroused, Muldoon warily made his way through the metal
litter until he was close enough to make out the source of the light. It
came from the center of a shallow area that had been cleared of rubble.
A rusted misshapen mass of metal lay in the center of the cleared space.
The greenish glow was coming from an opening in the mass.

Muldoon crept closer until he was able to make out details. Not too many
but enough to give him an idea of the size and general shape of the
thing. But what really held him were the figures of Robert and Evin
Reeger.

He saw them quite distinctly.

One of the twins was bent over a machine of some sort. There were
levers, gears, and rollers mounted on a webbed platform no larger than a
rather oversized typewriter. Muldoon's eyes went wide at the sight of
the greenbacks coming in a steady stream from the interior of the
machine and falling into a box at the side. He could see very little
else that was in the room, other than the brother of the twin at the
machine. He was on the far side of it, fiddling with something hidden.

Muldoon stared in fascination for another minute, then carefully made
his way back to the car. He had parked it within the growth of scrub
trees and bushes. He started it, turned the headlights on, and drove
slowly out into the open and up to the shack. He honked his horn loudly
a couple of times and got out of the car and walked up to the shack and
tried the door. It was closed.

Presently the figures of Evin and Robert Reeger came into view from the
direction of the dump heap. Muldoon's figure was outlined in the glow of
the headlights. Muldoon noticed the brief case one of them was carrying.

"Ah, there, Muldoon," Muldoon had recognized Robert's voice.

"Hello, Mr. Reeger. Thought I'd come by and let you know how I've been
doing."

Evin, who was carrying the brief case, unlocked the door and switched on
the light. The other two followed him into the room. Robert Reeger
motioned for Muldoon to take the sofa. Evin went into the other room.

"Well, my boy," Robert said heartily. "How is it going?"

"Slowly," Muldoon said casually. "But the first of this sort of
operation has to go that way. Kind of feel things out, if you know what
I mean?"

"Of course. How does it look?"

"I think it's going to go all right. I've got plans."

"Splendid! Do you need money?"

"Yes. About ten thousand."

"Evin! Do bring the case out," Robert called loudly.

In a couple of seconds, Evin Reeger appeared. He brought the brief case
to his brother, turned, and went back into the other room without saying
anything. He walked slowly and stiffly, his feet slapping heavily on the
bare boards.

"What's wrong with him?" Muldoon asked.

Robert Reeger was pulling money from the brief case. He looked up with
an expressionless face. "Nothing. You said ten thousand?..."

"Yes."

Reeger passed two of the packets to Muldoon. "Sure you won't need more?"

Muldoon put the money away, got up from the sofa, and started to the
door. "No. Just what I need. Uh, I'll see you Friday night."

"Fine! And don't forget. We must get all this done quickly."

"I won't forget."

       *       *       *       *       *

Robert Reeger waited till the sound of the Plymouth was no longer heard.
Then he went into the other room. Other than for two army cots the room
was empty. Evin was stretched full-length on one of the cots.

"You're certain he knows?" Evin asked.

"Yes. I saw him on the visio."

"But he couldn't see all the interior?"

"No. Just the duplicating machine. We must get rid of it tonight."

"What do you think he will do?"

"What can he do? He knows nothing. The money is genuine, and with the
destruction of the machine he can't prove anything. Nevertheless it
might be the wisest course to get rid of him. We might have been too
clever with that advertisement."

"Possibly. But, we must move quickly, then. I must leave this planet in
seven days now. And we must have this area under lease by then. Three
musts!"

Robert smiled thinly. "We will. If not through Muldoon, then through
another means. When you return in a year with the space fleet you will
find the landing area we need."

"And after that ..."

They smiled at each other.

"We said we would not fail. This planet will fall to our weapons like
ripe fruit from a tree."

"But first I must return to tell them," Evin said. "If I do not return
they will know we have failed, and will seek another planet."

"We won't fail," Robert reiterated. "Right now, let's get back to the
space ship and the duplicating machine."

       *       *       *       *       *

Muldoon spent a busy Thursday. A newsbrief in the _Times_ financial
section which told of a public utility wanting Island property gave him
an idea for one thing. He spent all morning bringing the idea to a head,
after he had verified the truth of the item. Then, after a late lunch,
he went to the Treasury Department's headquarters and spent a couple of
hours with the head of the local investigation department.

He was quite pleased with himself by nightfall, as he headed out to the
Island. This time he parked the car at a considerable distance from the
shack. There were lights on, this night. He walked boldly up and knocked
at the door. It opened wide and the thick figure of one of the twins
darkened the opening.

"Well, Mr. Muldoon. I did not think to see you till Friday."

"I thought I'd come and see you tonight," Muldoon said as he stepped
into the room.

"I didn't hear the car."

"Oh. Parked it back a bit," Muldoon said. He turned toward the other
twin as the inner door opened. "Hello."

"Hello."

"You know, Evin," Robert said, "I'm rather glad Muldoon stopped by
tonight. We might as well conclude our business with him now."

"An excellent idea, Robert. Excellent."

"What do you mean?" Muldoon asked. "I no longer am acting for you?"

"Not for us, for yourself. I'm afraid your services, in any capacity,
will no longer be needed."

Muldoon caught the undercurrent of menace in Robert's voice. It told him
they were not only suspicious but ready to act on it. He started to edge
toward the door, but Robert suddenly reached out and took his arm. There
was power in the fat man's grip. Evin moved swiftly for his size, and
took up a position before the door, which he kicked shut.

Muldoon twisted sharply and was free of the other's grip. He stepped
back a couple of paces. "What the hell's this all about?"

"Come now, Muldoon," Robert said softly. "You didn't think your prying
went unobserved, last night?"

"So I was nosey. But what's this rough stuff you're trying to pull?"

"Merely making sure your curiosity will end tonight."

       *       *       *       *       *

Muldoon took a couple of more retreating paces. "You mean you're going
to get rid of me? Well, maybe you will, and maybe you won't. But even if
you do ..."

A smile broke through the grim lips of the twin threatening Muldoon.
"You mean the duplicating machine? Just another piece of rusted scrap
among the rest of the junk."

Muldoon paled. The evidence he was going to need, gone.

"And of course the money is genuine. We made sure of it. Ink, paper,
everything. We made sure of it long ago. It will be a pity you won't be
here to see how efficient we can really be. But the rest of the planet
will know. As soon as Evin returns."

Muldoon's mind was working swiftly. "You got rid of the machine. But
what about the junk shop it was in. I'll bet there are more important
things there."

"Indeed there are. But no one will find it. It will be just another
rusted piece of large junk to them."

It was then Muldoon made his move. He lashed out with a fist. The blow
staggered Robert. And Muldoon was crashing his shoulder against the
inner door. It burst inward, but before he could get through Robert
grabbed him. The whole side of Muldoon's face went numb as Robert
crashed his fist against his jaw. Muldoon knew he didn't stand a chance
in a straight-up fight, not with these two. Robert's hands were reaching
for him, now.

Muldoon grabbed one of the hands with both of his, twisted outward as
he grasped two fingers in each hand. Robert's face went putty-grey as
the bones snapped. Muldoon no longer cared about fair play. His knee
came up where it could do most damage, and Robert sank grovelling to the
floor.

Muldoon whirled. Too late. The world exploded in a thousand flashes of
pain-filled lights. He went crashing backward into the wall. Evin hit
him again before he stumbled blindly away from the terrible fist.

"Let me kill him," Robert groaned.

Muldoon pulled himself up from the pain-filled world he had been sent
into. There seemed to be two Evins facing him. Then there was only one.
A twisted grin came to Muldoon's lips. "Come ahead, you rat," he
mumbled.

Evin came forward. And swift as an adder Muldoon kicked him just below
the knee cap. Evin screamed, and collapsed. Muldoon staggered out of the
way of the falling body, only to fall into the clutches of Robert's
sudden reaching fingers.

He fell to the floor.

Robert tried to get his good hand up to Muldoon's throat. Muldoon beat
at the thick face with both hands. But the other seemed not to feel the
pounding fists. Slowly the fingers managed to reach their goal. Muldoon
felt the darkness of death closing over him as his breath became a
tortured dying gasp. His hand found Robert's face, came gently over it
until his thumb pressed on one eyeball. And Robert screamed as the thumb
became a hooked instrument to blind him.

Muldoon rolled away from the other, staggered somehow erect, but knew
his strength was gone. He couldn't make it to the door. And now Evin had
him....

And the door burst open and men poured into the room. Muldoon recognized
only one, the head of the Treasury's investigation department, before he
blacked out.

       *       *       *       *       *

Deena Savory stroked his forehead gently. "Does it hurt much, baby?"

The nurse had left them alone when Deena came into the hospital room.

"Not now," Muldoon said.

"What are they going to do to those men?" she asked.

"Oh, twenty years, according to Phillips. Counterfeiting, you know,
carries heavy penalties."

"But I thought the money was good? After all, they had paid rent with
C-notes."

"A slip-up on the bank's part. You see they made one mistake. The
machine they had, turned out perfect bills. Every one with the same
serial number...."

Deena's eyes widened.

"And the junk shop or whatever it was?" she said.

"I thought I'd let well enough alone. You see I took care of that during
the day. The twins, being criminals, had automatically broken their
lease. They also made it possible for me to change clients. Well,
there's going to be a huge tank covering that dump and shack, a tank
holding an awful lot of natural gas. I got together with the owner of
the property and the utility people yesterday afternoon and worked out a
deal. They're going to dump all that junk into the ocean."

"I'm sorry about the other night," she said suddenly.

"Is that how you say you're sorry?" he asked.

"Uh-uh," she said, as he reached for her. "There's a time and place for
that."

"Promise."

Her lips agreed.


THE END




Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from _Amazing Stories_ September 1956.
    Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed. Minor spelling and
    typographical errors have been corrected without note. Variant
    spellings have been retained.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Lease to Doomsday, by Lee Archer

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LEASE TO DOOMSDAY ***

***** This file should be named 27392.txt or 27392.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/7/3/9/27392/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
