The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Beginning, by Henry Hasse

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Beginning

Author: Henry Hasse

Illustrator: Virgil Finlay

Release Date: December 28, 2008 [EBook #27645]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BEGINNING ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









    _Relentlessly, a narrative as old as time drives forward to a climax
    as old as man--and points a finger as grim as Death._

[Illustration]


the BEGINNING

By HENRY HASSE

Illustrated by FINLAY


In the purely cerebral sense, there was no particular point-of-sequence
at which Gral could have been said to Know. The very causality of his
existence was a succession of brute obedience to brute awareness, for it
was only thus that one survived. There was the _danger-sense_ on
those days when the great-toothed cats roamed the valley, and the
males-who-will-bring remained huddled and sullen in the caves above the
great ledge; there was the _hunger-sense_ when provender was low, and
Gor-wah drove them out with grunts and gibes to hunt the wild-dogs and
lizards and lesser beasts; and not infrequently there was the other
sense, the _not-hunger_, when the bring had been exceptional and there
was somnolence after the gorging.

Gral could not remember when he had experienced the latter, for it was
the dictate of Gor-wah, the Old One, that who did not bring did not
eat--not until the others had gorged. Gral was small, and weakest of all
the males. Not often did he bring. _Once_ on a spurious moment he had
scaled the valley-rim, and came out upon the huge plain where it was
rumored the little three-toed horses roamed. And he had seen them, he
had seen them! He pursued, armed only with blunt shaft and a few of the
throw-stones such as Otah used; but he was less swift than the tiny
horses, and his throw-stones fell wide, and it was rumored that here
roamed the long-tusked shaggy ones that were larger than the very caves
... trembling, Gral had retraced his way, to arrive at the ledge and
meekly await Gor-wah's word that he could partake of the sinews that
night.

_... Point of sequence. Causality in action. An atom is dissected, a
belly rumbles in hunger, a star blooms into brief nova; a bird wheels in
futile escape, an ice-flow impacts, an equation is expressed in awesome
mushrooming shape. These are multitudinous, apocalyptic. They are
timeless and equal. These are things whereby suns wheel or blossom or
die, a tribe vanishes, a civilization climbs or a world decays._

Or an earlier sun, hot and soft-stroking against leaves. Or a
Pleistocene man, smallest of all the males, whose supine acceptance had
devolved into laziness....

Gral would not have called it laziness; his crude synapses could not
have contained the thought, much less given it relevance. Even later--as
Gral-the-Bringer--his only point of relevance was to the Place where the
great thing happened.

The Place was a small rocky cleft above the river, not easily
accessible.... Gral found it one day because he dearly loved to climb,
though all to be found here were the lizards, stringy and without
substance. But this day he found more. It was _warmth_, a warmth
immeasurably more satisfying than the caves-above-the-ledge. Here for
perhaps an hour the late sun stroked directly in, soft and containing,
setting the narrow walls aglow with bright-brushed patterns.

To Gral it was an hour apart. He gathered leaves and placed them here,
and here he paused in the lateness of each day though his bring was
frugal and his belly would rumble that night. But to _that_ he was
accustomed, and this was pleasurable.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was the time of the thaw. Gral huddled in his Place and welcomed the
stroking warmth. He was weary, his forage had been fruitless, his
throw-stones wasted ... would he never master them as Otah and the
others? He had confronted a wild-dog and pinned it snarling against
rock, he had employed his shaft and got it fairly into flesh, only to
have the beast slip off the smooth point and escape. Smooth points--they
were useless! Briefly, his mind groped with that but could not sustain
it.

So Gral burrowed into the leaves, his anger diminished as he watched
with drowsy delight the sun-patterns stroking. And his eyes must have
closed, half closed....

It was no snarl that brought him back--it was a tread, soft-shod and
cautious, very close. The snarl came an instant later, deep-throated
with anger and meaning.

Another had found this Place, this warmth, these leaves that were fine
for burrowing. Gral came erect and stared into the visage of Obe the
Great Bear; just six feet away he saw the great head that swayed with
deceptive gentleness, the amber eyes burning, the twinned mountainous
muscle of shoulders ... and in that quick moment Gral saw something
else. Obe stood directly astride the pointed shaft which Gral had left
too far distant.

Gral did not breathe. He did not move. Only his hand crept slowly, but
already he knew his throw-stones were gone. Once more Obe snarled, and
Gral saw those great shoulder muscles slide. His hand encountered the
wall, groped desperately; then his fingers found something--a stick, a
root, some gnarled thing that protruded....

In one rearing flow of motion, Obe launched out in a mighty reach. Gral
caught part of that sweeping blow; stunned, he managed to gain footing,
and now both his hands were on the protruding object. He wrenched and
the thing came free, seeming strange and heavy in his hands. Obe was
upon him again, the great paws ready to crush ... pure terror sent Gral
stumbling back, but it was a different instinct that brought his arms
once up and then down in a great arc....

Once only. He felt a wondrous impact that jarred him to the
shoulders--and then it was a miracle. Obe was no longer upon him. Obe
lay half sprawled, roaring with rage, and from Obe's massive head came
the crimson life-stuff!

Gral did not question. Avoiding the destructive paws, he leaped in and
away, and then in, all the while employing the thing in his hand until
Obe's life-stuff had run its course in crimson ruin.

       *       *       *

Acceptance came slowly, as Gral sagged in weariness against the wall. He
could not believe this thing! Timorously, he approached the great
carcass and prodded with his foot. Then he accepted.

Now things were happening inside him--a great turmoil, a throbbing
within his chest. Gral straightened; he brought his arms quickly up and
around, and the thing-that-slew felt wondrous in the arc. Even better
than the throw-stones! It was like--he struggled for the meaning--like
an extension of one's self! One threw the stone and yet retained it!

But alas, it was not a stone at all, Gral discovered. He placed the
gnarled thing in sunlight and crouched to survey it. This
thing-that-slew was but a length of rotting root, frozen at the end with
clay and encrusted ice. And already the ice was shattered.

The sun did the rest, as Gral watched in despair; soon there was only
soft melting mud and a gnarled stick that would never slay again.

For a long time Gral crouched there, trying to understand. Dimly he
perceived, but his mind would not reach. He scowled angrily and flung
the useless stick away. There was a thing inside him he did not like, a
strange new thing that gnawed and nagged and brought anger again.

It was anger at being robbed of a priceless thing--but the gnawing went
deeper.

Wearily, he rose. He began his trek back to the great ledge, to make
announcement that his bring this day would be Obe.

       *       *       *       *       *

Otah came, and Lak and one other, and together they brought Obe back. No
one made remark on the slaying; it was enough that Obe was here! And
when Gral came forward at the gorging to take the bringer's share, he
merely took and retired, disdaining the great show of prowess and
exaggeration which the others used to demonstrate their kill. But he saw
that Gor-wah, the Old One, was pleased. Even Otah the Thrower-of-Stones
looked at him with envy; it was not often they had Obe the Great Bear;
only twice before had it happened, and both times it was Otah who
brought.

Gral gorged voluptuously that night. This too was new to his experience,
and this he liked. But newer still was the thing he did not like, the
thing that continued to gnaw and nag and would not let him sleep.

And next morning, with the valley still gray and murky before the dawn
and damp with bitter cold, Gral was gone in advance of the others. He
clambered down to the river and there he pursued his way--far along
toward the place where it widened into shallows. No thought of bringing
today! Instead he searched. He searched the rocky shallows as the sun
came shafting, and he was still searching later as it climbed high.

He found the place at last, where the stones were plentiful and of
proper size. There he paused; the thing was still angry and prodding
within him; Gral could not have known that this "thing-that-prodded" was
not anger but a churning impatience, a burning nameless need--that he
was in very truth a prototype, the first in the realm of pure research!

But he applied it, knowing remotely what he must do. It was long; it was
irksome; he ached all through with the effort but still he persisted.
Until at last, from all the stones in the shallows, he had gathered a
dozen that pleased him.

These he seized eagerly. He spread them out; he examined; he grunted and
grimaced and paused in perplexity. It was difficult to choose when each
might do! But he chose, weighing each in his hand before discarding,
until finally _one_ remained.

He grunted his pleasure, knowing purpose now. The vines! Again he
selected carefully. _Tight_, said the thing-that-prodded, _it must be
tight or you will have only a throw-stone_.

And so began the long task of arranging stone to shaft, as he brought
the vine round and round again. It was crude; his fingers were clumsy
and unaccustomed; the vine tangled and tore, and there was no way of
fastening. But with each failure he found new ways, until at last it was
done.

It was done! A thing of extended strength and weight, at once so
wondrous that Gral could only place it before him and stare. He felt a
pulsing at his throat, his thoughts went leaping. Obe the Great Bear!
Now he could bring Obe many times! Even Otah the Thrower-of-Stones would
be in awe!

Gral lifted the thing of his creation ... and just a little way distant,
his glance caught the bole of a tree. _Now this will be Obe the Great
Bear_ ... then Gral leapt forward, arm outflung in the arc he
remembered.

Truly and without effort the weight went to the mark. It made impact
that jarred him from arm to shoulder, but this he did not mind because
his weapon's edge brought a great gaping wound to the weathered bole.

_... the first sound of isolate words across a wire. The initial shock
of mushroom-shape above an atoll. The fierce clutch of a weighted shaft
newly fashioned ... man stands always_ FOR A MOMENT _in awe of what man
has wrought._

       *       *       *

For a moment only. And so Gral stood stark in his moment of awe, truly
frightened as he visioned what such a blow might have done to Obe. But
Gral was truly man, truly prototype; for the time of one deep breath he
felt it, then awe and fright were gone as he exulted.

Once more he brought the shaft _up_ in smooth swing and _down_ in the
arc....

Alas for Gral--alas for research. Alas for all the effort and
application and the prodding-thing within. It was Gral's destiny yet to
know that a mere day's effort was only the beginning.

For his second mighty swing did not reach the bole-bark. It reached
nothing but air. He felt a sudden lightness as the stone fled from
shaft, and he was left holding a stick trailing vines at the end.

Undaunted, he tried again, and again it happened--the stone went
plummeting. A third time he tried, and a fourth. He chose the more
pliant vines and strove to make them stay, sought a new way to fasten.
The stone would not stay.

Gral mourned, and from the mourning came anger and then a bitterness
that rose to blind him. For the rest of that day he tried--he could not
have counted the times. A factor was missing--dimly he knew that. The
sun was dull red along the valley when he desisted; his hands were raw
and bleeding, and seeing that, a sound rose in his throat like grating
gravel.

Grimly, he buried his stone there beneath the bole and made his way back
to the great ledge. His share of Obe would last yet a day or two. The
thought of food was only fleeting, because the anger was still inside
him, larger now, demanding now ... that thing-that-prodded.

       *       *       *       *       *

Obe was gone at last, both Gral's share and all the rest. Three days
were gone and Gral did not try to bring again. But each day he went from
the ledge in advance of the others, he went in a hunger he did not
heed--to the place of the buried stone.

On the third day he thought that Otah followed, keeping discreetly
behind; but he could not be sure. This was not Otah's usual direction.
And later, on the far shore across the shallows he saw one of Kurho's
tribe from Far End. It was not often that Kurho's people foraged this
far, and Gral could not say how long the man must have stood there bold
and brazen. When next he looked up, the fellow was gone.

Ordinarily he would have reported this to Gor-wah, but the incident was
soon forgotten. He continued doggedly with shaft and stone. It was
something wild and febrile that drove him now, and he could not have
wondered at his own incredible quixotism--he was a million years removed
from that! But inevitably his synapses took hold, the neuronic links
grooved, and to Gral one thought emerged: _the vines would never do_.

And so he came to know where the missing factor lay. He knew it dully
and was helpless.

More than helpless, he was hungry. It came with a great gnawing need. On
the fifth day it was _Otah_ who noticed, and more out of contempt than
pity tossed him the remnants of a wild-dog he had brought: the portion
was little more than stripped bones and sinew, but Gral accepted without
question, crawled to his place on the ledge and partially assuaged his
hunger....

_The ways of discovery are most wondrous--yet who will dare to say they
take precedence over the wondrous ways of the stomach? And the ways are
ironic; is it not conceivable that the two should align in devious
fruition?_ For Gral found answer, not in his groping hands, but tangled
about his clumsy feet!

       *       *       *

The sun came high and hot. Gral emerged from his sleep-place on the
ledge, faint and hungry but knowing he must try yet again. He took a
step, his feet tangled, and growling deep he reached down and tore at a
tough twining substance.

Sinews. Sinews stripped bare by his own hunger, all that Otah and others
had tossed him these past days; they were taut and clinging now,
unresilient, like the vines of the young trees and yet strangely unlike.

_Unlike!_ Gral stared, as his throat went pulsing. He reached out and
touched; one had twined about a rock, was now so fast that his fingers
could not cause it to move. For a long time he crouched, perplexed,
growling deep as his fingers explored. He glanced up at the sun, and
then back, and with that glance two things came together with searing
shock....

For the very first time, man--a Pleistocene man--had made a clear
cerebral distinction of cause and effect.

Gral arose. There was a wild new urgency. Quickly he searched and he
found, across all the great ledge, sinews from the gorging which the sun
had not yet touched. Some among the tribe stared with immobile contempt,
thinking Gral the scavenger was yet hungry. But Gral gathered quickly,
and departed, and was soon at the far place by the great bole, where he
retrieved his stone and set feverishly to work.

Indeed it was not like the vines! It was easy now, but he was doubly
thorough; he made his fingers be strong as he followed the pattern he
knew so well. The sinews held, they held! His part done at last, he went
out from the trees and placed his shaft where the sun's hot stroke could
reach.

And this was perhaps hardest of all--the waiting. Most of that day he
crouched and waited and watched, as the sun's work was done; that great
bright orb, his ally; he had known times when it was beneficent and
times when it was cruel, but now in his need Gral's thoughts were
kindly.

Soon it became as if his own kind thoughts and the sun's hot strength
were one. The thing-that-prodded now was different, now it outpoured,
gracious to meet his need. He could not have known that this was prayer!
And so, by degree and small degree Gral saw the sinews grasp and
tighten.

       *       *       *

Not until the sun was low, at valley's Far End, did he dare reach out
and take his shaft and put it to test. But already he knew! The stone
held, and it held, and would continue to hold after many tries. He had
fashioned a thing and it was wondrous--his own sole possession--a weapon
beyond anything the valley-people had dreamed of--and it was his alone.

A stirring of vague alarm made him pause. He growled deep. The
thing-that-prodded churned in a new way, a cunning way, and once again
Gral was prototype. This thing must be kept secret! Not yet would he
share--not until he became known as Gral-the-Bringer!

_... he could not have known. Could not have known that this thing he
wrought spelled at once Beginning and End: that no such shocking
departure remains long sole-possessed, either shaft or fire or
mushroom-shape: that with each great thing of man's devising comes
question and doubt and challenge and often disaster...._

Or knowing, would not have cared.

[Illustration]

       *       *       *       *       *

So now he was known as Gral-the-Bringer! He went alone each day, taking
throw-stones which he discarded in favor of his new weapon from its
place of hiding. He brought the wild-dogs for a time, but soon he
disdained them. Three times more he brought Obe the Great Bear, but
would not demonstrate his method of kill. Sometimes he scaled the
valley-rim to the great plain, where he slew the three-toed horses whose
flesh was sweet and different.

And each time at the gorging Otah watched him--watched sometimes sullen
and brooding, sometimes with secret knowing.

And then came a day when _Otah_ brought Obe the Bear. Three times in as
many days he brought Obe, and on the third time he brought back also the
shaft-with-stone, bearing it boldly to make sure that Gral and all the
others saw.

With half snarl and half wail, Gral leaped to seize it. Otah might have
crushed him with a blow, but Otah waited, looking at him fully. Gral's
snarl died in his throat. This was not the weapon he had hidden, but
another! Otah had found and copied.

"See this!" Otah grunted. "I slew Obe with this!" And he demonstrated to
all the tribe. He was still angry, facing Gral, but he gave credit.
"_Gral_ used it first. Gral is greatest among us! But if Gral can use,
Otah can use--we will all use!"

He turned to Gor-wah the Old One, and said in the language of
monosyllable and gesture: "We must have Council!"

There was Council, and the truth was out. Gral held back nothing in his
telling. Gor-wah listened and nodded and grunted, his brow furrowed and
he growled deep in his throat.

"A weapon of great magic," Gor-wah pronounced, and he prodded with his
fingers at it, almost afraid to touch.

"Arh-h-h!" echoed the males. "A weapon of great magic!"

"Let us have many such," Otah repeated with growl and gesture. "The
tribe of Gor-wah will be greatest in all the valley!"

Again Gor-wah grunted, shook his head slowly. "The tribe of Gor-wah
seeks only food and peace. This we have. We do well without such a
weapon."

"Arh-h," echoed the males. "We do well without."

Gral felt helpless, listening. All attention was now upon Otah and the
Old One. "But we will use only for food and peace," Otah pursued
sullenly. "Such was my meaning!"

Gor-wah rose, trembling. "Meaning? I will give you meaning. Kurho's
tribe at Far End! Already they have taken the lesser tribes. Each year
they come in bold insolence, and only the river separates; in time they
mean to take the whole valley. Kurho has declared it!" He spread his
hands. "Never again will we know peace, if Kurho learns the way of such
a weapon!"

There was pause, a restless unease. And again it was Otah who growled
boldly, touching the weapon: "Such is the reason for many of these. Let
us make them, and none will dare to come!"

"None will dare!" echoed the Council. But there were both those who said
it strong, and those who said in doubt.

Now it was plain that even Gor-wah was in doubt. He was old and he had
known this time would come, the time when another took the tribe, and
that one would be Otah. But now he stood straight and made
pronouncement. "I say no! The risk is too great. You, Otah--and you,
Gral--you will destroy this weapon. It must not be used again!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Of course it was never done. Otah also knew that he must take the tribe,
and they looked to him now. Soon Lok had the weapon, then Mai-ak and
most of the others, as day by day Gral instructed them in the making.
But they used with caution! Otah reminded them always of the Old One's
words, though none of the Far End tribe had been seen near the river for
many days now.

Until Mai-ak returned from a journey, to announce he had encountered one
of Kurho's tribe. "We exchanged insults. I invited him to come close,"
Mai-ak explained with amusing gesture, "but the fellow would not. He saw
my weapon! I think he would have given all his throw-stones to possess
it!"

Otah was not pleased. He would have admonished, except that Mai-ak told
a story well; besides, Mai-ak was a great hunter.

But there came another such day, and then others. First Lok reported and
then Mai-ak again. The reports became frequent. Kurho's men were forever
near, watching in silence this new weapon in the hands of the Gor-wah
tribe across the river.

And then Mai-ak brought a message ... there had been another encounter,
no insults this time but rather a sullen understanding. Kurho was aware
of the new weapon; it made his own people uneasy and restless; such a
thing at loose in the valley could only spell threat to all peoples!
But, if it was to be, then what the tribe of Gor-wah devised Kurho's
tribe would also devise. They would devise more and better!

Otah listened, growled in anger. "Kurho says this? Kurho, who has
boasted that he will take the whole valley?" Then he paused and
considered sensibly. "Mai-ak, take answer. You will say that we go in
peace. Say that never do we intend to cross the river. And say
also"--Otah paused, groping--"say also that we shall be ready for any
who do choose to cross!"

The Old One nodded approval, but no one saw; and no one saw the dark
furrow of doubt like a shadow of doom across his face.

"Kurho speaks big," sneered a young one, new in Council. "We have heard
it before, always it is Kurho's tribe who is greatest in every deed...."
He spat in contempt.

       *       *       *

Days were gone, endless days without incident. But the reports came
in--a mere trickle at first, and then in great tide. Kurho's tribe had
indeed devised. Their weapon had been observed! Dak returned one day in
high excitement, stumbling across the ledge from a long day's journey.

"Kurho has devised better! We bring Obe the Bear, but they have now
slain the great-toothed one. I saw it, I swear! They slew him easily!"
He gasped for breath, then gained his feet and gave them eloquent
gesture of what he had seen.

There could be no doubt. Kurho now had a weapon much more facile, more
deadly.

Otah accepted grimly. Now it was he who must prove! He went to work at
once, he and Gral, devising a weapon to meet the threat--more
sharp-edged and deadly, of greater length and balance. It took days. And
days more to seek out the place of the great-toothed ones. Not one but
_three_ were slain, and it was made certain the word reached Kurho.

But now Otah knew. He knew and was helpless. A frightful thing had been
launched and there could be no turning; nothing now but the constant
fear, the trap without end, the perilous thing above all their heads ...
and the waiting.

Kurho also waited. True, one thing remained to temper the distrust:
sporadic communication had been established, a thing new and yet heavy
with pretense, which again like a serpent at its tail spelled mutual
distrust. But it was there, begrudging, and all the smaller tribes knew
of it too--those scattered ones who were little more than clans. All the
peoples of the valley watched and waited, aware of this thing between
the two great tribes of Kurho and Otah.

"It is better that we should talk, even endlessly, than to use such
weapons tribe against tribe!" Such was Otah's word to those who
grumbled and those who feared, and there was much to indicate that such
was Kurho's feeling too.

Indeed it appeared to be so! For the first time, Kurho relaxed his
borders at Far End. Occasionally the Otah tribesmen were permitted to
enter, welcomed without suspicion--a thing unprecedented! Similarly,
select members from the Kurho tribe were accepted beyond the river; they
displayed certain prowesses new to the Otah tribe, for in many ways
these were a strange and fantastic people.

It seemed to be a beginning. Word went out in secret and still other
word returned, in which Mai-ak played a great part. And so, after scores
of days it was done: there would be a time of understanding; Kurho,
himself, would cross the river to go in person among Otah's people! When
this was done, Otah would also cross the river to observe the things at
Far End!

But now growlings arose which even Otah could not contain. Kurho should
not be welcomed! Kurho must not be trusted! Was not this the man who
already had suppressed the minor tribes? Had he not flaunted his aim of
one day taking the whole valley?

Nevertheless, Kurho came. He came in all his boast and arrogance. The
time was not festive--he was made to feel that--but what Kurho felt he
did not show. Extravagant point was made that he should see all that he
wished! Across all the great series of ledges he was taken, both high
and low and length and breadth, to observe the abundance and well-being
and extent of the Otah tribe. Through all the near valley he was shown,
even to the places of great hunting, that he might see how the tribe of
Otah prospered in the Bringing.

Through it all, Kurho made a token show of interest; he twice lost his
temper in boast against boast, but he was more often a blunt enigma. He
saw much and said little. Those times when he did speak, so extravagant
were his grunt and gesture that much was lost.

When Kurho departed at last for Far End, he had implanted a feeling of
frustration and one thing more--the disturbing thought that not all of
his own boasts were idle!

       *       *       *

And now came the time for Otah to cross. It was done so quietly that not
many knew he was gone, but soon the reports came: Otah had been received
with great clamor and curiosity by the Kurho people, and accorded much
honor! Aside from that, the result was much the same, as Otah saw much
and said little and did not once lose his temper. Kurho persisted in his
boast and claim, and it was rumored that the two leaders had gone so far
as to discuss the weapons!

Rumor was true. Otah returned from Far End and immediately called
Council, even as Kurho was calling Council. Little had been gained,
little proven; the perilous thing was still there, that monstrous means
of death that might come in a moment of temper or reprisal to either
tribe. Alas, such weapons were not easily relinquished--and who would be
first?

Plainly, the way would now be slow and heavy with suspicion, but a
method to abate such a threat must soon be formulated.

On _that_ Otah and Kurho were agreed!

       *       *       *       *       *

So the two great leaders agreed, and were patient, and twice more there
were meetings. So engrossed they became and even enamored, that they
were only dimly aware--

Others in the valley, those so scattered and isolate as to be considered
only clans, had long watched and waited--and yearned. Neither the
long-shaft weapon nor the way of making were longer secret--so why
should they not also have?

Inevitably the reports trickled in. A lone clansman had been observed
near the river, employing one of the weapons crudely devised but
efficient. Some days later, one from the high-plateau was seen skulking
the valley with such a weapon. Those lone ones, who barely subsisted in
the barren places beyond river and cave, nor foraged afield--discreet
and fleeting at first but with increased daring as the days went on.

And so fixed were Otah and Kurho that such reports were tolerated. There
could be no threat here! True, the way of the making was no longer
secret. True, such clan-people had long been despised and neglected and
left to their own grubbing hunger--but was it not recognized, especially
now, that the tribes of Otah and Kurho would determine the fate of all?

_They erred--both Otah and Kurho. Neither would determine, nor would
preponderance of weapons determine. It was not yet perceived that such
clan-people were not Tribe-People, and thus could not know the meaning
of Council, nor weigh consequence, nor realize in their new-found
cleverness that a single arrogant act would trigger the first and final
avalanche...._

It came. It came on a day when a lone and hungry clansman found himself
a full day's journey beyond the river; he was not of Otah's Tribe nor
any tribe, nor did he know that the two he faced were of Kurho's Tribe.
In the dispute over the bring, so emboldened was he by his weapon
newly-fashioned that he used it quick and surely.

He did not again look at the two bodies! Taking up his bring, the lone
one departed quite leisurely, without even the good sense to flee in
horror of the consequence.

Consequence came. It came soon, before the sun was scarcely down. It
came swiftly without question or council, as word reached Far End that
two had been slain. Throughout the night it came in divergent attack, as
Kurho deployed a token force near the river and sent his real strength
high to the north, across the valley-rim and down upon Otah's people. It
was at once attack and reprisal and reason!

And for Otah it was reason! For many weeks past, in test and maneuver of
the long-shafts he had looked to the north. Now couriers brought the
alarm swiftly, and within minutes his forces were launched--fearless
ones who knew each foot of terrain by day or night. Otah led one
contingent and Mai-ak the other, strategy being to stem Kurho's strength
high upon the valley-rim, deplete the enemy and then join force to hunt
down any who sifted through.

It was good strategy, the only strategy--and for a time it went well.
Within the hour Kurho's forces were scattered, as attack and
counter-attack surged and slashed in wild eruption of the long-shafts.
Just as eruptive were the neuro-emotives, as each in his primal way must
have known that _this_ was the long awaitment, _this_ was the grim
finality in Kurho's boast and Otah's boast of weapons.

A few sifted through, but were quickly brought down as Otah's drifting
rear-guard deployed to their assignments. It became evident early that
Otah's tribe was more proficient in the long-shafts!

Alas, mere proficiency would not prevail against force of numbers. Well
within the hour Otah knew it, knew with a raging despair that time was
not with him, he had deployed too late with too little. Now he knew with
consuming clarity, that despite the lulling pretense Kurho's boasts of
strength had not been idle boasts!

This was Otah's last bitter thought, and then he was too occupied for
cerebral indulgence. For the next minutes he wielded truer than any! Men
came and fell, and others leaped and fell, skulls shattered, the
life-stuff spurting, before Otah's shaft went spinning away in shattered
ruin; he leaped to seize another, employed it in great sweeping swaths
against those who still came. Two went down, but two came to fill the
gap. In perfect unison, one parried as the other wielded truly to the
mark....

It cannot be said, with surety, that Otah in that ultimate moment felt
pain. It is fairly certain that both finitely and cosmically the initial
numbing shock did register; and it may be assumed that he jolted rather
horribly at the splintering bite of bone into brain. _But who can say he
did not reach a point-of-prescience, that his neuro-thalamics did not
leap to span the eons, and gape in horror, in that precise and endless
time just before his brains spewed in a gush of gray and gore, to
cerebrate no more?_

       *       *       *       *       *

A matter of minutes, now. Both Kurho and Mai-ak knew it. The latter had
glimpsed Otah's destruction, and with wild abandon sought to rally his
men into the area.

There was no longer an area. There was clash and groan and rush and
retreat, there was dark endless rock and a darker sky, from which the
very stars seemed to recoil in darkest wonderment at man's senseless
assault. The valley-rim yawned, and there Mai-ak made his stand and made
it well.

He was unaware that Kurho was no more--that the man of boast was at this
very moment a quivering, protoplasmic lump splattered across a dark
crevice. A random weapon in a frantic hand had proved to be no respecter
of person. Nor did it matter! Decimated as they were, enough of the
enemy got through. Once propelled in the insane purpose there could be
no stopping, as they descended upon Otah's people who huddled in the
caves....

For weeks, they had been told that when it came it would be from above,
sudden and savage without defense or recourse. Few had believed, or
bothered to plot the route to safety. Would not these issues be
resolved? Had not their caves been always safe and secure?

Now there was no time for belief or wonder. Within minutes none of
Otah's tribe were alive, neither women nor children. Gor-wah the Old One
remained, having failed in his exhortations; now he stood quite still,
erect and waiting, with arms outflung as the weapons came swarming, and
when that final blow fell the expression upon his mouth might have been
a grimace or might have been a smile....

Nor did the others escape, those at Far End who also huddled and waited
and would not believe. Their caves at the valley-floor were even less
secure. Whether it was blinding hate or the bitter dregs of expediency,
for Mai-ak and his remnants there was only one recourse now. It had been
deeply ingrained!

Grimly they pursued the way, automaton-like, unresponsive now to horror
or any emotive. And once again, within the hour the weapons fell.

It was swift and it was thorough.

Methodical. Merciless. Complete.

       *       *       *       *       *

It will not be said here when emotive-response returned. Does one return
from a horror all-encompassing, or seek to requite the unrequited? Does
one yearn for a Way that is no more when deadening shock has wiped it
out?

The season of thaw came, and again the great cold and once more the
thaw. Both Obe the Bear and the great saber-cats were at large across
the valley, and for those few who remained the bring was not easy now.
There was more dangerous prey!

Lone clansman encountered clansman across his path, and there was
furtive slinking. Each went silently alone and returned alone to his
place of hiding. Bellies growled, but none dared use his weapon except
in secret.

Perhaps a few, some isolate few remembered that time of chaos a season
ago--but it was fleeting recall at best, as somatic responses rose to
blot it out.

It was not to be forever! One thing remained, unasked and unbeknownst,
grooved with synaptic permanence in their burgeoning brains. _This was
neither beginning nor end: for though Otah's Tribe was gone, bellies
still growled. Kurho's Tribe was no more, but the weapons yet remained._

_There could be no beginning or end--for would not new things come,
means and methods and ways of devising so long as man remained? Was not
this The Way?_

Such were Mai-ak's thoughts at the time of the next thaw; when he felt
the thing-that-prodded that would not let him be, and his anger became
stubborn resolve; when day after day he bent the young saplings, and
found a way at last to fasten the sinew.

When he pulled, finally, pulled with all his strength, and with great
gloating saw his shaft go outward to a distance never yet conceived....


THE END




Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was first published in _Amazing Stories_ May 1961.
    Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed. Minor spelling and
    typographical errors have been corrected without note. The
    tribal names Lok, Lak and Dak, although possible typesetting
    errors, remain as printed.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Beginning, by Henry Hasse

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BEGINNING ***

***** This file should be named 27645.txt or 27645.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/7/6/4/27645/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
