The Project Gutenberg EBook of Revenge, by Arthur Porges

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Revenge

Author: Arthur Porges

Release Date: January 9, 2009 [EBook #27756]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK REVENGE ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                       REVENGE

                   By ARTHUR PORGES

     _Hell may have no fury like a woman scorned,
 but the fury of a biochemist scorned is just as great
              --and much more fiendish._


If the Syndicate is half as powerful as some people have claimed,
they'll murder me any day now. I object on principle to being killed by
evil men for a good deed, so maybe lynching by stupid ones is
preferable. I mean you, and you--the suetheads who profited by my work,
but refused your help.

You've been yammering about narcotics for years--how drug addiction was
spreading, reaching down even to your unmannerly, spoiled brats, who
despise their parents and our venal society to the same degree. The
stuff comes in by the ton across the Mexican border; they grow it for
our benefit in Red China; and a few "friendly" Asian countries don't
mind exporting some now and then, either. In spite of heroic work by our
small group of poorly financed narcotics agents, the flow of drugs
cannot be halted.

Oh, you and your elected representatives made a lot of panicky moves to
combat this threat. The Department of Health, Education, and Welfare was
given a new Bureau, set up like the F.B.I., and headed by Myron P.
Bishop, a man trained by that distinguished expert on narcotics,
Anslinger, himself.

But as to sensible solutions, such as legalizing the sale of heroin to
break the world-wide criminal control on the distribution of drugs--that
your vapid Puritan morality wouldn't permit. Millions of dollars for
enforcement, and to punish the sick, but not one cent for prevention,
and almost nothing to find out why people become addicts in the first
place, and how to cure them.

It wasn't entirely your fault. You listened to the experts, usually
career policemen who expect to cure any social evil with clubs and
prisons. I am reminded of the simpleton found measuring two horses with
a tape in order to be able to distinguish the black one from the white.
Until I came along, nobody had ever reached the core of the matter. You
don't kill a flourishing plant--in this case an Upas Tree--by lopping
off a handful of leaves. You strike at the roots. That's what I meant to
do--and did--for your benefit. Oh, I admit there were a few dollars in
it for me, but so what? The ox that treads the wheat is not muzzled.
When a man saves a manufacturer $50,000 a year by some improved process,
or even by using three bolts someplace instead of four, they gladly pay
him three per cent of the annual savings, or something like that, as a
reward. Most big outfits have such a policy, and it's a good one. Well,
if I cut millions off the government budget, is a lousy $100,000 too
much to ask? I just wanted to go on with my researches without battling
a horde of bill collectors every month. Fat chance--I didn't get a
measly dime. You, your elected and appointed officials, and your kept
press just gave me the all-time horse-laugh. Well, he who laughs
last--you'll remember the old saw; I'll see to that.

       *       *       *       *       *

I'm writing this so you'll know how they treated me. You mustn't think
I'm a crank, mad at the world for no reason. My case is better than
Dreyfus' and Sacco-Vanzetti's combined. Here I was prepared to remove
the drug scourge forever, and at a piddling cost. Did I get courteous
handling, or at least a fair hearing? Not bloody likely! I was an idiot
to expect anything from the world's most inflated bureaucracy--Dickens'
Circumlocution Office brought up to date.

Let me start at the beginning; then you'll see who's right. I'm a
biochemist by profession. A damned good one, but too individualistic to
please the big research centers. They like docile teams--scientific
Percherons to pull the big red wagon. So I taught at one jerkwater
college after another. Sooner or later my superiors, all dodderers who
stopped thinking with sighs of relief once they had their PhD union
cards, objected to my attitude. If I published, they were jealous; it
made the other faculty members look bad. If I failed to produce, then
why was I wasting lab facilities and neglecting my classes? The
students wanted their term papers back within five days; the other
teachers could manage it, why not me? The difference between what my
colleagues expected from their pupils and what I did was the difference
between the lightning bug and the lightning. Those students! They didn't
want biochemistry; they want a letter on a card; a "C" would do. Damn
few of them got it from me, I'm happy to say, and those that did, knew
more about the subject than most PhD's.

Now, I take as my creed the fruitful dictum: Think in other categories.
A famous researcher once invented--or discovered--this maxim in a dream.
It is the secret of many great advances in science. Get off the main
line. Stop fooling with the leaves of the tree, and turn to the roots.
Invert the problem, if necessary.

I was thinking about the narcotics scandal. A teacher at my college had
a lovely sixteen-year-old daughter, carefully reared, who was badly
hooked. I saw that poor man's hair whiten in a few months. How would you
feel, knowing that your daughter had been so degraded by a drug as to
sell herself to anybody with enough money to buy her a fix? An innocent,
playful sniff at a party, and some punk, probably an addict himself, had
trapped her in order to finance his own habit. They talk about cures,
but people on the inside know that permanent escape from the trap is as
rare as portraits of Trotsky in Russia. Or integrity among politicians
in this country.

Well, I put my brains to work on the problem. It seemed obvious that, as
in the case of Prohibition, you couldn't possibly lick the drug traffic
by cutting the lines of supply. Not in a country as big as ours, with
the Mexican border and Red China on the side of the enemy. Not when a
package the size of a watch could be worth a fortune.

Think in other categories, I reminded myself. How can a biochemist,
rather than a policeman, stop the Syndicate? Then it came to me, simple
and obvious. Hit the source, the weak link, the roots of the poison
tree. In short, Papaver somniferum, the opium poppy itself.

Basic, isn't it? Destroy the plant, and you cut the heart out of the
drug traffic. No cops; no hopeless warfare against cunning smugglers; no
battle with big-money corruption of officials. And remember: no chemist
alive can synthesize opium or its derivatives. Sure, there are a few
other bad narcotic drugs from different plants, like marijuana, but they
play a relatively small part, and can be controlled. Besides, it was my
intention to destroy their sources as well, when the time came. But
first the biggest culprit.

       *       *       *       *       *

I go to work, re-examining all the recent work on tobacco virus and
similar plant killers. New studies on the key protein chains of the
genes were the foundation stones of my plan. The disease had to be
highly specific and deadly. I couldn't risk even the remotest
possibility of harming food plants in a hungry world.

But, as I've said, with no false modesty, I'm no slouch in my field of
biochemistry. I took a harmless poppy rust from our California flowers
here, and treated its genes with certain chemicals. It was a matter of
six months, and well over eighty tries, but finally I came up with a
virus that killed the opium poppy like smallpox wiped out the Sioux. No;
more than that. Some Indians were, or became, immune to the disease,
just as insects build up resistance to the most potent poisons. But with
my virus that's simply not possible. I won't get technical here, but to
become immune to this stuff would be like a man's developing anti-bodies
against his own tissues. It couldn't happen without killing the organism
faster than the virus does. Once this epidemic began, not a poppy would
survive.

So far everything was fine, except that, as usual, I lost my job. I got
fifty term papers behind. It didn't bother me, because there wasn't a
student in my three classes who knew any more biochemistry than a
baboon. In the first paper I'd found this gem: "It is well known that a
mammal reproduces by suckling its young." Faced with more of the same,
it was a pleasure to be fired.

Now, in any really civilized society, they'd have my statue on top of
the capitol building, and with neon lights to boot. But in our
bureaucratic wilderness of Washington, with a thousand government-hired
cretins running interference for each big, appointed super-cretin, my
troubles had just begun.

I took some sample poppies to the H.E.W. offices. They were in
vacuum-sealed plastic envelopes, because I knew that once my virus
spores got loose in the atmosphere, they'd spread all over the world
like radioactive dust, or faster. I hoped to see the Commissioner of
Narcotics, Myron P. Bishop, but His Magnificence was harder to reach
than the whole College of Cardinals. It was impossible to put my point
across. Plants, was it? That way to the Department of Agriculture. Oh,
poppies. Pamphlets on wildflowers could be had from Documents.

I wrote countless letters, pulled what few wires were within my reach,
and haunted Washington like the ghost of Calhoun. And finally I got ten
minutes with El Pomposo himself.

As I've said, dumb students are nothing new to me. But even the worst of
them couldn't have been any more obtuse than Bishop. I had the dead
plants, all brown and withered. There were simple charts showing
exactly, in terms of time, how the virus worked, killing the poppy
within forty-eight hours, and even destroying the viability of any seeds
that might be ripening.

Did this jughead appointed by the President to fight the terrible drug
problem comprehend the miracle being offered to him? The simple solution
that would make him the greatest--in fact, the only--success in his post
that this country had ever known? Not he. I had to spell it out in
nursery school terms.

But I've penetrated many a numbskull in class by dint of persistent
drilling, and finally got through to the cold oatmeal under his parietal
bones.

Did that clear the air? If you think so, guess again. He threw up his
hands in horror. Turn a plant disease loose on the world deliberately!
It was a violation of the conventions against germ warfare. It was
barred by international law. It was unthinkable that the United States
would indulge in such irresponsible behavior.

All right, I said. Take it to the U.N. Let them distribute the poppy
killer. He brightened a little at that, since every bureaucrat loves
above all to pass the buck. A clear-cut decision is fatal to the
species. Then he gave me a note to our delegate, Wilbur Cavanaugh, Jr.

This character was a bit sharper. He heard me out, looked at my deceased
poppies, and arranged a conference with a bigwig from the State
Department. Then things got really messy. When I pointed out that in a
few weeks every damned opium plant in Asia would be deader than the Ming
Dynasty, this little creep from Foggy Bottom almost had kittens on the
spot. It seems that just now our relations with Red China are highly
delicate. If we turned the virus loose on them, even if it did kill only
poppies (and he had his doubts about that. What if--shudder--it attacked
rice?) the Reds would scream murder. They'd yell germ warfare, and have
us cold. They could ship us opium by the long ton--that didn't affect
the delicate condition, though.

       *       *       *       *       *

It seemed to me, however, that there was something ambiguous and wistful
in the State man's attitude, and I thought I understood. When a country
sends a spy to do some dirty job, they disown him officially if he is
caught. Except for that U-2 fiasco some years ago, when the U.S. broke
all the unwritten rules and made jackasses of us before the world. Now,
obviously, if I killed all the poppies in the world, that would be a
fait accompli. Washington could deny knowing anything about the cause of
death, especially since it would work indiscriminately even in friendly
parts of Asia. Just as long as I got my hundred thousand, I didn't mind
skipping the official credit. In fact, it would keep the Syndicate off
my back.

"Suppose," I said, "on my own responsibility, I release the spores and
ruin the opium trade for good. Will you see that I get paid?"

He was horrified. In the first place, nothing whatever could be done
until the virus had been checked out by government scientists. If I
would give him the virus, and my notes, he'd start the ball rolling. I
know that Washington ball; it's all angles, and doesn't roll worth a
damn. I went cold at the thought. Before you can get an okay on anything
big from a bureau there, your long, grey beard will be sweeping the
floor.

For a moment I was tempted to take my plans to England, but then
remembered that by sane legislation legalizing the sale of drugs under
controlled conditions, they had already licked the problem, and wouldn't
be in the market. For two cents, I thought, I'd make China pay me the
money to keep the virus buried. For that matter, the Syndicate would
gladly kick in with a million. But I'm an American first, and couldn't
play it that way, especially remembering Professor A's daughter.

I thought the thing through, and decided that if I turned the disease
loose, so that every good poppy is a dead one, any decent government
will quietly pay me off. They only need to know that no other plants are
affected.

And that's the way I played it. The next day I sprayed a few grams of
concentrated virus into the humid air of Washington, and went home. If
you read the papers, you know the rest of that particular story. In
eight months not even Sherlock Holmes could have found a live opium
poppy on the face of the earth. Once current stocks are gone, there'll
be no more narcotics deriving from that particular plant. The government
sensibly outbid all the addicts and operators in order to save what is
left for medical use. It should last for fifty years. All according to
my plan--fine!

But when I tried to collect, they didn't know me from the late Lucky
Luciano. There was no proof whatever, they said, that my virus did the
job. After all, their scientists had not been allowed to check my work.
I could have faked the whole thing, attempting to take credit for a
mutant disease which began naturally, especially since dozens of
bacteriologists were now isolating the virus.

When I pressed harder, they dragged out an F.B.I. file showing I was a
crank and maverick, unable to hold a job, and guilty of signing a peace
petition in 1949. If Bishop or Cavanaugh tried to help, I don't know
about it. I suppose I'm lucky that the Syndicate has been equally
skeptical. Otherwise, being out many millions, they would have
liquidated me by now.

But basically it's your fault--you, the people. I took my case to you,
as a court of last resort. A few papers gave me a fair enough shake to
present the evidence, but you paid no attention. I tried to get your
signatures to a petition to purge the H.E.W. Department, or to start a
Congressional investigation. You just laughed at me. You enjoyed that
headline: "Crackpot Chemist Claims He Killed All Those Poppies. Was it
Self-Defense?"

Well, my jovial friends, I'm going to teach you a lesson. I could easily
wipe out half of you by killing some selected food plants, but I'm not a
mass murderer, and would rather make a more subtle job of it. I've two
more viruses just about perfected; after the first, it's easier. When I
turn them loose, you'll have a real grievance against me. This time,
you're getting notice in advance, so nobody can talk about "natural"
disease. Besides, the appended lab notes will easily convince a few key
men in biochemistry; and they'll confirm me.

Now let me point out the two plants you'll miss badly.

One is yeast. Yes, yeast. When you read this, the one-celled organisms
responsible for wine, beer, and alcohol generally, will be dying as a
race. In a few months, good liquor will be scarcer than an electric
blanket in hell. Sure, grain alcohol can be synthesized, but bouquet
isn't that simple, and you'll pay dearly for it--how you'll pay!--and
decent lab-made whiskey won't be on the shelves tomorrow, either.

The other plant you'll miss even more. I mean tobacco. No more
cigarettes; no more fat cigars--and hallelujah!--no more tobacco
commercials on TV. Did you know, tobacco cannot be synthesized at all,
at any price? Get it, you two-pack-a-day fiends?


THE END




Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from _Amazing Stories_ February 1961.
    Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed. Minor spelling and
    typographical errors have been corrected without note.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Revenge, by Arthur Porges

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK REVENGE ***

***** This file should be named 27756.txt or 27756.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/7/7/5/27756/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
