The Project Gutenberg EBook of Shepherd of the Planets, by Alan Mattox

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Shepherd of the Planets

Author: Alan Mattox

Illustrator: Leo Summers

Release Date: February 11, 2009 [EBook #28048]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SHEPHERD OF THE PLANETS ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









[Illustration]


            SHEPHERD OF
            THE PLANETS

           By ALAN MATTOX

        ILLUSTRATOR SUMMERS


 _Renner had a purpose in life. And
  the Purpose in Life had Renner._


The star ship came out of space drive for the last time, and made its
final landing on a scrubby little planet that circled a small and lonely
sun. It came to ground gently, with the cushion of a retarder field, on
the side of the world where it was night. In the room that would have
been known as the bridge on ships of other days, instrument lights
glowed softly on Captain Renner's cropped white hair, and upon the
planes of his lean, strong face. Competent fingers touched controls here
and there, seeking a response that he knew would not come. He had known
this for long enough so that there was no longer any emotional impact in
it for him. He shut off the control panel, and stood up.

"Well, gentlemen," he said, "that's it. The fuel pack's gone!"

Beeson, the botanist, a rotund little man with a red, unsmiling face,
squirmed in his chair.

"The engineers on Earth told us it would last a lifetime," he pointed
out.

"If we were just back on Earth," Thorne, the ship's doctor, said drily,
"we could tell them that it doesn't. They could start calculating
again."

"But what does it mean?" David asked. He was the youngest member of the
crew, signed on as linguist, and librarian to the ship.

"Just that we're stuck here--where ever that is--for good!" Farrow said
bitterly.

"You won't have to run engines anymore," Dr. Thorne commented, knowing
that remark would irritate Farrow.

Farrow glared at him. His narrow cheekbones and shallow eyes were
shadowed by the control room lights. He was good with the engines which
were his special charge, but beyond that, he was limited in both
sympathy and imagination.

       *       *       *       *       *

Captain Renner looked from face to face.

"We were lucky to set down safely," he said to them all. "We might have
been caught too far out for a landing. It is night now, and I am going
to get some rest. Tomorrow we will see what kind of a world this is."

He left the control room, and went down the corridor toward his
quarters. The others watched him go. None of them made a move to leave
their seats.

"What about the fuel pack?" David asked.

"Just what he said," Farrow answered him. "It's exhausted. Done for! We
can run auxiliary equipment for a long time to come, but no more star
drive."

"So we just stay here until we're rescued," David said.

"A fine chance for that!" Farrow's voice grew bitter again. "Our captain
has landed us out here on the rim of the galaxy where there won't be
another ship for a hundred years!"

"I don't understand the man," Beeson said suddenly, looking around him
belligerently. "What are we doing out here anyway?"

"Extended Exploration," said Thorne. "It's a form of being put out to
pasture. Renner's too old for the Service, but he's still a strong and
competent man. So they give him a ship, and a vague assignment, and let
him do just about what he wants. There you have it."

He took a cigar from his pocket, and looked at it fondly.

"While they last, gentlemen," he said, holding it up. He snipped the
end, and lit it carefully. His own hair had grown grey in the Service,
and, in a way, the reason for his assignment to the ship was the same as
Renner's.

"I think," he said slowly, "that Captain Renner is looking for
something."

"But for what?" Beeson demanded. "He has taken us to every
out-of-the-way, backward planet on the rim. And what happens? We land.
We find the natives. We are kind to them. We teach them something, and
leave them a few supplies. And then Renner loses interest, and we go
on!"

"Perhaps it is for something in himself," David offered.

"Perhaps he will find it here," Thorne murmured. "I'm going to bed."

He got up from his seat.

David stood up, and went over to one of the observation ports. He ran
back the radiation screen. The sky outside was very black, and filled
with alien stars. He could see absolutely nothing of the landscape about
them because of the dark. It was a poor little planet. It hadn't even a
moon.

In the morning they opened up the ship, and let down the landing ramps.
It was a very old world that they set foot upon. Whatever mountains or
hills it had ever had, had long ago been leveled by erosion, so that now
there was only a vaguely undulating plain studded with smooth and
rounded boulders. The soil underfoot was packed and barren, and there
was no vegetation for as far as they could see.

But the climate seemed mild and pleasant, the air warm and dry, with a
soft breeze blowing. It was probable that the breeze would be always
with them. There were no mountains to interfere with its passage, or
alter its gentle play.

Off to one side, a little stream ran crystal clear over rocks and
gravel. Dr. Thorne got a sample bottle from the ship, and went over to
it. He touched his fingers to the water, and then touched them to his
lips. Then he filled the sample bottle from the stream, and came back
with it.

"It seems all right," he said. "I'll run an analysis of it, and let you
know as soon as I can."

He took the bottle with him into the ship.

       *       *       *       *       *

Beeson stood kicking at the ground with the toe of his boot. His head
was lowered.

"What do you think of it?" Renner asked.

Beeson shrugged. He knelt down and felt of the earth with his hands.
Then he got out a heavy-bladed knife and hacked at it until he had pried
out a few hard pieces. He stood up again with these in his hands. He
tried to crumble them, but they would not crumble. They would only break
into bits like sun-dried brick.

"It's hard to tell," he said. "There seems to be absolutely no organic
material here. I would say that nothing has grown here for a long, long
time. Why, I don't know. The lab will tell us something."

Renner nodded.

For the rest of the day they went their separate ways; Renner to his
cabin to make the entries that were needed when a flight was ended, even
though that ending was not intentional; Beeson to prowling along the
edge of the stream and pecking at the soil with a geologist's pick; and
Farrow to his narrow little world of engines where he worked at getting
ready the traction machines and other equipment that would be needed.

David set out on a tour of exploration toward the furthermost nests of
boulders. It was there that he found the first signs of vegetation. In
and around some of the larger groups of rocks, he found mosses and
lichens growing. He collected specimens of them to take back with him.
It was out there, far from the ship, that he saw the first animate life.

When he returned, it was growing toward evening. He found that the
others had brought tables from the ship, and sleeping equipment, and set
it up outside. Their own quarters would have been more comfortable, but
the ship was always there for their protection, if they needed it, and
they were tired of its confinement. It was a luxury to sleep outdoors,
even under alien stars.

Someone had brought food from the synthetizer, and arranged it on a
table. They were eating when he arrived.

He handed the specimens of moss and lichen to Captain Renner, who looked
at them with interest, and then passed them on to Beeson for his study.

"Sir?" David said.

"What is it, David?" Captain Renner asked.

"I think there are natives here," David said. "I believe that I saw
one."

Renner's eyes lit up with interest. He laid down his knife and fork.

"Are you sure?" he asked.

"It was just a glimpse," David said, "of a hairy face peering around a
rock. It looked like one of those pictures of a cave man one used to see
in the old texts."

Renner stood up. He moved a little way away, and stood staring out into
the growing dark, across the boulder-studded plain.

"On a barren planet like this," he said, "they must lack so many
things!"

"I'd swear he almost looks happy," Dr. Thorne whispered to the man next
to him. It happened to be Farrow.

"Why shouldn't he be?" Farrow growled, his mouth full of food. "He's got
him a planet to play with! That's what he's been aiming for--wait and
see!"

       *       *       *       *       *

The next few days passed swiftly. Dr. Thorne found the water from the
little stream not only to be potable, but extremely pure.

Farrow got his machinery unloaded and ready to run. Among other things,
there was a land vehicle on light caterpillar treads capable of running
where there were no roads and carrying a load of several tons. And there
was an out-and-out tractor with multiple attachments.

Beeson was busy in his laboratory working on samples from the soil.

David brought in the one new point that was of interest. He had been out
hunting among the boulders again, and it was almost dark when he
returned. He told Renner about it at the supper table, with the others
listening in.

"I think the natives eat the lichen," he said.

"I haven't seen much else they could eat," Beeson muttered.

"There's more of the lichen than you might think," David said, "if you
know where to look for it. But, even at that, there isn't very much. The
thing is, it looks like it's been cropped. It's never touched if the
plants are small, or half grown, or very nearly ready. But just as soon
as a patch is fully mature, it is stripped bare, and there never seems
to be any of it dropped, or left behind, or wasted."

"If that's all they have to live on," Thorne said, "they have it pretty
thin!"

The natives began to be seen nearer to the camp. At first there were
just glimpses of them, a hairy face or head seen at the edge of a rock,
or the sight of a stocky figure dashing from boulder to boulder. As they
grew braver, they came out more into the open. They kept their distance,
and would disappear into the rocks if anyone made a move toward them,
but, if no attention was paid them, they moved about freely.

In particular, they would come, each evening, to stand in a ragged line
near one of the nests of boulders. From there, they would watch the
crewmen eat. There were never more than twelve or fifteen of them, a
bandy-legged lot, with thick, heavy torsos, and hairy heads.

It was on one of these occasions that Dr. Thorne happened to look up.

"Oh, oh!" he said. "Here it comes!"

Renner turned his head, and rose to his feet. The other men rose with
him.

Three of the natives were coming toward the camp. They came along at a
swinging trot, a sense of desperation and dedicated purpose in their
manner. One ran slightly ahead. The other two followed behind him,
shoulder to shoulder.

Farrow reached for a ray gun in a pile of equipment near him, and raised
it.

"No weapons!" Captain Renner ordered sharply.

Farrow lowered his arm, but kept the gun in his hand.

The natives drew near enough for their faces to be seen. The leader was
casting frightened glances from side to side and ahead of him as he
came. The other two stared straight ahead, their faces rigid, their eyes
blank with fear.

They came straight to the table. There they reached out suddenly, and
caught up all the food that they could carry in their hands, and turned
and fled with it in terror into the night.

Somebody sighed in relief.

"Poor devils!" Renner said. "They're hungry!"

       *       *       *       *       *

There was a conference the following morning around one of the tables.

"We've been here long enough to settle in," Renner said. "It's time we
started in to do something for this planet." He looked toward Beeson.
"How far have you gotten?" he asked.

       *       *       *       *       *

Beeson was, as usual, brisk and direct.

"I can give you the essentials," he said. "I can't tell you the whole
story. I don't know it. To be brief, the soil is highly nitrogen
deficient, and completely lacking in humus. In a way, the two points tie
in together." He looked about him sharply, and then went on. "The
nitrates are easily leached from the soil. Without the bacteria that
grow around certain roots to fix nitrogen and form new nitrates, the
soil was soon depleted.

"As to the complete lack of organic material, I can hazard only a guess.
Time, of course. But, back of that, probably the usual history of an
overpopulation, and a depleted soil. At the end, perhaps they ate
everything, leaves, stems and roots, and returned nothing to the earth."

"The nitrates are replaceable?" Renner asked.

Beeson nodded.

"The nitrates will have formed deposits," he said, "probably near
ancient lakes or shallow seas. It shouldn't be too hard to find some."

Renner turned to Farrow.

"How about your department?" he asked.

"I take it we're thinking of farming," Farrow said. "I've got equipment
that will break up the soil for you. And I can throw a dam across the
stream for water."

"There are seeds in the ship," Renner said, his eyes lighting with
enthusiasm. "We'll start this planet all over again!"

"There's still one thing," Beeson reminded him drily. "Humus! Leaves,
roots, organic material! Something to loosen up the soil, aerate it.
Nothing will grow in a brick."

Renner stood up. He took a few slow paces, and then stood looking out at
the groups of boulders studding the ancient plain.

"I see," he said. "And there's only one place to get it. We'll have to
use the lichens and the mosses."

"There'll be trouble with the natives if you do," Thorne said.

Renner looked at him. He frowned thoughtfully.

"You'll be taking their only food," the doctor pointed out.

"We can feed them from the synthetizer," Renner answered. "We know that
they will eat it."

"Why bother?" Farrow asked sourly.

Renner turned on him.

"Will the synthetizer handle it?" he asked.

"I guess so," Farrow grumbled. "For a while, at least. But I don't see
what good the natives are to us."

"If we take their food," Renner said, "we're going to feed them. At
least until such time as the crops come in, and they are able to feed
themselves!"

"Are you building this planet for us, or for them?" Farrow demanded.

Renner turned away.

       *       *       *       *       *

They put out cannisters of food for the natives that night. In the
morning it was gone. Each evening, someone left food for them near their
favorite nest of rocks. The natives took it in the dark, unseen.

Gradually, Captain Renner himself took over the feeding. He seemed to
derive a personal satisfaction from it. Gradually, too, the natives
began coming out into the open to receive it. Before long, they were
waiting for him every evening as he brought them food.

The gathering of the lichen began. They picked it by hand, working
singly or in pairs, searching out the rocks and hidden places where it
grew. From time to time they would catch glimpses of the natives
watching them from a distance. They were careful not to get close.

On one of these occasions, Captain Renner and David were working
together.

"Do they have a language?" Captain Renner asked.

"Yes, sir," David answered. "I have heard them talking among
themselves."

"Do you suppose you can learn it?" Renner asked. "Do you think you could
get near enough to them to listen in?"

"I could try," David offered.

"Then do so," Renner said. "That's an assignment."

Thereafter David went out alone. He found that getting close to the
natives was not too difficult. He tried to keep out of their sight,
while still getting near enough to them to hear their voices. They were
undoubtedly aware of his presence, but, with the feeding, they had lost
their fear of the men, and did not seem to care.

Bit by bit he learned their language, starting from a few key roots and
sounds. It was a job for which he had been trained.

Time passed rapidly, and the work went on. Captain Renner let his beard
grow. It came out white and thick, and he did not bother to trim it. The
others, too, became more careless in their dress, each man following his
own particular whim. There was no longer need for a taut ship.

Farrow threw a dam across the little stream, and, while the water grew
behind it, went on to breaking up the soil with his machines. Beeson
searched for nitrate, and found it. He brought a load of it back, and
this, together with the moss and lichen, was chopped into the soil. In
the end, it was the lichen that was the limiting factor. There was only
so much of it, so the size of the plot that they could prepare was
small.

"But it's a start," Renner said. "That's all we can hope for this first
year. This crop will furnish more material to be chopped back into the
soil. Year by year it will grow until the inhabitants here will have a
new world to live in!"

"What do you expect to get out of it?" Farrow asked bitingly.

Renner's eyes glowed with an inner light.

       *       *       *       *       *

Renner's beard grew with the passing months until it became a luxuriant
thing. He let his hair go untrimmed too, so that, with his tall, spare
figure, he took on a patriarchal look. And, with the passing months,
there came that time which was to be spring for this planet. The first
green blades of the new planting showed above the ground.

The natives noticed it with awe, and kept a respectful distance.

That evening, when it was time for the natives' feeding, the men
gathered about. Little by little the feeding had become a ritual, and
they would often go out to watch it. It was always the same. Renner
would step forward away from the others a little way, the load of food
in his hands. The natives would come to stand before him in their ragged
line, their leader a trifle to the front. There they would bow, and
begin a chant that had become a part of the ritual with the passing
time.

With the first green planting showing, there was a look of deep
satisfaction in Renner's eyes as he stepped forward this night. His hair
had grown quite long by now, and his white beard blew softly in the
constant wind. There was a simple dignity about him as he stood there,
his head erect, and looked upon the natives as his children.

The natives began their chant. It became louder.

"Tolava--" they said, and bowed.

As usual, Farrow was nettled.

"What does the man want anyway?" he asked out loud. "To be God?"

Renner could not help but hear him. He did not turn his head.

"David!" he said.

"Sir?" David asked, stepping forward.

"You understand their language now, don't you?" Renner asked.

"Yes, sir," David said.

"Then translate!" Renner ordered. "Out loud, please, so that the others
may hear!"

"Tolava--" the natives chanted, bowing.

"Tolava--our father," David said, following the chant. Suddenly he
swallowed, and hesitated for a moment. Then he straightened himself, and
went sturdily on. "Tolava--our father--who art from the heavens--give
us--this day--our bread!"


THE END




Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from _Amazing Stories_ November 1959.
    Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed. Minor spelling and
    typographical errors have been corrected without note.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Shepherd of the Planets, by Alan Mattox

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SHEPHERD OF THE PLANETS ***

***** This file should be named 28048.txt or 28048.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/8/0/4/28048/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
