The Project Gutenberg EBook of Strange Alliance, by Bryce Walton

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Strange Alliance

Author: Bryce Walton

Illustrator: Charles McNutt

Release Date: February 11, 2009 [EBook #28047]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK STRANGE ALLIANCE ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









[Illustration]


    _Haunted by their dark heritage, a medieval fate awaited them...._


 STRANGE
     ALLIANCE

 _BY BRYCE WALTON_


Doctor Spechaug stopped running, breathing deeply and easily where he
paused in the middle of the narrow winding road. He glanced at his
watch. Nine a.m. He was vaguely perplexed because he did not react more
emotionally to the blood staining his slender hands.

It was fresh blood, though just beginning to coagulate; it was dabbled
over his brown serge suit, splotching the neatly starched white cuffs of
his shirt. His wife always did them up so nicely with the peasant's love
for trivial detail.

He had always hated the silent ignorance of the peasants who surrounded
the little college where he taught psychology. He supposed that he had
begun to hate his wife, too, when he realized, after taking her from a
local barnyard and marrying her, that she could never be anything but a
sloe-eyed, shuffling peasant.

He walked on with brisk health down the narrow dirt road that led toward
Glen Oaks. Elm trees lined the road. The morning air was damp and cool.
Dew kept the yellow dust settled where spots of sunlight came through
leaves and speckled it. Birds darted freshly through thickly hung
branches.

He had given perennial lectures on hysterical episodes. Now he realized
that he was the victim of such an episode. He had lost a number of
minutes from his own memory. He remembered the yellow staring eyes of
the breakfast eggs gazing up at him from a sea of grease. He remembered
his wife screaming--after that only blankness.

He stopped on a small bridge crossing Calvert's Creek, wiped the blood
carefully from his hands with a green silk handkerchief. He dropped the
stained silk into the clear water. Silver flashes darted up, nibbled the
cloth as it floated down. He watched it for a moment, then went on along
the shaded road.

This was his chance to escape from Glen Oaks. That was what he had
wanted to do ever since he had come here five years ago to teach. He had
a good excuse now to get away from the shambling peasants whom he hated
and who returned the attitude wholeheartedly--the typical provincial's
hatred of culture and learning.

Then he entered the damp, chilled shadows of the thick wood that
separated his house from the college grounds. It was thick, dense, dark.
One small corner of it seemed almost ordinary, the rest was superstition
haunted, mysterious and brooding. This forest had provided Doctor
Spechaug many hours of escape.

He had attempted to introspect, but had never found satisfactory causes
for his having found himself running through these woods at night in his
bare feet. Nor why he sometimes hated the sunlight.

       *       *       *       *       *

He tensed in the dank shadows. Someone else was in this forest with him.
It did not disturb him. Whatever was here was not alien to him or the
forest. His eyes probed the mist that slithered through the ancient
mossy trees and hanging vines. He listened, looked, but found nothing.
Birds chittered, but that was all. He sat down, his back against a
spongy tree trunk, fondled dark green moss.

As he sat there, he knew that he was waiting for someone. He shrugged.
Mysticism was not even interesting to him, ordinarily. Still, though a
behaviorist, he upheld certain instinctual motivation theories. And,
though reluctantly, he granted Freud contributory significance. He could
be an atavist, a victim of unconscious regression. Or a prey of some
insidious influence, some phenomena a rather childish science had not
yet become aware of. But it was of no importance. He was happier now
than he had ever been. He felt free--young and new. Life seemed worth
living.

Abruptly, with a lithe liquid ease, he was on his feet, body tense,
alert. Her form was vaguely familiar as she ran toward him. She dodged
from his sight, then re-appeared as the winding path cut behind screens
of foliage.

She ran with long smooth grace, and he had never seen a woman run like
that. A plain skirt was drawn high to allow long bronzed legs free
movement. Her hair streamed out, a cloud of red-gold. She kept looking
backwards and it was obvious someone was chasing her.

He began sprinting easily toward her, and as the distance shortened, he
recognized her. Edith Bailey, a second-year psychology major who had
been attending his classes two semesters. Very intelligent, reclusive,
not a local-grown product. Her work had a grimness about it, as though
psychology was a dire obsession, especially abnormal psychology. One of
her theme papers had been an exhaustive, mature but somehow overly
determined, treatise on self-induced hallucination and auto-suggestion.
He had not been too impressed because of an unjustified emphasis on
supernatural myth and legend, including werewolves, vampires, and the
like.

She sprang to a stop like a cornered deer as she saw him suddenly
blocking the path. She turned, then stopped and turned back slowly. Her
eyes were wide, cheeks flushed. Taut breasts rose and fell deeply, and
her hands were poised for flight.

But she wasn't looking at his face. Her gaze was on the blood
splattering his clothes.

He was breathing deeply too. His heart was swelling with exhilaration.
His blood flowed hotly. Something of the whirling ecstasy he had known
back in his student days as a track champion returned to him--the mad
bursting of the wind against him, the wild passion of the dash.

A burly figure came lurching after her down the path. A tramp,
evidently, from his filthy, smoke-sodden clothes and thick stubble of
beard. He recalled the trestle west of the forest where the bindlestiffs
from the Pacific Fruit line jungled up at nights, or during long
layovers. Sometimes they came into the forest.

He was big, fat and awkward. He was puffing and blowing, and he began to
groan as Doctor Spechaug's fists thudded into his flesh. The degenerate
fell to his knees, his broken face blowing out bloody air. Finally he
rolled over onto his side with a long sighing moan, lay limply, very
still. Doctor Spechaug's lips were thin, white, as he kicked savagely.
He heard a popping. The bum flopped sidewise into a pile of dripping
leaves.

He stepped back, looked at Edith Bailey. Her full red lips were moist
and gleaming. Her oddly opaque eyes glowed strangely at him. Her voice
was low, yet somehow, very intense.

"Wonderful laboratory demonstration, Doctor. But I don't think many of
your student embryos would appreciate it."

       *       *       *       *       *

Doctor Spechaug nodded, smiled gently. "No. An unorthodox case." He lit
a cigarette, and she took one. Their smoke mingled with the dissipating
morning mist. And he kept on staring at her. A pronounced sweater girl
with an intellect. This--he could have loved. He wondered if it were too
late.

Doctor Spechaug had never been in love. He wondered if he were now with
this fundamental archetypal beauty. "By the way," he was saying, "what
are you doing in this evil wood?"

Then she took his arm, very naturally, easily. They began walking slowly
along the cool, dim path.

"Two principal reasons. One, I like it here; I come here often. Two, I
knew you always walk along this path, always late for your eight o'clock
class. I've often watched you walking here. You walk beautifully."

He did not comment. It seemed unnecessary now.

"The morning's almost gone," she observed. "The sun will be out very
warm in a little while. I hate the sun."

On an impulse he said: "I'm going away. I've wanted to get out of this
obscene nest of provincial stupidity from the day I first came here. And
now I've decided to leave."

"What are you escaping from?"

He answered softly. "I don't know. Something Freudian, no doubt.
Something buried, buried deep. Something too distasteful to recognize."

She laughed. "I knew you were human and not the cynical
pseudo-intellectual you pretended to be. Disgusting, isn't it?"

"What?"

"Being human, I mean."

"I suppose so. I'm afraid we're getting an extraordinarily prejudiced
view. I can't help being a snob here. I despise and loathe peasants."

"And I," she admitted. "Which is merely to say, probably, that we loathe
all humanity."

"Tell me about yourself," he said finally.

"Gladly. I like doing that--to one who will understand. I'm nineteen. My
parents died in Hungary during the War. I came here to America to live
with my uncle. But by the time I got here he was dead, too. And he left
me no money, so there was no sense being grateful for his death. I got a
part-time job and finished high school in Chicago. I got a scholarship
to--this place." Her voice trailed off. She was staring at him.

"Hungary!" he said and repeated it. "Why--I came from Hungary!"

Her grip on his arm tightened. "I knew--somehow. I remember Hungary--its
ancient horror. My father inherited an ancient castle. I remember long
cold corridors and sticky dungeons, and cobwebbed rooms thick with dust.
My real name is Burhmann. I changed it because I thought Bailey more
American."

"Both from Hungary," mused Doctor Spechaug. "I remember very little of
Hungary. I came here when I was three. All I remember are the ignorant
peasants. Their dumb, blind superstition--their hatred for----"

"You're afraid of them, aren't you?" she said.

He started. "The peasants. I----" He shook his head. "Perhaps."

"You're afraid," she said. "Would you mind telling me, Doctor, how these
fears of yours manifest themselves?"

He hesitated; they walked. Finally he answered. "I've never told anyone
but you. There are hidden fears. And they reveal themselves consciously
in the absurd fear of seeing my own reflection. Of not seeing my shadow.
Of----"

She breathed sharply. She stopped walking, turned, stared at him.
"Not--not seeing your--reflection!"

He nodded.

"Not seeing your--shadow--!"

"Yes."

"And the full moon. A fear of the full moon, too?"

"But how did you know?"

"And you're allergic to certain metals, too. For instance--silver?"

He could only nod.

"And you go out in the night sometimes--and do things--but you don't
remember what?"

He nodded again.

Her eyes glowed brightly. "I know. I know. I've known those same
obsessions ever since I can remember."

Doctor Spechaug felt strangely uneasy then, a kind of dreadful
loneliness.

"Superstition," he said. "Our Old World background, where superstition
is the rule, old, very old superstition. Frightened by them when we were
young. Now those childhood fixations reveal themselves in crazy
symptoms."

He took off his coat, threw it into the brush. He rolled up his shirt
sleeves. No blood visible now. He should be able to catch the little
local passenger train out of Glen Oaks without any trouble. But why
should there be any trouble? The blood----

He thought too that he might have killed the tramp, that popping sound.

She seemed to sense his thoughts. She said quickly: "I'm going with you,
Doctor."

He said nothing. It seemed part of the inevitable pattern.

       *       *       *       *       *

They entered the town. Even for mid-morning the place was strangely
silent, damply hot, and still. The 'town' consisted of five blocks of
main street from which cow paths wound off aimlessly into fields, woods,
meadows and hills. There was always a few shuffling, dull-eyed people
lolling about in the dusty heat. Now there were no people at all.

As they crossed over toward the shady side, two freshly clothed kids ran
out of Davis' Filling Station, stared at them like vacant-eyed lambs,
then turned and spurted inside Ken Wanger's Shoe Hospital.

Doctor Spechaug turned his dark head. His companion apparently hadn't
noticed anything ominous or peculiar. But to him, the whole scene was
morose, fetid and brooding.

They walked down the cracked concrete walk, passed the big plate-glass
windows of Murphy's General Store which were a kind of fetish in Glen
Oaks. But Doctor Spechaug wasn't concerned with the cultural
significance of the windows. He was concerned with _not_ looking into
it.

And oddly, he never did look at himself in the glass, neither did he
look across the street. Though the glass did pull his gaze into it with
an implacable somewhat terrible insistence. And he stared. He stared at
that portion of the glass which was supposed to reflect Edith Bailey's
material self--_but didn't reflect anything. Not even a shadow._

They stopped. They turned slowly toward each other. He swallowed hard,
trembled slightly. And then he knew deep and dismal horror. He studied
that section of glass where her image was supposed to be. _It still
wasn't._

He turned. And she was still standing there. "Well?"

And then she said in a hoarse whisper: "_Your reflection--where is it?_"

And all he could say was: "And yours?"

Little bits of chuckling laughter echoed in the inchoate madness of his
suddenly whirling brain. Echoing years of lecture on--cause and effect,
logic. Little bits of chuckling laughter. He grabbed her arm.

"_We--we can see our own reflections, but we can't see each other's!_"

She shivered. Her face was terribly white. "What--what is the answer?"

No. He didn't have it figured out. Let the witches figure it out. Let
some old forbidden books do it. Bring the problem to some warlock. But
not to him. He was only a Doctor of Philosophy in Psychology. But
maybe--

"Hallucinations," he muttered faintly. "Negative hallucinations."

"Doctor. Did you ever hear the little joke about the two psychiatrists
who met one morning and one said, 'You're feeling excellent today. How
am I feeling?'"

He shrugged. "We have insight into each other's abnormality, but are
unaware of the same in ourselves."

"That's the whole basis for psychiatry, isn't it?"

"In a way. But this is physical--functional--when psychiatry presents
situation where--" His voice trailed off.

"I have it figured this way." How eager she was. Somehow, it didn't
matter much now, to him. "We're conditioned to react to reality in
certain accepted ways. For instance that we're supposed to see our
shadows. So we see them. But in our case they were never really there to
see. Our sanity or 'normalcy' is maintained that way. But the constant
auto-illusion must always lead to neuroticism and pathology--the hidden
fears. But these fears must express themselves. So they do so in more
socially acceptable ways."

Her voice suddenly dropped as her odd eyes flickered across the street.
"But we see each other as we really are," she whispered tensely. "Though
we could never have recognized the truth in ourselves."

She pointed stiffly. Her mouth gaped, quivered slightly.

He turned slowly. His mouth twitched with a growing terrible hatred.
They were coming for him now.

       *       *       *       *       *

Four men with rifles were coming toward him. Stealthily creeping, they
were, as though it were some pristine scene with caves in the
background. They were bent slightly, stalking. Hunters and hunted, and
the law of the wild and two of them stopping in the middle of the
street. The other two branched, circled, came at him from either side,
clumping down the walk. George recognized them all. The town marshal,
Bill Conway, and Mike Lash, Harry Hutchinson, and Dwight Farrigon.

Edith Bailey was backed up against the window. Her eyes were strangely
dilated. But the faces of the four men exuded cold animal hate, and
blood-lust.

Edith Bailey's lips said faintly, "What--what are we going to do?"

He felt so calm. He felt his lips writhe back in a snarl. The wind
tingled on his teeth. "I know now," he said. "I know about the minutes I
lost. I know why they're after me. You'd better get away."

"But why the--the guns?"

"I murdered my wife. She served me greasy eggs. God--she was an
animal--just a dumb beast!"

Conway called, his rifle crooked in easy promising grace. "All right,
Doc. Come on along without any trouble. Though I'd just as soon you made
a break. I'd like to shoot you dead, Doctor."

"And what have I done, exactly," said Doctor Spechaug.

"He's hog-wild," yelled Mike Lash. "Cuttin' her all up that way! Let's
string 'em up!" Conway yelled something about a "fair trial," though not
with much enthusiasm.

Edith screamed as they charged toward them. A wild, inhuman cry.

Doctor Spechaug's eyes flashed up the narrow street.

"Let's go!" he said to Edith Bailey. "They'll see running they've never
seen before. They can't touch us."

They ran. They heard the sharp crack of rifles. They saw the dust
spurting up. Doctor Spechaug heard himself howling as he became aware of
peculiar stings in his body. Queer, painless, deeply penetrating
sensations that made themselves felt all over his body--as though he was
awakening from a long paralysis.

Then the mad yelling faded rapidly behind them. They were running,
streaking out of the town with inhuman speed. They struck out in long
easy strides across the meadow toward the dense woods that brooded
beyond the college.

Her voice gasped exultingly. "They couldn't hurt us! They couldn't! They
tried!"

He nodded, straining eagerly toward he knew not what, nosing into the
fresh wind. How swiftly and gracefully they could run. Soon they lost
themselves in the thick dark forest. Shadows hid them.

       *       *       *       *       *

Days later the moon was full. It edged over the low hill flanking Glen
Oaks on the east. June bugs buzzed ponderously like armor-plated dragons
toward the lights glowing faintly from the town. Frogs croaked from the
swampy meadows and the creek.

They came up slowly to stand silhouetted against the glowing moon,
nosing hungrily into the steady, aromatic breeze blowing from the Conway
farm below.

They glided effortlessly down, then across the sharp-bladed marsh grass,
leaping high with each bound. As they came disdainfully close to the
silent farm house, a column of pale light from a coal oil lamp came
through the living room window and haloed a neglected flower bed. Sorrow
and fear clung to the house.

The shivering shadow of a gaunt woman was etched against the half drawn
shade. The two standing outside the window called. The woman's shadow
trembled.

Then a long rigid finger of steel projected itself beneath the partially
raised window. The rifle cracked almost against the faces of the two. He
screamed hideously as his companion dropped without a sound, twitching,
twitching--he screamed again and began dragging himself away toward the
sheltering forest. Intently and desperately the rifle cracked again.

He gave up then.

He sprawled out flatly on the cool, damp, moon-bathed path. His hot
tongue lapped feverishly at the wet grass. He felt the persistent impact
of the rifle's breath against him, and now there was a wave of pain. The
full moon was fading into black mental clouds as he feebly attempted to
lift his bleeding head.

He thought with agonized irony:

"Provincial fools. Stupid, superstitious idiots ... and that damned Mrs.
Conway--the most stupid of all. _Only she would have thought to load her
dead husband's rifle with silver bullets!_ Damned peasants----"

Total darkness blotted out futile revery.




Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from _Fantasy Book_ Vol. 1 Number 1 (1947).
    Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed. Minor spelling and
    typographical errors have been corrected without note, whilst
    variant spellings remain as printed.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Strange Alliance, by Bryce Walton

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK STRANGE ALLIANCE ***

***** This file should be named 28047.txt or 28047.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/8/0/4/28047/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
