The Project Gutenberg EBook of My Father, the Cat, by Henry Slesar

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: My Father, the Cat

Author: Henry Slesar

Release Date: February 19, 2009 [EBook #28119]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MY FATHER, THE CAT ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









    _Henry Slesar, as we have said before, is a young advertising
    executive who has rapidly become one of the better known writers in
    the field. Here is an off-trail story that is guaranteed to make
    some of you take a very searching second look at some of the young
    men you know._


      my
 father,
     the
     cat

 _by HENRY SLESAR_


 He wondered if I'd told her everything, and, faltering, I
 had to admit that I hadn't. She was wonderful--but human.


My mother was a lovely, delicate woman from the coast of Brittany, who
was miserable sleeping on less than three mattresses, and who, it is
said, was once injured by a falling leaf in her garden. My grandfather,
a descendant of the French nobility whose family had ridden the tumbrils
of the Revolution, tended her fragile body and spirit with the same
loving care given rare, brief-blooming flowers. You may imagine from
this his attitude concerning marriage. He lived in terror of the vulgar,
heavy-handed man who would one day win my mother's heart, and at last,
this persistent dread killed him. His concern was unnecessary, however,
for my mother chose a suitor who was as free of mundane brutality as a
husband could be. Her choice was Dauphin, a remarkable white cat which
strayed onto the estate shortly after his death.

Dauphin was an unusually large Angora, and his ability to speak in
cultured French, English, and Italian was sufficient to cause my mother
to adopt him as a household pet. It did not take long for her to
realize that Dauphin deserved a higher status, and he became her friend,
protector, and confidante. He never spoke of his origin, nor where he
had acquired the classical education which made him such an entertaining
companion. After two years, it was easy for my mother, an unworldly
woman at best, to forget the dissimilarity in their species. In fact,
she was convinced that Dauphin was an enchanted prince, and Dauphin, in
consideration of her illusions, never dissuaded her. At last, they were
married by an understanding clergyman of the locale, who solemnly filled
in the marriage application with the name of M. Edwarde Dauphin.

I, Etienne Dauphin, am their son.

To be candid, I am a handsome youth, not unlike my mother in the
delicacy of my features. My father's heritage is evident in my large,
feline eyes, and in my slight body and quick movements. My mother's
death, when I was four, left me in the charge of my father and his
coterie of loyal servants, and I could not have wished for a finer
upbringing. It is to my father's patient tutoring that I owe whatever
graces I now possess. It was my father, the cat, whose gentle paws
guided me to the treasure houses of literature, art, and music, whose
whiskers bristled with pleasure at a goose well cooked, at a meal well
served, at a wine well chosen. How many happy hours we shared! He knew
more of life and the humanities, my father, the cat, than any human I
have met in all my twenty-three years.

Until the age of eighteen, my education was his personal challenge.
Then, it was his desire to send me into the world outside the gates. He
chose for me a university in America, for he was deeply fond of what he
called "that great raw country," where he believed my feline qualities
might be tempered by the aggressiveness of the rough-coated barking dogs
I would be sure to meet.

I must confess to a certain amount of unhappiness in my early American
years, torn as I was from the comforts of the estate and the wisdom of
my father, the cat. But I became adapted, and even upon my graduation
from the university, sought and held employment in a metropolitan art
museum. It was there I met Joanna, the young woman I intended to make my
bride.

Joanna was a product of the great American southwest, the daughter of a
cattle-raiser. There was a blooming vitality in her face and her body, a
lustiness born of open skies and desert. Her hair was not the gold of
antiquity; it was new gold, freshly mined from the black rock. Her eyes
were not like old-world diamonds; their sparkle was that of sunlight on
a cascading river. Her figure was bold, an open declaration of her sex.

She was, perhaps, an unusual choice for the son of fairy-like mother and
an Angora cat. But from the first meeting of our eyes, I knew that I
would someday bring Joanna to my father's estate to present her as my
fiancee.

I approached that occasion with understandable trepidation. My father
had been explicit in his advice before I departed for America, but on no
point had he been more emphatic than secrecy concerning himself. He
assured me that revelation of my paternity would bring ridicule and
unhappiness upon me. The advice was sound, of course, and not even
Joanna knew that our journey's end would bring us to the estate of a
large, cultured, and conversing cat. I had deliberately fostered the
impression that I was orphaned, believing that the proper place for
revealing the truth was the atmosphere of my father's home in France. I
was certain that Joanna would accept her father-in-law without distress.
Indeed, hadn't nearly a score of human servants remained devoted to
their feline master for almost a generation?

We had agreed to be wed on the first of June, and on May the fourth,
emplaned in New York for Paris. We were met at Orly Field by Francois,
my father's solemn manservant, who had been delegated not so much as
escort as he was chaperone, my father having retained much of the old
world proprieties. It was a long trip by automobile to our estate in
Brittany, and I must admit to a brooding silence throughout the drive
which frankly puzzled Joanna.

However, when the great stone fortress that was our home came within
view, my fears and doubts were quickly dispelled. Joanna, like so many
Americans, was thrilled at the aura of venerability and royal custom
surrounding the estate. Francois placed her in charge of Madame Jolinet,
who clapped her plump old hands with delight at the sight of her fresh
blonde beauty, and chattered and clucked like a mother hen as she led
Joanna to her room on the second floor. As for myself, I had one
immediate wish: to see my father, the cat.

He greeted me in the library, where he had been anxiously awaiting our
arrival, curled up in his favorite chair by the fireside, a wide-mouthed
goblet of cognac by his side. As I entered the room, he lifted a paw
formally, but then his reserve was dissolved by the emotion of our
reunion, and he licked my face in unashamed joy.

Francois refreshed his glass, and poured another for me, and we toasted
each other's well-being.

"To you, _mon purr_," I said, using the affectionate name of my
childhood memory.

"To Joanna," my father said. He smacked his lips over the cognac, and
wiped his whiskers gravely. "And where is this paragon?"

"With Madame Jolinet. She will be down shortly."

"And you have told her everything?"

I blushed. "No, _mon purr_, I have not. I thought it best to wait until
we were home. She is a wonderful woman," I added impulsively. "She will
not be--"

"Horrified?" my father said. "What makes you so certain, my son?"

"Because she is a woman of great heart," I said stoutly. "She was
educated at a fine college for women in Eastern America. Her ancestors
were rugged people, given to legend and folklore. She is a warm, human
person--"

"Human," my father sighed, and his tail swished. "You are expecting too
much of your beloved, Etienne. Even a woman of the finest character may
be dismayed in this situation."

"But my mother--"

"Your mother was an exception, a changeling of the Fairies. You must not
look for your mother's soul in Joanna's eyes." He jumped from his chair,
and came towards me, resting his paw upon my knee. "I am glad you have
not spoken of me, Etienne. Now you must keep your silence forever."

I was shocked. I reached down and touched my father's silky fur,
saddened by the look of his age in his gray, gold-flecked eyes, and by
the tinge of yellow in his white coat.

"No, _mon purr_," I said. "Joanna must know the truth. Joanna must know
how proud I am to be the son of Edwarde Dauphin."

"Then you will lose her."

"Never! That cannot happen!"

My father walked stiffly to the fireplace, staring into the gray ashes.
"Ring for Francois," he said. "Let him build the fire. I am cold,
Etienne."

I walked to the cord and pulled it. My father turned to me and said:
"You must wait, my son. At dinner this evening, perhaps. Do not speak of
me until then."

"Very well, father."

When I left the library, I encountered Joanna at the head of the
stairway, and she spoke to me excitedly.

"Oh, Etienne! What a _beautiful_ old house. I know I will love it! May
we see the rest?"

"Of course," I said.

"You look troubled. Is something wrong?"

"No, no. I was thinking how lovely you are."

We embraced, and her warm full body against mine confirmed my conviction
that we should never be parted. She put her arm in mine, and we strolled
through the great rooms of the house. She was ecstatic at their size and
elegance, exclaiming over the carpeting, the gnarled furniture, the
ancient silver and pewter, the gallery of family paintings. When she
came upon an early portrait of my mother, her eyes misted.

"She was lovely," Joanna said. "Like a princess! And what of your
father? Is there no portrait of him?"

"No," I said hurriedly. "No portrait." I had spoken my first lie to
Joanna, for there was a painting, half-completed, which my mother had
begun in the last year of her life. It was a whispering little
watercolor, and Joanna discovered it to my consternation.

"What a magnificent cat!" she said. "Was it a pet?"

"It is Dauphin," I said nervously.

She laughed. "He has your eyes, Etienne."

"Joanna, I must tell you something--"

"And this ferocious gentleman with the moustaches? Who is he?"

"My grandfather. Joanna, you must listen--"

Francois, who had been following our inspection tour at shadow's-length,
interrupted. I suspected that his timing was no mere coincidence.

"We will be serving dinner at seven-thirty," he said. "If the lady would
care to dress--"

"Of course," Joanna said. "Will you excuse me, Etienne?"

I bowed to her, and she was gone.

At fifteen minutes to the appointed dining time, I was ready, and
hastened below to talk once more with my father. He was in the dining
room, instructing the servants as to the placement of the silver and
accessories. My father was proud of the excellence of his table, and
took all his meals in the splendid manner. His appreciation of food and
wine was unsurpassed in my experience, and it had always been the
greatest of pleasures for me to watch him at table, stalking across the
damask and dipping delicately into the silver dishes prepared for him.
He pretended to be too busy with his dinner preparations to engage me in
conversation, but I insisted.

"I must talk to you," I said. "We must decide together how to do this."

"It will not be easy," he answered with a twinkle. "Consider Joanna's
view. A cat as large and as old as myself is cause enough for comment. A
cat that speaks is alarming. A cat that dines at table with the
household is shocking. And a cat whom you must introduce as your--"

"Stop it!" I cried. "Joanna must know the truth. You must help me reveal
it to her."

"Then you will not heed my advice?"

"In all things but this. Our marriage can never be happy unless she
accepts you for what you are."

"And if there is no marriage?"

I would not admit to this possibility. Joanna was mine; nothing could
alter that. The look of pain and bewilderment in my eyes must have been
evident to my father, for he touched my arm gently with his paw and
said:

"I will help you, Etienne. You must give me your trust."

"Always!"

"Then come to dinner with Joanna and explain nothing. Wait for me to
appear."

I grasped his paw and raised it to my lips. "Thank you, father!"

He turned to Francois, and snapped: "You have my instructions?"

"Yes, sir," the servant replied.

"Then all is ready. I shall return to my room now, Etienne. You may
bring your fiancee to dine."

I hastened up the stairway, and found Joanna ready, strikingly beautiful
in shimmering white satin. Together, we descended the grand staircase
and entered the room.

Her eyes shone at the magnificence of the service set upon the table, at
the soldiery array of fine wines, some of them already poured into their
proper glasses for my father's enjoyment: _Haut Medoc_, from _St.
Estephe_, authentic _Chablis_, _Epernay Champagne_, and an American
import from the Napa Valley of which he was fond. I waited expectantly
for his appearance as we sipped our aperitif, while Joanna chatted about
innocuous matters, with no idea of the tormented state I was in.

At eight o'clock, my father had not yet made his appearance, and I grew
ever more distraught as Francois signalled for the serving of the
_bouillon au madere_. Had he changed his mind? Would I be left to
explain my status without his help? I hadn't realized until this moment
how difficult a task I had allotted for myself, and the fear of losing
Joanna was terrible within me. The soup was flat and tasteless on my
tongue, and the misery in my manner was too apparent for Joanna to miss.

"What is it, Etienne?" she said. "You've been so morose all day. Can't
you tell me what's wrong?"

"No, it's nothing. It's just--" I let the impulse take possession of my
speech. "Joanna, there's something I should tell you. About my mother,
and my father--"

"Ahem," Francois said.

He turned to the doorway, and our glances followed his.

"Oh, Etienne!" Joanna cried, in a voice ringing with delight.

It was my father, the cat, watching us with his gray, gold-flecked eyes.
He approached the dining table, regarding Joanna with timidity and
caution.

"It's the cat in the painting!" Joanna said. "You didn't tell me he was
here, Etienne. He's beautiful!"

"Joanna, this is--"

"Dauphin! I would have known him anywhere. Here, Dauphin! Here, kitty,
kitty, kitty!"

Slowly, my father approached her outstretched hand, and allowed her to
scratch the thick fur on the back of his neck.

"Aren't you the pretty little pussy! Aren't you the sweetest little
thing!"

"Joanna!"

She lifted my father by the haunches, and held him in her lap, stroking
his fur and cooing the silly little words that women address to their
pets. The sight pained and confused me, and I sought to find an opening
word that would allow me to explain, yet hoping all the time that my
father would himself provide the answer.

Then my father spoke.

"Meow," he said.

"Are you hungry?" Joanna asked solicitously. "Is the little pussy
hungry?"

"Meow," my father said, and I believed my heart broke then and there. He
leaped from her lap and padded across the room. I watched him through
blurred eyes as he followed Francois to the corner, where the servant
had placed a shallow bowl of milk. He lapped at it eagerly, until the
last white drop was gone. Then he yawned and stretched, and trotted back
to the doorway, with one fleeting glance in my direction that spoke
articulately of what I must do next.

"What a wonderful animal," Joanna said.

"Yes," I answered. "He was my mother's favorite."


[Illustration]




Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from _Fantastic Universe_ December 1957.
    Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed. Minor spelling and
    typographical errors have been corrected without note.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of My Father, the Cat, by Henry Slesar

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MY FATHER, THE CAT ***

***** This file should be named 28119.txt or 28119.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/8/1/1/28119/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
