The Project Gutenberg EBook of Stopover, by William Gerken

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Stopover

Author: William Gerken

Release Date: March 30, 2009 [EBook #28450]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK STOPOVER ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









    _What will the world be like, the day after Tomorrow, for the lonely
    ones who will have talents that others will half fear, half envy?
    William Gerken describes this strange world in which young and old
    will have to find new values and pursue new dreams, as they search
    for the answer...._


stopover

_by WILLIAM GERKEN_


 When he opened the door to the shed that day, and saw
 the axe suspended in mid-air, he understood what was wrong.


He had been living with us for a week before I found out he was a
Lifter. Even the discovery was an accident. I had started for the store,
but then remembered a chore I wanted him to do. I heard the sounds of
wood-chopping coming from the shed, so I went behind the house to the
small wooden structure. I must have gasped or something, because he
turned around to look at me, dropping the axe he had poised over a block
of wood as he turned. Only he hadn't been holding the axe; it had been
hanging in mid-air without support.

The first time I saw him was when he knocked on my door. I don't think
I'll ever forget how he looked--tall and thin, old clothes and older
shoes, an unruly mop of blond hair. It was only when I looked at his
face that I realized that he was more than a mere boy of eighteen or
nineteen. The tired lines around his mouth, the sad, mature look in his
eyes, the stoop already evident in his young shoulders; he had been
forced to mature too quickly, and seemed to have knowledge a boy his
age had no right to be burdened with.

"I--I was wondering if I might get a bite to eat, sir," he said.

I grinned. No matter how he looked, he was no different from anyone else
his age where food was concerned. "Sure; come on in and rest a spell," I
told him. "Marty, can you fix a plate of something? We've got a guest."
Marty--my wife--glanced through the kitchen doorway. After a cursory
look at the boy, she smiled at him and went back to work.

"Sit down, son, you look pretty done-in. Come far today?"

He nodded. "Guess it shows, huh?" he said, brushing the road dust from
his trousers.

"Uh-huh. Where you from? Not around here, I know."

"Far back as I can remember, Oregon has been home."

It wasn't hard to guess why he was almost a thousand miles from home.
During the war, over ten million American families had been separated,
their way of life destroyed by the hell of atomic bombings. Ever since
its end, people had been seeking their loved ones; many, only to find
them dead or dying. Sometimes the searches stretched across continents
or oceans. In that respect the boy sitting opposite me was no different
from hundreds of others I've seen in the past ten years. The only
difference was in his face.

"Looking for your family," I said, making it a statement.

"Yessir." He smiled, as though the sentence had double meaning.

After he had eaten, he went down to the town store to look through its
records. They all do. They turn the pages of the big stopover book,
hoping a relative or friend had passed through the same town. Then they
sign the book, put down the date and where they're headed, and set out
once more. Almost all towns have stopover books nowadays, and a good
thing, too. They helped me find Marty back in '63, when the truce was
finally signed. In fact, I found her right here in this town. We got
married, settled down, and haven't been more than a hundred miles away
since then.

Martha called me into the kitchen almost as soon as he was gone. "He's a
nice boy."

"That he is," I agreed. "You know, I've been thinking; we could use a
young fella around here to help with the work."

"If he'll stay. There was something in his eyes; a sort of longing for
someone very close to him. That kind usually takes off after a night's
rest."

"I know. Guess I'll drop by the store; see if I can talk him into
staying."

By the time I reached the store, school was out, and a group of kids
were gathered around him, listening to his description of the Rocky
Mountains, which he had crossed during the summer. The kids weren't the
only ones listening. Even the adults were standing around in the store,
remembering the places they had once seen themselves, and getting such
bits of news as he dropped about the other towns he had passed through.
The Searchers are, next to the town radio stations, the only source of
information we have now, so it's no wonder they're so warmly greeted
wherever they stop.

Soon as he'd finished telling about the Rockies, I said we'd appreciate
it if he would stay for supper. He said he would, and later, while he
and Tommy, my eight-year-old son, and I were walking home, I asked him
if he'd stay with us for a while.

For a moment he looked wistful, as if wishing he could stay here, and
forget whoever he was trying to find. Then he smiled and said, thanks,
he would stay for a week or so.

He was real helpful, too, cutting stove and fireplace wood for the
coming winter, running errands, hunting for game animals, and teaching
at the school. Almost all Searchers teach when they can be persuaded to
stay in town for a spell. Since there are no more colleges to produce
teachers, anyone who knows something useful takes a turn at teaching.
'Fore the war, I was a mathematics major in college, so twice a week I
teach all kinds of math at school, from numbers through calculus.
Mostly, Searchers teach about what the places they had passed through
are like.

Then, when I opened the door to the shed that day, and saw the axe
suspended in mid-air, I suddenly realized why he had that sad, tired
look about him all the time.

He picked up the axe from where it had fallen, and stood it against the
wall. Reaching for his jacket, he said, "I--I guess I'd better be moving
along, Mr. Tranton. I'm really sorry if I've caused you any trouble." He
started past me for the door.

"Hold on, son." I grabbed his arm. "Why the rush?"

"I don't want to cause you any trouble. Now that you know what I am--"
he gritted the words out bitterly, "the word will get around. I wouldn't
want the others in town to be angry with you because of me. You and Mrs.
Tranton have been swell to me. Thanks for everything." He tried to pull
his arm loose, but I held fast.

"Let's go inside and have a cup of coffee," I suggested. "I don't know
about the other towns you've been through, but here we don't hate a
person because he might happen to have powers we don't."

"Yesterday I was down at the store, and I heard one of the men sounding
off about us," he said. "He didn't sound like he cared much for us."

"Must have been John Atherson. He never could understand ESP, and he
blames the war on it. We just let him talk; can't change a person like
that." We went up the back steps and through the door into the kitchen.
"Go on, show Marty," I said, taking off my jacket.

He looked at me to make sure I meant it. Then he raised the coffee pot
from the stove, and watched it move across the room under its own power
to the table where I was sitting. Leaving the pot in mid-air, he made
the cupboard open, and still standing in the middle of the room, floated
three cups and saucers to the table. Then he got the cream, sugar and
three spoons, put them on the table, and poured the coffee. Marty
watched the coffee pot move back to the stove, her mouth open in
amazement, "I heard of it, but I don't think I'd have believed it if I
hadn't seen it." I nodded, and she smiled at him. "Now that I know," she
said, "I'm even gladder you chose to stay here for a while."

He grinned. "Thanks." He sat down with us at the table, and stirred some
sugar into his coffee.

"It must be hard on you," Marty said quietly, in a knowing way. "Are you
really looking for your family, or for others with ESP?"

"My father was killed during the bombings. After that, Mom and I were
alone. She only had a little talent; Dad and I were the ones who were
really adept. Anyway, we stayed on the small farm we owned until last
spring. Then Mom married again, and I was free to leave. I think her new
husband was sorry to see me go, because it meant a lot of manual work
for him that I had been doing an easier way. I decided to see if I
couldn't find any others like myself, so I left and started across the
country."

"Do you have any other powers, or can you just control things?" Marty
asked.

He grinned. "If you mean, am I an all-around superman, no. Dad wasn't
either. I do have a scattering of other psi talents, though, but nothing
as well-developed as my telekinesis. I'm still working on them."

Tommy came in from school just then. "Could you teach him how to use his
mind that way, or do you have to be born with it?" I said.

He smiled again. "No, you don't have to be born with it. Everyone could
do it if they started training themselves young enough to use their
minds to the fullest extent. All through history certain people have had
strange powers. The trouble was, they were thought to be freaks instead
of the better developed humans they actually were. Even now, we're only
on the threshold of learning the full power of the mind." He turned to
Tommy. "Would you like to learn how to do things, Tommy?"

"Sure. Like what?"

He glanced at Marty and me. "Like making the world a better place to
live."

Two weeks later, at a meeting of the town council, I wasn't too worried
about getting the proposal accepted. We might have some trouble with
Atherson, but I figured between the two of us we could handle him. When
the new business came up, I stood up and led Tommy to the front of the
hall. There were a few whispers as we went, as children under fifteen
aren't allowed in the hall during a council meeting.

"Tommy has something to say to you which, I think, will interest
everyone here. Go on, son."

Seconds afterwards, we all heard, a clear "Hello," but not with our
ears; the word came from inside our heads.

Someone said: "The kid's a telepath," and the silence was broken.

Everybody was talking at the same time.

"I suppose you think it's an honor to have one of them damn things for
your son," Atherson yelled. "I'm glad you're the one who got stuck, and
not me."

"Tommy was not _born_ a telepath, John," I told him. "He has been
_deliberately trained_ to make use of the latent power in his brain. And
I don't think I'm 'stuck' either. We all know we've been slowly slipping
into retrogression ever since '63. None of us like it, but there isn't
anything we can do to halt it--yet. We don't want our children, or their
children, to keep slipping backwards. If we don't stop it in our
lifetime, we may not be able to stop it at all.

"As I see it, the best chance we have to at least achieve a status quo
is to accept the aid those among us with psi talents are willing to
give. After all, it's their world, too. With their help, we may be able
to build a better civilization, one without the socio-political diseases
that led to the war.

"The young man who has been staying at my house for the past three weeks
taught Tommy to do what he just did. He says he thinks he can do it with
any child under ten years old, and is even willing to try it with some
teen-agers. Of course, Tommy's training has just begun. He will keep on
learning for years.

"Here's my idea. If some of the children get a grounding in how to
develop their dormant brain power, by the time they're twenty, they'll
be able to mold a new society, one geared to the present culture instead
of the past traditions. How about it?"

I waited. For a minute there was silence. Finally one of the older men
stood up. "Is he sure he can do it?"

"All we know is it worked with Tommy," I replied.

"I don't like it; it's unnatural," Atherson said.

"No one asked you to like it," someone said.

Another called: "Do you think three world wars in fifty years _is_
natural? Let's take a vote."

A vote was taken, and it was decided to add an extra class for those
children whose parents wanted them to attend. After a month, the council
would expect a report on what progress--or lack of it--had been made.

       *       *       *       *       *

A few weeks later, when my math class was over, I hung around to watch
the new class. It was divided into small groups, each training on a
different psi talent. One group was lifting pencils and gently returning
them to desks by telekinesis. Another was sitting quietly, once in a
while breaking into shouts of laughter; probably telepathy. There were
other groups, but I didn't know enough about the talents to identify
their work.

During the time he was teaching, he met a girl. They spent quite a bit
of time together, and she joined the special class. By the time the
report to the council came due, it wasn't hard to tell they were in
love.

Just about everyone in town turned out for that meeting. The boys and
girls who were taking the class were seated at the front of the hall.
The report was first on the agenda, so the kids could go home to bed.

"When we started," he said, "I asked those children who weren't
interested, or who were--um--unsuited to the work, to leave. Then we ran
through a general training exercise, and after a week, I split the class
up into groups. Each group was to concentrate on one talent, but general
sessions for the entire class give everyone practice in all talents. I
think we've made fairly good progress. Some of the older teen-agers have
shown an interest in the talents (he glanced at his girl), and although
progress has not been as rapid as with the younger children, they are
sufficiently developed to help instruct. Now your children are going to
demonstrate what they have learned."

For the next half hour we watched Tommy and fourteen other boys and
girls work. Tommy and the others who had concentrated on telepathy read
silently to us from books and talked to each other, projecting their
thoughts so we could also listen in. The telekinesis group all worked
together to build a small table. All the necessary materials were
stacked at the front of the room. The kids sat in a half circle, their
brows furrowed in concentration as lumber, nails and hammers moved under
the guidance of their minds. When they had finished, the table was
complete, even to the sanding and a coat of varnish.

Finally, the only one with precognition--a girl about six years old,
with long blonde hair--gave the weather forecast for the next two weeks.
Copies of her prediction were passed out to us, so we could check her
accuracy.

Once the kids were gone, he stood up again. "I hope you are all
convinced as to what can be accomplished through the use of psi. The
talents can and should be used for the betterment of society, not for
carnival side shows. Of course, there are more than those just
demonstrated. Unfortunately, I couldn't find them present in this group.
I was hoping for either a healer or a sensitive, but no one had the
necessary ability.

"If you want the class continued, the decision is yours. Thanks for
having open minds, and for giving me a chance." He picked up his jacket
and walked out.

Atherson didn't bother to come to the meeting, so the vote to continue
the class was unanimous.

He stayed on, teaching part-time, helping out with the work at my place,
and seeing his girl. Then, one afternoon two weeks after the council
meeting, she came to see me. "You've got to stop him, Mr. Tranton," she
said. "He's going to leave. He told me he was going right after he
finished the class today. He's probably down at the store right now,
buying things to take with him. You've got to make him stay."

"Why?" I asked quietly, watching the tears well up in her eyes. She
hadn't lost her composure yet, but she felt so strongly about him she
was on the verge of breaking down.

"Because I love him and he loves me," she retorted. "That's why. Won't
you talk to him? At least get him to take me with him. Please."

"You said you love him. Would you rather he stayed here, and was never
fully happy, or left to continue searching, maybe to return someday,
ready to settle down? If you really love him there's no question."

"Couldn't he take me with him?"

I shook my head. "I don't think you should even ask him to take you.
You'd be a burden that would slow him down. He'd worry about you, have
to get your food, find shelter for you. He might let you go with him,
but don't ask him to. He's too young to be tied down. Now go on, and
wish him good luck and kiss him goodbye. He's coming up the road now."

She glanced out the open window, jumped up, and ran out into the
sunlight, to wait at the side of the road. I picked up the book I had
been reading, but the window was too close to the road for me to
concentrate on the pages. She didn't say anything until he was standing
before her.

"I'll be waiting," she said. "Take care of yourself."

He nodded. "I have to go," he told her. "Partly because it was Dad's
last wish, partly because I need others of my own kind. Alone, we can't
help the world much; together, there's a good chance for results. I left
a letter for the council saying you were going to take over the class,
because you have the ability to carry on. Watch Cathy, and help her all
you can. She's got it; her weather forecast proved that much. You've got
to drum that into her; never let her forget it. Maybe I'll be back--I
hope so. But first, I have to find others. I need them, and they might
need me. We're still not completely self-sufficient.

"Give the kids my love, and keep them at it. Just don't forget they
_are_ kids. Give them a chance to grow up as normally as possible.
That's a chance I didn't have."

He kissed her tenderly, then started off down the road. When he reached
the crest of the hill, he turned and waved. Marty joined me at the
doorway, and we waved too. Outlined against the bright blue afternoon
sky, he stood immobile for a moment. To many, he would have been just a
young man with a tired-out face; but to me, the symbol of a better life
for Tommy and his children ... a life unmarred by the threat of instant
death as punishment for something he had little control over.

He's gone now, but the work will go on, and the Athersons of the world
will come to realize he is giving us another chance, a chance we don't
really deserve. Somehow he reminds me of another man. A man who said:
"Suffer the little children to come unto me, and forbid them not; for of
such is the kingdom of God."




Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from _Fantastic Universe_ September 1957.
    Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed. Minor spelling and
    typographical errors have been corrected without note.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Stopover, by William Gerken

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK STOPOVER ***

***** This file should be named 28450.txt or 28450.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/8/4/5/28450/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
