The Project Gutenberg EBook of Solar Stiff, by Chas. A. Stopher

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Solar Stiff

Author: Chas. A. Stopher

Release Date: April 30, 2009 [EBook #28646]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SOLAR STIFF ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









              SOLAR STIFF

                  By

           CHAS. A. STOPHER


 _Totem poles are a dime a dozen north
 of 63° ... but only Ketch, the lying
   Eskimo, vowed they dropped out of
        frigid northern skies._


Probos Five gazed at the white expanse ahead, trying to determine where
his ship would crash. Something was haywire in the fuel system of his
Interstar Runabout. He was losing altitude fast, so fast that all five
pairs of his eyes couldn't focus on a place to land.

Five pairs of arms, each pair about three feet apart on the loglike
body, pushed buttons and rotated controls frantically, but to no avail.
In a few short minutes it would all be over for Probos Five. Even if by
some miracle he remained unhurt after crashing, he would die shortly
thereafter. The frigid climatic conditions of the third planet were
deadly to a Mercurian. He thought once of donning his space suit but
decided against it. That would merely prolong the agony. From Planet
Three, when one has a smashed space cruiser, there is no return. Probos
Five knew that death was riding with him in the helpless ship. The
situation did not unnecessarily dismay him; Mercurians are philosophers.

Probos Five ceased to manipulate the unresponding controls. Stretching
his trunklike torso to its full twenty feet, four heads gazed through
observation ports at the four points of the compass while the remaining
head desultorily watched the instrument panel.

Since die he must, Probos Five would meet his end stoically, and five
pairs of stumpy arms folded over five chests in a coordinated gesture of
resignation.

Probos Five thought fleetingly of his wife Lingua Four and remembered
with some annoyance that she was the author of his present predicament.
A social climber, Probos Five thought to himself, but aside from that a
good wife and mother in addition to being a reigning beauty. Lingua Four
was tall even for a Mercurian. Already she scaled seven dergs, or in
Earth terms, fourteen feet and was beginning to show evidences of a
fifth head. Five heads were rarely found on females and Probos Five was
justly proud of his good fortune. In all Mercury at the present time, he
knew of but two females possessing five heads and soon Lingua Four would
be the third of her sex to be thus endowed.

Yes, thought Probos Five, a woman to be proud of; for today after three
vargs of marriage the memory of her trim trunk with four pairs of eyes
laughing mischievously, filled his five brains with flame. Slim as a
birch she stood in his memory, and eight eyes whispered lovers' thoughts
across space and time.

Probos Five recalled his five minds from their nostalgic reverie and
gazed at the contour of the Earth that was rushing up to meet him.
White, blazing white reflecting the rays of the midnight sun covered the
region as far as the eye could reach.

"Good," thought Probos Five, "the Polar regions. That means the end will
come quickly. One or two seconds at the most of that bitter cold would
be enough."

       *       *       *       *       *

Turning away from the windows Probos Five let his thoughts return to
Lingua Four, to Probos Two, his son, and his home on the first planet
from the sun. Ah, that is the place to live, thought Probos, the
temperature an unchanging 327°; just comfortably warm, where one could
enjoy a life of warmth and ease. Too bad that he would not live to see
it again. Thirty vargs, he reflected, is such a short time. With luck,
perhaps he may have lived to see a hundred vargs slip by. And perhaps in
time he may have added three more heads and five dergs in length to his
towering trunk.

He thought of Probos Two and wondered idly if his son would also visit
the barbarian worlds to collect data for Lingua Four.

He wished that he could have seen more of Probos Two. There's an
up-and-coming lad, he thought, not quite two vargs old and two heads
already. Yes, indeed, he's quite a boy, Probos Five remembered proudly;
maybe his mother will keep him at home instead of running him all over
the universe to get material for her committees.

He wished that Lingua Four would settle down and be content as a
housewife, but he doubted that she would. Social ambition was boring
like a termite under her bark.

Lingua Four was determined to be the first lady of Arbor, the capital
city of Mercury. To this end Lingua Four had labored unceasingly. She
was president of half the women's clubs of Arbor. She could always be
depended upon to furnish the best in new and diverting subjects.

She headed almost all committees for aid or research on any type of
problem. It was owing to Lingua Four being president of the Committee
for Undernourished Arborians that Probos Five was making this
ill-starred trip. His purpose was to capture a few of the upright,
divided trunk animals that inhabited the third planet.

They were to be transported to Mercury and given over to scientific
study as to their edible qualities. If it were found that the divided
trunk creatures were fit for Mercurian consumption, the problem of
undernourishment would no longer exist since the supply of divided
trunks was seemingly inexhaustible. Mercurians had made expeditions to
the third planet before and every report concluded with--"Divided trunk
creatures increasing in number."

Privately Probos Five doubted the possibility of using the divided
trunks for food, since the last expedition once again reported a
complete lack of captives due to the frail and tenuous bodies of the
divided trunks. Then, too, transportation and preservation posed a
tremendous problem, not to mention the difficulty of trying to eat
something that might vaporize on your fork. But then these questions may
never arise, he decided, for of all the reports perused by Probos Five
not one expedition had succeeded in bringing a divided trunk to Mercury.

All reports were read to the last letter by Probos Five before
assembling equipment for his own trip. In the reports he had noted many
of the difficulties of the earlier missions. Planet Three was impossible
for a Mercurian without a heated space suit. The temperature of Planet
Three was so low that it would literally freeze a Mercurian stiff in a
matter of seconds.

The casualties of the early expeditions had been numerous. Many
Mercurians had succumbed to the bitter cold due to flaws in space suits
and other accidents. A break in the suit meant instant death. The
victims of such mishaps were invariably buried in the isolated, sparsely
inhabited Polar regions to avoid alarming the divided trunk creatures.

It was strange, mused Probos Five, that the divided trunks were
seemingly unable to bear the slightest increase in temperature. Their
bodies disintegrated upon contact with a Mercurian. Some were roped and
dragged from a distance up to the doors of the space ships, but no
inhabitant of Planet Three had been closer to Mercury than the air lock
of the space cruisers. As the divided trunk people were dragged into the
air lock, warm air from the ship would be pumped into the lock to dispel
the frigid air of Planet Three. As the warmth of Mercury enveloped the
divided trunks they became quite red, began to melt and finally
dissolved into a gaseous state, leaving a small pile of ashes and a
disagreeable odor in the air lock that sometimes lingered for days.

Probos Five believed he had the solution for these obstacles in the path
of scientific study of the divided trunks. He had decided to use guile
in place of strength. For this reason he had come alone and in a small
space runabout to put his solution to the test. But his solution now
could never be tried, he remembered morosely.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the aft compartment Probos Five had constructed a refrigeration
plant. By maintaining a constant degree of frigidity he hoped to deliver
a pair of each species of divided trunks to Mercury. He hoped especially
to capture a complete set and perhaps a few over to make up for breakage
and losses. As to what form of sustenance the divided trunks were
accustomed to, he had no idea whatsoever. He had intended to bring
samples of earth, vegetation and anything else that may have suggested a
source of food for the divided trunks.

The thought too had occurred to him that possibly the divided trunk
creatures ate one another. On the possibility of this Probos Five had
determined to capture three black ones, three white ones, three yellows,
three browns and three reds, and three of any other color that he might
find. He rather doubted that more colors or combination of colors
existed. All previous expedition reports had mentioned only the five
colors. However, Probos Five had determined to keep several eyes open on
the off chance that he might find a new and different species.

His refrigerator was modeled along the architectural lines of the dens
of the divided trunks. The main room of the refrigerator opened to the
outside of the ship by means of a small air lock. A Mercurian size air
lock was not needed for the divided trunks, as few had been found to be
much over three dergs in height.

Winches and cables to pull the divided trunks into the refrigerator were
installed in the refrigerator room itself to avoid burning the divided
trunks with hot cables from other parts of the ship.

In addition, Probos Five had cunningly devised a refrigerated trap. This
too was designed to simulate the caves of the divided trunk creatures
but was smaller. It was constructed with entrances readily seen and
exits well hidden. Probos Five had expected great things of his trap. He
had conceived the idea after reading the report of a Mercurian
expedition that explored the dens of the divided trunks at some place
marked "Coney Island." According to the reports the divided trunks
showed no hesitancy in entering these types of dens. In fact, the writer
of the report gave it as his opinion that the divided ones perhaps
played games in these types of caves. It also mentioned that some of the
dens were equipped with flat shiny surfaces that cast reflections or
images. Probos Five had incorporated the image-making surfaces into his
trap design. A pity that all this effort must be wasted, thought Probos
as he once more turned to the observation ports to check his remaining
distance from the planet's surface. Seeing that his time was short,
Probos Five turned all five faces forward in the Mercurian gesture of
disdain for death. A moment later came the shock.

       *       *       *       *       *

A week later the proprietor of a novelty shop in Fairbanks watched two
natives with their dog team pulling something loglike through the snow
toward the trading post. Turning to a customer he remarked,

"Here comes Ketch and Ah Koo dragging in another Totem Pole. Guess that
Ketch must be the biggest liar ever produced by the Eskimos. He tried to
tell me that Totem Poles fall from the sky. Says he can always find one
if he sees it fall because it's so hot it melts the snow around it.
Personally I think he should be elected president of the Liars' Club,
but I'll buy the Totem Pole anyway. Those pesky tourists always whittle
a chunk out of my Totem Pole for a souvenir.

"I'm glad he's bringing me another one," the storekeeper concluded, "the
one he sold me last year is about whittled away."




Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from _Planet Stories_ January 1954.
    Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed. Minor spelling and
    typographical errors have been corrected without note.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Solar Stiff, by Chas. A. Stopher

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SOLAR STIFF ***

***** This file should be named 28646-8.txt or 28646-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/8/6/4/28646/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
