The Project Gutenberg EBook of Cogito, Ergo Sum, by John Foster West

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Cogito, Ergo Sum

Author: John Foster West

Release Date: June 17, 2009 [EBook #29149]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK COGITO, ERGO SUM ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









    _Are the Spirit and the Flesh one and the same thing? Or are they
    separate entities, dependent and at the same time independent of
    each other? Perhaps some great Cosmic Law holds this secret. But the
    one Universal Element that we can depend upon, apparently, is The
    Lucky Accident._


 cogito,
    ergo
     sum

 _by ... John Foster West_


 A warped instant in Space--and
 two egos are separated from their
 bodies and lost in a lonely abyss.


I think, therefore I am. That was the first thought I had. Of course not
in the same symbols, but with the same meaning.

I awakened, or came alive, or came into existence suddenly, at least my
mental consciousness did. "Here am I," I thought, "but what am I, why am
I, where am I?"

I had nothing to work with except pure reason. I was _there_ because I
was not somewhere else. I was certain I was _there_ and that was the
extent of my knowledge at the moment.

I looked about me--no, I _reasoned_ about me. I was surrounded by
nothingness, by black nothingness, a vacuum. Immense distances away I
could detect light; or rather, I could perceive waves of force passing
around me which originated at points vast distances away, vast in
relation to my position in the nothingness.

There were waves of force all about me, varying in frequency. The
nothingness was alive with waves of force, traveling parallel and
tangential to each other without seeming to interfere one with another.
I measured them, differentiated between them and finished with the task
in a matter of seconds.

How could I do it? It was one of the capabilities I was _created_ with.

What was I? I perceived the waves of force. I perceived great quantities
of mass--solid, liquid, gas--whirling in vacuum, mass built up out of
patterns of basic force. I searched my own being, analyzed myself. I was
not gas. I was not solid. I was not even force. Yet I existed. I could
reason. I was a beginning, a sudden beginning. And I had duration
because I knew that time had elapsed since the moment I _awakened_
though I had no means of telling how much time or of even naming the
period.

       *       *       *       *       *

Could I really be _pure reason_? Can reason exist? Can rational entity
exist without a groundwork of matter, or at least of force?

It could. It must. I was rational entity and I existed. Yet I could find
nothing of force, nothing to occupy space about my _self_. For all I
could ascertain, I might have covered a one-dimensional point in
eternity or I might have been spread throughout vast distances.

From this reasoning I concluded that rational entity might occur either
as some force unlike that of all natural phenomena in space, or as some
combination of these forces at the moment beyond my own power to
analyze, even detect. I finished with that for the time being.

How did I come into being? I discarded the question as unanswerable
temporarily. What was I before that instant I suddenly reasoned _cogito,
ergo sum_? I could not say.

How did I know I even existed, really? Obviously because I was capable
of rational thought. But what was thinking? First it was perceiving and
accepting my own existence; beyond that, it was recognizing the dark
nothingness around me and the forces it contained. I had to exist.

But how did I know nothingness was right? And how did I know its
darkness was right? And how did I know the waves of force were _waves_
and _force_? And how did I know matter was _matter_ and that I was none
of these?

"Symbols," I reasoned. "I'm thinking in symbols. I could not reason
without symbols; therefore I could not exist as I am without symbols to
think with."

Yet whose symbols were they? Where and how did I come by them? I could
think back clearly to the instant of my creation, yet I had not invented
the symbols in the interim of my existence, nor had they been given to
me. What then? They were part of me when I came alive in this universe,
had been _invented_ some other time and elsewhere by someone else or by
what I was before I became the entity of reason I now was.

Then that first flash of perception in nothingness was not spontaneous.
There was something behind it. I was something before that moment, in
another era of time, perhaps a creature of substance. But what?

I concentrated. I remembered the symbol _Marl_. I was or had been an
entity _Marl_. Were there others back there, somewhere? There must have
been, must be yet. Was I the only _Marl_ who metamorphosed into this
state of rational entity? Surely not. Yet I could contact no other
rationale around me as far away as I could probe. How far was that? How
could I know. Was it far enough to reach the other _Marls_, or were they
scattered thinly throughout infinity around me like the flecks of mass?

I was suddenly ill. The symbol _malaise_ came to me as the proper
description of my malady. I grew dizzy with my sickness. I wished to
regurgitate, to cast off this cold, frightening sensation. Yet I was
provided with no physical means of doing it. It filled me throughout all
my thinking. It was I. I thought to exist. I thought depression,
sickness. Therefore I was the malady and it was a hell of malcontent
beyond symbolical description.

What was wrong with me? I was frightened. I was concerned for my
existence here alone. What was it called? The idea shimmered there on
the fringe of perception, then fairly leaped into my consciousness.
Existing alone as pure reason was worse than no-existence, was worse
than dying or never having been at all. I need another _Marl_. To exist
happily, I must have at least one other _Marl_ to communicate with, to
share my thoughts, to share my being.

Is this a necessity, a condition peculiar to me as I am, as reason, or
is it a condition that came across the barrier with me from that other
state? It must be the latter. An entity of pure reason, having come into
existence as reason, would need nothing but himself. Why? Because he
would be _without emotion_.

"I am _emotional_," I thought. "I am entity of almost pure reason, but I
have inherited emotion from my previous state. It is a disorder of
thought, but it can be a pleasant disorder when the emotion is the right
one; or, if unpleasant, when satisfied.

"But I could not have emotions as I am now. They are _cortical
responses_, or are supposed to be. What is _cortical_? No, they are a
sort of illogical reasoning, nothing physical--" The rest eluded me.

"I am lonely," I thought. "Loneliness stems from fear and fear is a
basic emotion. I am very lonely. I have been lonely for a long time,
bringing it with me here. I would rather sate my loneliness than live to
eternity, than know all there is to know. What can quell my loneliness?
Another like me, another _Marl_--whatever a _Marl_ is. I must have, must
find another _Marl_."

I began to search. I darted frantically about space like a frightened
thing, though I could perceive no movement. I knew I passed from one
area of space to another because I could measure slight changes in the
position of the stars about me. I knew the points of light were _stars_.

There was duration. I could not know how much. Eternity? A split second?
But at last I discovered another like me. No, almost like me, but
another _Marl_. The other entity had less of reason, more emotion. It
was frightened and lonely. The _Marl's_ whole existence was that of
sickness--of loneliness, which is fear. The _Marl_ was darting about
madly, seeking, seeking a thing like itself. What was it, like me but
different?

As I came in, I measured our similarity and differences. Rationally we
were identical, or almost so. Emotionally we were different, vastly
different. "_Marls_ appear to exist as rationale and emotion," I
reasoned. "Beyond that I cannot go."

The other _Marl_ perceived me, darted frantically toward me, then
slowed. We came together, touched like--_like two cautious fish meeting
in a dark pool and touching mouths to substantiate identical species_.

The other _Marl_ was satisfied with my identity. It leaped frantically
at me, raced around me, through me, finally stopped, pervading me, while
_vibrating_ in sheer relief and happiness. I felt the great
fear-loneliness in the other _Marl_ begin to recede and in its place
came an almost overpowering euphoria. It was _contentment_, and it
stemmed from the basic emotion _love_. I knew this at once.

I suddenly realized that I too was relieved, that I was no longer sick
with fear-loneliness. It was good, this existing of the other within me
or simultaneously with me. Or was it I within the other? It sated our
fear emotion and made, created a love-euphoria.

"I am happy I found you," I communicated. "I was lonely for another
_Marl_. You are a _Marl_?"

The other hesitated, thinking. "No. I am _Pat_. I am different from you.
But it is chiefly emotional. It is good."

"You are a _Pat_," I returned in disappointment. "I had hoped to find
another _Marl_."

"Don't be disappointed," the _Pat_ soothed. "We are alike, really.
Almost so. Like--like flame and gas are both substance yet different. We
are two types of the same thing. I am no longer frightened. I am no
longer lonely. You are good for me."

I was relieved because I wanted to be. I believed the other _Marl_--no,
the _Pat_--because I wanted to believe. I did not bother to
rationalize. I felt elation.

"Then in that other time, that other place we both belonged to a--a
common group, with another name?" I suggested.

"I believe so," the _Pat_ answered.

"How was it when you came awake?" I asked. "Can you remember?"

"I think so. I recall I was born here in fright because it was all
wrong. I was not in my natural state, so it was not right." The _Pat_
paused to think. "I remember there was great speed and I was born in
fright. Were you?"

"No," I answered. "I was not frightened at first. And I was never
frightened to the degree you were. I was mostly lonely, which is related
to fear. But when I first conceived of my existence here I was coolly
logical. I awakened _reasoning_--realizing that I existed."

"I suppose it has to do with our emotional differences," the _Pat_
beside me or with me or within me communicated.

"Do you recall where in space you came from?" I asked. "I must have been
doubting my existence at first so intensely I did not observe. You seem
to have taken your own being for granted, thus you were, perhaps, more
observant."

"I--I think so." The _Pat_ hesitated and I knew it was observing the
stars around us. "Yes. Come with me. I think I know where."

I stayed with the _Pat_, a part of it, and we lurched through space.
Rather, we ceased to exist at one point in space and existed in another.
How far? Distances meant nothing.

"It was here," the _Pat_ informed me finally.

       *       *       *       *       *

Something was wrong here. The interweaving waves of force were all
wrong. There was a disorder, a great cancer in space. The waves
interfered with the progress of each other all along a great barrier. It
was not natural, not like it was elsewhere.

"Something is wrong with the waves of force crossing this area. They
interfere with each other. New forces are created. Do you detect it?" I
communicated.

"I feel it," the _Pat_ answered. "It is a sickness in space like--like
our loneliness."

I knew the comparison was ridiculous but I let it pass. "You said you
came alive at great speed. I could have been traveling too. We must have
plunged into this barrier. It seems to me that emotions must originate
in a _physical_ being; perhaps reason could be free, but not emotion. I
don't know. But I have a theory. I believe our _physical_ selves still
exist somewhere in space. The barrier, perhaps, interfered with the
normal functioning of our mental equipment. We exist at one point in
space and we are thinking, experiencing emotions at another point. It's
as if our minds are--are broadcasting our thoughts and emotions far away
from our physical selves. Either that, or our rationales were torn free
and only our emotions are broadcast. Does that sound logical?"

"Yes," the _Pat_ agreed, "I believe that is the answer."

I felt that the _Pat_ was pleased with my theory, that it greatly
admired my reasoning. I also perceived that it had no idea what I meant
by the explanation. I did not mind.

"You said you were moving at great speed," I continued. "Can you
remember the line, the direction you were traveling in?"

The _Pat_ hesitated only a moment. "Yes. You perceive the star cluster
there, the triangular one? My heading was in that direction, but it was
changing fast."

"Then we could find nothing by traveling toward the triangular cluster?"

"No. I was moving in an arc in the direction of the distorted square
cluster there. Do you see it?"

"Yes," I answered, knowing her use of the word _see_ was unconscious.
"That is Cetus."

"Cetus?" The _Pat_ was startled. "How do you know that?"

"I don't know. The name came to me. It seemed right to call it that."

"It--it's all so frightening!"

I had no time for pampering our emotions, though I was at great peace
with the _Pat_ so near me. Time might prove vital. "Neither would it do
any good to travel in the direction of Cetus," I said.

"No. No," the _Pat_ communicated. "If there is any object of matter or
force I was a part of in that other existence traveling through space,
it is in an arc. The best we can do is take an arbitrary direction
between the triangular cluster and the one called Cetus and hope to
intercept the object, the other part of me, whatever it is."

"Come with me," I ordered.

I discovered the object of mass hurtling through space before the _Pat_
did. It was symmetrical and metallic. I tore myself away from my
companion and darted to meet it. I discovered it was a shell, a hollow
thing, and I passed inside. There was a room there. There were
projections and circles of transparent matter. I experienced the symbol
_dials_.

There were two other creatures seated close to the dials, things of
matter, and their substance was protoplasm. But there was no rationale
present in either of them. I examined the living matter of the smaller
one swiftly. Organs seemed poised in a suspended state. The creature I
observed, housed in a protective shell, seemed paralyzed or dead. I
remembered the word _dead_.

Then the _Pat_ was with me again. "I--I feel something, _Marl_. I am
frightened. What are they, those things there?"

"They seem to be--" I stopped communicating.

The _Pat_ had disappeared!

The thing of protoplasm nearest me was moving but I was no longer
interested. I remember the _Pat_ had touched the upper extremity of the
creature and had vanished, had ceased to be.

The old sickness was back. I was lonely. I wanted the other entity. I
could not, did not wish to exist without the _Pat_.

I darted frantically about the metal shell, here and there, searching,
searching. Where was the _Pat_? I _screamed_ for it. I thought _Pat_ as
far away as I could reach, but there was no reaction, no response at
all.

In my frenzy, I was back beside the creatures of protoplasm before I
realized it, near the one I had not yet examined.

"Perhaps they took her," I thought. It was not logical, but it was a
hope. Hope is emotional; I was becoming more emotional than rational.

I touched the larger of the two creatures, experimentally; moved
cautiously inside it, searching, searching.

Suddenly I was seized by a great force, an inexorable power that grasped
me and wrenched me, tearing me from the point in space I had occupied a
moment before. My perception blurred, but I was not frightened. Without
the _Pat_ I did not care what happened. I was intensely curious. "So
this is how it is," I reasoned in a flash, "to _cease to be_."

And I ceased to be....

       *       *       *       *       *

Marlow shook his head. I must have dozed, he thought. He glanced at the
chronometer on the console ahead. No, only a minute or two had elapsed
since the last time he had checked.

"Sleepy head! Wake up and live!"

He looked to his right. Pat sat in the navigator's seat smiling at him.

"I didn't sleep, honestly," he protested. "We hit some sort of barrier
back there. It knocked me out for a moment. I had the damnedest
impression--"

"Remember what you promised!" She swiveled the seat about to face him.
"No more scientific lectures on the mysteries of space or I'll return to
earth. You know my poor brain can't absorb it."

"You win," he grinned, running calloused fingers through his greying
crew-cut. He leaned forward and kissed her briefly. "How did an old
space hermit like me ever win a flower-garden bride in the first place?"

They laughed together, and he felt secure within the metallic shell
surrounding them, no longer alone.




Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from _Fantastic Universe_ March 1954.
    Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed. Minor spelling and
    typographical errors have been corrected without note.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Cogito, Ergo Sum, by John Foster West

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK COGITO, ERGO SUM ***

***** This file should be named 29149.txt or 29149.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/9/1/4/29149/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
