The Project Gutenberg EBook of G-r-r-r...!, by Roger Arcot

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: G-r-r-r...!

Author: Roger Arcot

Release Date: June 21, 2009 [EBook #29194]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK G-R-R-R...! ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









    _Roger Arcot explores the fringes of a really never forgotten world,
    the introduction to which is an aged manuscript _De Necromantiae_,
    and the wish, not too repressed, to pledge your soul to the Devil!
    There are many strange memories and unhappy frustrated souls in this
    Fantastic Universe of ours--strange and sinister memories and
    stranger urges, frightening urges that refuse to die in the heart of
    Brother Ambrose._


 g-r-r-r...!

 _by ... ROGER ARCOT_


 He had borne the thousand and one injuries with humility and
 charity. But the insults! These were more than he could suffer....


Gr-r-r! There he goes again! Brother Ambrose could scarce restrain the
hatred that seethed and churned in his breast, as his smallish eyes
followed Brother Lorenzo headed once more for his beloved geraniums, the
inevitable watering-pot gripped in both hands, the inevitable devotions
rising in a whispered stream from his saintly lips. The very fact the
man lived was a mockery to human justice: God's blood, but if thoughts
could only kill.

_Ave, Virgo!_

The thousand and one injuries of Fray Lorenzo he had borne as a
Christian monk should, with humility and charity. But the insults, aye,
the insults to faith and reason! They were more than a generous Father
could expect His most adoring servant to suffer, weren't they? To have
to sit next to the man, for instance, at evening meal and hear his silly
prattle of the weather. Next year's crop of cork: we can scarcely expect
oak-galls, he says. Isn't _petroselinum_ the name for parsley? (No,
it's Greek, you swine. And what's the Greek name for Swine's Snout? I
could hurl it at you, like the Pope hurling anathema.) _Salve tibi!_ It
sticks in one's craw to bless him with the rest. Would God our cloister
numbered thirty-and-nine instead of forty.

For days now, for weeks, Brother Ambrose had witnessed and endured the
false piety of the man. How he'd ever got admitted to the order in the
first place beat all supposition. It must have been his sanctimonious
apple-cheeks or (Heaven forbid such simony), some rich relative greased
the palm of the Prior. _Saint, forsooth!_

Brother Ambrose recalled just a week previous; they had been outside the
walls, a round dozen of the brothers, gathering the first few bushels of
grapes to make the good Benedictine wine. And all men tended to their
duty in the vineyard--save who? Save lecherous Lorenzo, whose job was to
attend the press. Picked the assignment himself, most likely, so he
could ogle the brown thighs and browner ankles of Dolores squatting on
the Convent bank, _gitana_ slut with her flashing eyes and hint of sweet
delight in those cherry-red lips and coquettish tossing shoulders. A man
could see she was child of the devil, flesh to tempt to eternal
hellfire.

But how skillful Brother Lorenzo had been in keeping the glow in his
dead eye from being seen by the others! Only Ambrose had known it was
there. Invisible to even the world, perhaps; but lurking just the same
in Lorenzo's feverishly disguised brain. _Si_, there and lusting beyond
a doubt. By one's faith, the blue-black hair of Dolores would make any
weak man itch; and the stories that had floated on the breeze that day,
livelily exchanged between her and that roguish Sanchicha, the
_lavandera_; Lorenzo must surely have lapped them all up like a hungry
spaniel, though he cleverly turned his head away so you would not guess.
After all, Ambrose, scarcely a step closer, could recall clearly every
word of the bawdy tales!

Back to the table again; and Brother Ambrose once more noticed how Fray
Lorenzo never let his fork and knife lie crosswise, an obvious tribute
he, himself, always made in Our Senor's praise. Nor did Lorenzo honor
the Trinity by drinking his orange-pulp in three quiet sips; rather (the
Arian heretic) he drained it at a gulp. Now, he was out trimming his
myrtle-bush. And touching up his roses.

Gr-r-r, again! Watching his enemy putter away in the deepening twilight
that followed the decline of the Andalusian sun, Brother Ambrose
recalled the other traps he had lain to trip the hypocrite. Traps set
and failed; but, oh, so delicious anyhow, these attempts to send him
flying off to Hell where he belonged: a Cathar or a Manichee. That last
one, involving the pornographic French novel so scrofulous and wicked.
How could it failed to have snared its prey? Especially, when Fray
Ambrose had spent such sleepless nights, working out his plot in great
detail?

Brother Ambrose allowed himself an inward chortle, as he paced along the
portico, recollecting how close to success the scheme had come. The book
had had to be read first (or re-read, rather) by Ambrose to determine
just which chapter would be most apt to damn a soul with concupiscent
suggestion. Gray paper with blunt type, the whole book had been easy
enough to grasp for that matter--what with the words so badly spelled
out. The cuckoldry tales of Boccaccio and that gay old archpriest, Juan
Ruiz de Hita, what dry reading they seemed by comparison--almost like
decretals.

As if by misadventure, Brother Ambrose had left the book in Lorenzo's
cell, the pages doubled down at the woeful sixteenth print. Ah, there
had been a passage! Simply glancing at it, you groveled hand and foot in
Belial's grip.

But, that twice-cursed Lorenzo must have had the devil's luck that day.
A breeze sprang up to flip the volume closed; and the monk, not knowing
the book's owner and espying only its name, had handed it over to the
Prior who had promptly turned the monastery upside down in search of
further such adulterous contraband!

Worse fortune followed. The next day, Brother Lorenzo had come down with
a temporary stroke of blindness--it lasted only a week; but even so, for
seven days Ambrose had been forced to labor in his stead in the drafty
library, copying boresome scrolls in a light scarcely less dim than
moonlight. Worse still, the Prior had found mistakes: letters dropped,
transposed (Latin was so bothersomely regular; compared to the vulgar
tongue). For what he called such "inexcusable slovenliness," the Prior
had imposed a penance of bread and water and extra toil.

_Slovenliness!_ Why didn't the Prior--was he blind, too?--notice the
deadly sins that were each day so neatly practised by Brother Lorenzo?
They went unpunished. Probably, God's Angel would even be found to have
been asleep when Judgment Day came around and Lorenzo would slip into
Heaven by a wink, as one might say.

Obviously, there was no justice, except such as man would make himself,
Brother Ambrose had at last decided.

_Ave Maria, plena gratia._

Now at last, he was alone in his cell, free finally from the unendurable
(sometimes it seemed everlasting) torment of Brother Lorenzo's presence.
Twenty-nine distinct damnations listed in Galatians, if you cared to
look up the text; and not one of them could the enemy be made to trip
on, a-dying.

In fact, of late, so bad had the situation grown that Brother Ambrose
had even once considered pledging his soul to Satan. Oh, not for keeps!
No enmity was worth that dread sacrifice. But as a trick, sort of--with
a flaw in the indenture that proud Lucifer would miss until it was too
late to wriggle out of the bargain.

But that had been two days ago.

Now, a better scheme presented itself to Brother Ambrose, engendered by
that forced labor within the dreary precincts of the convent library.
For that was where (and when) he had made his delightful discovery, the
one that would now redeem him from all his irritations and travail. The
discovery that would rid him of Brother Lorenzo for always!

It had happened like this.

Inasmuch as the monastery was over eight hundred years old, many ancient
books and moldy scrolls lay forgotten in the cobwebby corners of the
great library, especially where the light was gloomy. One afternoon
during his week of enforced toil, Brother Ambrose had sought the shelter
of one of these ill-lighted and seldom-visited nooks of the building to
recover certain lost hours of sleep, hours that had gone astray the
night before as he sat up in his lonely cell and brooded over his
wrongs. But before his drowsy head could nod off into dreams completely,
his eye had chanced to notice a faded scroll that jutted forth from its
fellows on the shelves. Starting to push the offender back in place,
Ambrose's fingers had hesitated when he noticed the title: _De
Necromantiae_.

Surely, thought the monk, such a book belonged on the Index. Then, it
occurred to him that possibly the copy in front of him was the only one
of its kind in the world, in which case not even the Holy Father could
be expected to know it existed. Then, how could it be on the Index or be
forbidden?

Taking advantage of this personal achievement in casuistry, Brother
Ambrose promptly untied the scroll and began reading.

What he discovered there interested him very much. We do not intend to
describe all of the marvels unfolded for him in that venerable mildewed
manuscript, for some of the more gruesome mysteries of the supernatural
world are better left unrevealed; but let it be said at least, that one
chapter intrigued Brother Ambrose immensely. So much so, that he
shamelessly whipped out his scissors and, nipping that section, stuck it
inside his rough wool robes so he might peruse it at greater leisure
within the privacy of his cell.

The chapter that evoked such delight and interest within Brother
Ambrose's complicated brain was one that had been penned in the early
ages of the Church by a lay-brother who had concerned himself with pagan
magic. In it, he had described the fiendish habits and activities of
werewolves and had actually even presented a formula. _Ut Fiat Homo
Lupinus_ it was entitled, which purported to give the secret words and
ritual necessary to achieve the transformation from man to beast.

At last, the opportunity had arrived Ambrose's way to achieve his
long-desired revenge on Brother Lorenzo!

Twenty-four hours had passed since the momentous discovery. The moment
was at hand. Night again had settled upon the Spanish cloisters, the
last bell had tolled; and all the good and hardy men were supposed to be
at sound sleep on their rough iron cots. But in Brother Ambrose's chilly
cell, a small candle burned--casting sickly light that produced huge
flickering shadows against the whitewashed walls.

Brother Ambrose held the treasured piece of manuscript between his
hands. It was difficult to make out the faded Latin; the writing was
cramped and crude, and Ambrose was no scholar to boot. But like all
persons of his times, he was quite well-aware of the existence of
werewolves, werefoxes, and other such monsters; and he held no doubt but
what the spell would work.

It was the scheming brother's plan to creep in the stealth of night down
the corridor to the barred oak door of Lorenzo's own simple cell. There,
he would knock; lightly enough to disturb no other sleepers, yet loud
enough that the rapping would summon Brother Lorenzo from whatever
wicked dreams might be festering in his own sleeping mind.

As Fray Lorenzo's naked footsteps were heard pattering across the bare
floor, Ambrose would drink the bat's blood he had collected, sniff the
wolfbane he had ground to ash, and pronounce the obscure Celtic words
that would alter the very atoms of his flesh, transforming them into an
obscene travesty of life. Brother Lorenzo, when he opened the door,
would be met not by a fellow human being, but by a snarling fanged wolf
that would hurl its hairy bulk at the drowsy monk's own throat.

The next day, the entire monastery would be awakened, of course, by
shouts of the news that foul murder had been discovered. But no amount
of detection would ever manifest the bestial murderer. Brother Ambrose
would hug to his soul the secret of his crime until the day of his
shriving.

At length, the hour had grown so late that it was certain even the Prior
himself must have long since retired.

Brother Ambrose made ready to carry out his deed. He rose from his cot,
removed the coarse brown robe that normally he wore to bed as well as in
his daily rounds so that his long-unwashed body stood naked. There must
be no chance for tell-tale blood to stain his clothes, when his fierce
talons and wolfish teeth tore and rended at human flesh.

Carrying his precious piece of scroll, he departed from his cell and
groped his way down the stone corridor until the light improved enough
for him to see his way. Luckily, a patch of moonlight illuminated the
very space in front of the accursed Brother Lorenzo's door. What
fortune!

Brother Ambrose halted and stared at the door as though his eyes could
see through it, at the sleeping form within. He sucked in a deep breath.
His palms were sweaty; his heartbeat rapid. For a moment, he was almost
ready to back out.

Then suddenly, the memory of all the hundreds of grudges he bore against
Lorenzo surged through him. Hatred built up a massive reservoir, that
broke out over his crumbling conscience and flooded his body with anger
and wild resentment. His teeth gritted. What had he been thinking of--to
retreat now, with revenge so nearly at hand!

He rapped. A moment later, he heard a creaking sound like Brother
Lorenzo slipping out of bed.

Trembling, he lifted the phial of bat's blood, drank it down. It tasted
salty. He chewed on the wolfbane powder until it mixed with the saliva
of his mouth, then he swallowed. Holding the ancient scroll-segment
before him, he began to repeat the badly-written incantation: _Ut fiat
homo lupinus, pulvis arnicae facenda est et dum...._

A thousand jolts assailed his body, as if he had been struck by all the
lightnings in heaven. Then, came a rushing paralysis, a distortion of
time and space, a dread feeling of disintegration and death ...

The door to Brother Lorenzo's cell began to recede, swelling in volume
as it did. The ceiling of the corridor likewise retreated at
ever-increasing pace. Staring down at his own dwindling frame, Ambrose
saw that the slug-white flesh was now covered with thick fur, even as
the limbs were gnarling--

Then, suddenly the door opened. Brother Lorenzo stepped out, his kindly
pious face wrinkled with sleep but otherwise showing no irritation or
displeasure at being summoned from his rest. At first, the monk seemed
not to have noticed Ambrose's form, for he gazed above him and away.

Ambrose kept on shrinking.

Finally, Brother Lorenzo's gaze chanced to glance downward. But still,
his features mirrored no recognition or alarm; only puzzlement.

_Now_, thought Ambrose, _now is the time for me to snarl_.

But no snarl, nor semblance of a snarl, emerged from his lips. Rather,
his lips had elongated into long sucking proboscises, while already a
third pair of limbs had commenced growing from his furred-over abdomen.

This was not a wolf-like form, he was assuming, Ambrose suddenly
realized in terror. But if it was not lupine, what was it? Had he
misread the incantation? Had he mispronounced a simple word?

The weird crawling form into which he had metamorphosed was now hardly
an inch higher than the surface of the floor. But Ambrose's eyes had
bulged into great many-faceted orbs capable of seeing objects with
greater clarity than ever. Inches away from him, he made out the segment
of scroll he had discarded after reading aloud from it. Crawling over to
it, he perused the beginning words of the spell.

And it suddenly dawned on him (while what passed for a heart and
ventricles within his pulpy form began simulating horror) that the
ancient monk of centuries ago who had first copied the incantation must
have been as careless of spelling as he. For the charm obviously did not
convert its user into a werewolf, but rather some other animal ...

Dredging up all the miserable Latin he knew, Ambrose fished for some
word similar to _lupinus_.

And suddenly he had it!

_Pulicus!_ That was the word the sloppy copyist of yesteryear had
wrongly transcribed.

From the word _pulex_, meaning "flea."

Not how to become a wolf-like man, but a flea-like man--that was what
the formula had described.

Ambrose, the flea, braced himself. Gathering his powerful legs under
him, he leaped in soaring flight to land upon the object of hatred--the
giant Brother Lorenzo, who towered so high above him.

But the gentle and considerate Brother Lorenzo, who probably would not
have hurt hair nor hide of any other creature on Earth--even he knew
full well that there is only one thing you can do to discourage a flea.

Swat!




Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from _Fantastic Universe_ January 1957.
    Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed. Minor spelling and
    typographical errors have been corrected without note.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of G-r-r-r...!, by Roger Arcot

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK G-R-R-R...! ***

***** This file should be named 29194.txt or 29194.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/9/1/9/29194/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
