The Project Gutenberg EBook of Be It Ever Thus, by Robert Moore Williams

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Be It Ever Thus

Author: Robert Moore Williams

Release Date: June 25, 2009 [EBook #29240]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BE IT EVER THUS ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









    _Men have fought and died for life and liberty since the beginning
    of time, and they will continue the fight until time finally comes
    to an end. Here is a thoroughly readable story about just such a
    situation--a story which could well be a forecast of the chilling
    future of your children and ours._


   be
   it
 ever
 thus

 _by ... Robert Moore Williams_


 The planet's natives were so similar to their conquerors that no
 one could tell them apart--except for their difference in thinking.


This was Graduation Day. The senior class from the Star Institute of
Advanced Science was scheduled to go through the Museum of the Conquered
and observe the remnants of the race that had once ruled this planet.
There were many such museums maintained for the purpose of allowing the
people to see the greatness their ancestors had displayed in conquering
this world and also to demonstrate how thorough and how complete that
conquest had been. Perhaps the museums had other reasons for existing,
but the authorities did not reveal these reasons. Visiting such a museum
was part of the exercises of every graduating class.

Billy Kasker arrived early, to take care of all last minute problems for
Mr. Phipper, the instructor who would take the group through the museum,
and to make certain that all of the members of the graduating class knew
what they were supposed to do on the trip. Billy Kasker was class
president. A handsome, husky youth, accommodating, generous, and
thoughtful to a fault. He was well liked both by the faculty and the
students. He was pleasant to everybody, even to Joe Buckner, who called
him "teacher's pet" and sneeringly remarked that he had been elected
class president as a result of a superb job of boot-licking.

Even such remarks as these had not disturbed Bill Kasker. He still acted
as if Joe Buckner was his best friend.

"Are we all here, Billy?" the instructor called.

"All here, sir," Billy Kasker answered.

"Very well. Let's start to the museum. As we go through you may ask any
questions you wish. However, I must insist you stay close to me and not
wander from the group. We will be in no danger, you understand--the
creatures living in the museum have had their fangs pulled most
effectively--but even so we must not take chances."

The instructor led off. He was a fussy little person in a shiny black
coat and a soft hat that was too big for him. No matter how much paper
he stuffed inside the brim, the hat never seemed to fit right. Peering
through glasses that were always threatening to fall off, he moved away
from the Star Institute toward the nearby museum. The class of eight
girls and nine boys followed him.

"Why do we have to go through this old museum?" Joe Buckner complained.
"We already know everything about it."

"It's the rule," Billy Kasker answered. "The faculty thinks we should
see the situation at first hand. Then we will have a better
understanding of it."

Joe Buckner grunted disdainfully. "You're always sucking in with the big
shots and telling everybody what they say."

"You asked me. I tried to tell you." Billy Kasker's voice was still
pleasant. If a slight glint appeared in his eyes, it remained there for
only a second.

The museum was an open area many miles long. It was enclosed by a high,
electrically charged fence along which guard towers were placed at
regular intervals. There was only one gate, to which the instructor led
the class. A captain, resplendent in a brilliant uniform, came out of
the guard house to greet them.

"The graduating class from the Star Institute, eh? Good. We had notice
that you were coming. Guard, bring Mr. Phipper a _Thor_ gun, then open
the gates." The last was spoken in a brisk tone to the guard who had
followed the captain.

The _Thor_ gun was brought immediately. It was a small weapon, with a
belt and holster. The captain took it from the holster. Watching, Billy
Kasker had the impression that the weapon was made of glittering, spun
glass. It had a short, heavy barrel in which tiny instruments were
visible. Billy Kasker watched very closely.

"Do you know how to use it?" the captain asked.

"Oh, yes," the instructor answered.

"Is it so dangerous in there that we need a _Thor_ gun?" Susan Sidwell
said. Susan had majored in ionic chemistry and had graduated with high
honors.

"No, it isn't dangerous at all," the instructor answered hastily. "The
weapon is worn merely for the sake of tradition."

"No danger at all, young lady," the captain said. "Nothing to worry
about. Not while you've got this, anyhow." He patted the _Thor_ gun
which the instructor was buckling to his waist.

The gates were open. The instructor in the lead, the group passed
through. Billy Kasker brought up the rear. Joe Buckner was directly
ahead of him.

They went first to see the wreckage of the city--shattered walls,
tumbled buildings, streets with rubble still piled in them. Weeds and
creeping vines grew over the broken bones of this city as if they were
attempting to hide the ugly scars.

The instructor adjusted his voice to the proper tone. He had made this
same speech to many graduating classes and he knew exactly what he was
going to say.

"You understand, of course, that this part of the old city was almost
completely destroyed in our attack of the year 4021 After Yevbro, or the
year 1967, according to the way the natives reckoned time on this
planet. This part of it has been allowed to remain the way our ships
left it, as an example of the effectiveness of our weapons."

His voice gave the impression that he was personally participating in
that attack and was enjoying the destruction that had taken place. He
stood straight, squared his shoulders and breathed deeply.

"What happened to the natives who lived here?" Billy Kasker asked.

The instructor frowned. "Oh, they were killed." At first he was a little
irritated at the question, then again satisfaction came back into his
voice.

"They got what was coming to them for trying to resist our sky ships,"
Joe Buckner said.

"Oh, yes, they deserved their fate." The instructor hitched the _Thor_
gun a little higher on his hip.

Billy Kasker was silent.

"We will go next to the fields, then to the factory section--such of as
there is--then to that part of the city which we have allowed the
natives to rebuild. Come."

The class moved out of the city. Here they saw their first natives. Clad
mostly in rags--many of them bent and stooped, some of them showing the
marks of hunger--they were a quiet people who kept strictly out of the
way of the class group. But except for the clothing and the marks of
hunger, they were identical in appearance with their conquerors.

"Why, they look just like us!" Joe Buckner said indignantly. He sounded
outraged at the resemblance.

"There are many differences," the instructor said quickly. "Note their
clothing, how poorly made it is. They make it themselves out of the wool
of some kind of animal--deer, I believe, or bear."

"Sheep," Billy Kasker corrected.

"Oh, yes, sheep is the name of the animal. Thank you, Billy."

"You're welcome, sir."

"But they oughtn't to look like _us_!" Joe Buckner continued.

"There are chemical differences," Susan Sidwell said. "Once, in the
laboratory, we analyzed their blood. The color was different for one
thing. They also have a much different metabolism."

"But suppose one of them escaped from the museum and got into our part
of the world. How would we know he wasn't one of us, if he put on our
clothes?" Joe Buckner sounded outraged.

"That is one purpose our bracelets serve," the instructor answered. "A
very good question, Joe. As you know, each of us receives a bracelet at
birth, which is slipped over the hand and onto the wrist. Made of
_plasticum_, which cannot be cut by any method, the bracelet has the
unique property of expanding in size as the wearer grows. It cannot be
removed except by cutting off the arm of the wearer." He laughed as if
he had made a good joke. "But I am sure no one would ever think of doing
that. The bracelet carries the serial number assigned to each of us."

He held up his arm, exhibiting the gleaming circle of _plasticum_ on his
wrist. To him--to all of them--it was a badge of honor, a mark that
proved one belonged to a superior race. "If one of the natives escaped,
the absence of a bracelet would disclose his identity at once. We would
take measures to have him eliminated."

"I see," Joe Buckner said. He sounded mollified. "How would we eliminate
him?"

"I believe it is customary to use a _Thor_ gun in such cases--a large
caliber which will disintegrate him instantly. The model I have will
only blast a hole a few inches in diameter."

"I'm going to be a _Thorgunman_," Joe Buckner said with sudden
enthusiasm.

"Good!" the instructor said. "That is a very fine calling. If I had my
life to live over again--" He sighed for lost opportunities.

At the announcement of his ambition, Joe Buckner rose higher in the
opinion of the class.

"Observe how they make their living," the instructor continued.

The class saw the natives at work tilling the soil. The technique used
here was very crude but mildly interesting. They used plows and harrows
for loosening the soil, devices that were pulled by large animals.

"_Horses_, I believe they call the animals. Of course, we don't allow
them to have power-drawn equipment."

"It's not at all like the way we obtain our food," Billy Kasker said
thoughtfully.

"Oh, no," the instructor answered. "We synthesize our foods. As a matter
of fact, they are _required_ to grow their food. That way, they have to
spend so much time finding something to eat that they can't cause
trouble." He grinned as if something in the idea pleased him.

"Serves them right," Joe Buckner said.

The natives working in the fields seemed not to see the class. When the
group came near, they stopped talking and worked harder.

"Scared to talk when we're around," Joe Buckner said. "They're yellow!"

"Now for the factory section," the instructor said.

The factories were small and unimpressive. Working here with very crude
tools and with no power equipment, the natives were making farm
machinery.

"Why don't we give them better tools?" Billy Kasker asked.

"What have they got coming?" Joe Buckner exclaimed. "They lost, didn't
they?"

"Yes, but--"

"If you had your way you'd be sucking in and helping the side that lost.
Pretty soon you'd discover _you_ had lost!"

"Hardly that," Billy Kasker replied. "But it seems more human--"

"_Human?_ That's a laugh!" Joe Buckner slapped his thighs and roared
with laughter.

"Come along," the instructor said.

"Look--there are children playing games!" Susan Sidwell observed.
"Horrible-looking little brats, aren't they?" She pointed to a group of
brown-skinned youngsters playing some kind of a game that involved a
ball and a club. One threw the ball, the second struck at it with the
club.

"What a stupid way to play," Joe Buckner said.

       *       *       *       *       *

As soon as the young natives saw the graduating group coming, they
stopped their game and ran away. They seemed very frightened.

"The young ones fear us," the instructor explained. "The older ones fear
us too, but they don't show it so much." He watched the fleeing
youngsters with every evidence of great inward satisfaction.

Billy Kasker's lips closed in a thin straight line.

"Now we will go to the rebuilt section."

They walked on.

"One of the natives is following us," Susan Sidwell suddenly said.

Turning, the group saw that a member of the conquered race was coming
along the street behind them. He was dressed all in brown--his hat, his
shirt, his pants.

The instructor put his hand on the butt of the _Thor_ gun.

The native walked past the group without seeming to see it. He was
whistling between his teeth. He walked on ahead of them, turned down an
alley, and disappeared. The instructor took his hand off the _Thor_ gun.

"He wasn't really following us; he wouldn't dare. Does anybody have any
questions?" He looked brightly around the group.

"Yes, I have," Joe Buckner said. "Why don't we just kill all of these
natives? They're not any good to us."

The instructor smiled slyly. "I'll tell you a little secret about that.
It's awfully hard to kill _all_ of any race. No matter how thoroughly
you do the job, a few always manage to escape. Then they breed and
increase in spite of everything you do.

"After we had conquered this planet we had trouble catching all of the
natives. They were the most cantankerous, persistent race you can
imagine. So these museums were set up, to lure them in here. We
announced that these places would be set aside and that they would not
be bothered as long as they remained in the museums. All in all, we made
the museums rather attractive places, hoping that--"

"I see the plan!" Joe Buckner said glowingly. "After you got them all
into the museums--_blooie!_--knock all of them off at once!"

The instructor smiled. He looked as pleased as if he had thought of the
idea himself. A little stir of applause ran through the group as they
expressed their gratitude to their rulers for making this world safe for
them.

"Why haven't they been killed before now?" Billy Kasker asked. "These
museums were opened over forty years ago. Surely--"

"I don't know about that," the instructor answered. "I think probably
our rulers are waiting for a propitious time, or perhaps for an incident
that will give them an excuse to carry out their plan."

"I hope they don't wait too long," Joe Buckner said. "Golly, I want to
be a _Thorgunner_ and get in on the mop-up when it comes!"

The group stirred, seemed to look forward to the day of the final
slaughter.

"Any other questions?" the instructor asked.

"I have one," Billy Kasker said hesitantly. "It doesn't exactly have
anything to do with our trip through the museum--it's something I ran
across in a book--but I don't quite understand it, and I wondered--"

"Go right ahead, Billy. What do you have on your mind?"

"Well, ah, did--did you ever hear of a _changeling_? I know it's a kind
of a silly question but--"

"A _changeling_?" The instructor frowned.

"I think it comes out of a fairy story or something like that," Billy
Kasker said.

"Oh, yes. Now I recall the word." The instructor's face lighted. "It's a
story about the fairies taking one child from its crib and substituting
another for it. The substituted child was called a _changeling_. Or
perhaps some poor mother, wishing to give her child a better chance,
stole the child of a rich mother and put her child in its place. I
really don't remember too much about it."

"Thank you, sir. You have explained it very lucidly."

The instructor beamed.

Joe Buckner sniffed. "Asking a question, then telling the instructor he
has explained it very clearly when you didn't even ask a sensible
question in the first place--that's what I call sucking in! Who ever
heard of a _changeling_?"

The group moved on. They came to the section of the city that had been
repaired. The streets had been cleared of the rubble, houses had been
rebuilt, and here and there little touches of green grass showed where
an attempt to add a touch of beauty had been made.

They saw very few of the natives. Far ahead of them they occasionally
glimpsed a native slipping furtively out of the way. Behind them, always
at a distance, heads occasionally poked around corners at them.

"They're very cowardly," the instructor said.

"Where's Billy Kasker?" Susan Sidwell suddenly asked.

The group halted. Billy Kasker was no longer following them. A little
stir of consternation ran through them as they realized the class
president was missing.

"Billy! Billy!" the instructor called.

There was no answer.

"I just don't understand this. He knows he should remain with us."

"Maybe some of these horrible natives grabbed him!" Susan Sidwell said.
The group was startled--and suddenly afraid.

       *       *       *       *       *

The instructor took a deep breath. "I have a _Thor_ gun. I'll go find
him. Joe, you are in charge of the group until I return. All of you
remain in the middle of the street and don't move."

The instructor went back along the street. He was exasperated and a
little alarmed. If anything happened to Billy, how could he explain the
matter to the gate captain or to Billy's parents?

"Billy!" he called again and again.

Suddenly he had an answer from an alley.

"Here, sir--here I am. Are you looking for me? I'm sorry, sir." Billy
himself appeared in the alley.

Reassured at the sight of the youth, but angry, the instructor moved
into the alley. "What is the meaning of this? You have alarmed all of
us."

"I'm awfully sorry, sir. But I saw something back here that interested
me, and I stopped to take a look. I hope you will forgive me." His
manner was so contrite and his chagrin so complete that the instructor
had no choice but to forgive him.

"Of course, Billy. But you mustn't do anything like this again. It might
be dangerous."

"I won't, sir. I promise. But I wonder, since you are here, if you would
be good enough to explain to me the thing I saw back here. It will only
take a minute."

"What is it?"

"It's something in one of the houses. I came back looking at something
else, then caught a glimpse of this. If you will come into the back yard
you can see it. I would really like to have you explain it to me, sir.
You are always so clear in your explanations." Billy Kasker's manner was
very winning.

"Well, if it will only take a minute--" The instructor followed Billy
into the back yard. At the rear was a shed with an open window. A plot
of grass separated the shed from the house. On the second floor of the
house, a window had been shattered.

"There's something up there in that broken window. If you will come
here, sir, you can see it better."

"Um. Ah! Oh, yes." The instructor's back was to the open window of the
shed. He stared upward at the house.

Two brown-coated arms came out of the window of the shed and clamped a
fierce grip around his throat, jerking him backward against the wall. He
grabbed frantically for the _Thor_ gun.

The face of the brown native appeared in the window of the shed. "Get
that gun, Billy!"

Billy Kasker was already in action. He snatched the gun from the
instructor's flailing hands.

The brown native leaned from the window. Muscles bulging in his powerful
arms, he lifted the instructor upward and through the window. A thump
came from inside the shed. Billy Kasker, _Thor_ gun ready for use, went
through the door.

The instructor was writhing on the floor. The native had a knee on his
chest, a knife in his hand.

"This is for the race you _think_ you've conquered!" the native said. He
plunged the knife into the instructor's throat. Green liquid spurted
from the wound.

"Green blood!" the native said. "One of the chemical differences." He
came to his feet. The dying instructor was forgotten. The native's hand
went out. "Billy, am I glad to see you. I was afraid you wouldn't
recognize me in spite of the tune I was whistling as I walked past you
on the street."

"I wouldn't forget," Billy Kasker said.

"But, Billy, it's been twelve years since I traded you, as a kid of
five, for one of their brats--changing the bracelet as I changed you.
Many times since then I've thought you had forgotten, or that I wouldn't
live to see the day when you came back here with a graduating class."

"I don't forget," Billy Kasker said. "I'm even class president!" The
words burst out of him as if he was still having trouble understanding
what they meant.

"That's wonderful, Billy. You're accepted as one of them, but you're one
of us all the time. You're in with them, you're set. You have done a
wonderful job and I'm proud of you."

The glow in the native's eyes was a wonderful sight to behold. In it
there showed the hope of the future for all the conquered natives of
this lost planet that had once been called Earth--the faith, the sure
knowledge that they would rise again ... indeed, that they were already
rising.

"Thank you! But--" Billy nodded toward the body of the instructor, then
spun hastily as a sound came from the rear of the shed, the _Thor_ gun
coming to focus. A trap door was rising there. Three natives were
looking up from under it.

"They're all right," the brown native said quickly. "They're with us."

Three ragged men scrambled up from below. They looked at the brown
native, then at the body of the instructor on the floor. A look of
fierce exultation appeared on their faces. Then they looked at Billy
Kasker and at the _Thor_ gun he was holding.

"Give the _Thor_ gun to Jim," the brown native said.

Without hesitation Billy Kasker handed the gun to the native who reached
for it. Jim did everything but kiss the weapon. "God, the years I've
spent dreaming of the moment when I would get one of these babies into
my hands! One was all I needed."

"Don't stand there gloating, Jim--get moving," the brown native said.
"Within a month I want you not only to know how a _Thor_ gun works but
to be manufacturing them by the dozens, including the large sizes. This
is the gun that has been stopping us all these years--it is the gun that
is going to take us out of these pig pens they call museums. Get
moving!"

"Yes, sir." Jim was already gone through the trap door.

       *       *       *       *       *

The brown native jerked off the instructor's clothes, then worked
quickly but deftly with his knife. As he finished, the instructor's hand
separated from the arm at the wrist.

"He said no one would ever _think_ of doing anything like that," Billy
Kasker said.

"Nobody but one of us stinking natives." The brown man removed the
_plasticum_ bracelet, began to work with the fingers of his left hand.
"I've spent years learning how to throw my thumb out of joint, just
getting ready for the time--"

The _plasticum_ bracelet slipped over the collapsed thumb. It fitted
very snugly on his wrist. He held it up.

"Neat, eh. This makes me one of the conquerors."

"A nice fit. But we have very little time. The group will become
alarmed."

The second native began to take the instructor's body down the trap
door. The brown native swiftly slipped off his clothes and donned the
garments the instructor had worn.

"Ed, where's that _Thor_ gun model? I've got to have something that
looks and feels like a genuine _Thor_ gun to turn in at the gate."

"Here it is, sir." The third native handed a gleaming replica of the
_Thor_ gun to the brown man. He slipped it into the holster. It fitted
snugly.

"How do I look, Billy?"

Billy Kasker surveyed the brown native. He was remarkably changed. No
longer did he look like one of the natives, he looked like a conqueror.
"Just a little higher on the nose with the glasses. And maybe a little
less stuffing inside the brim of the hat. But--can you carry off the
part of the instructor?"

"I can carry it off or die trying," the brown native said.

"Good!" The two shook hands, then turned and went out the door. As they
left, Billy Kasker saw that Ed was mopping the last remnants of the
green blood from the floor.

"Perfect, down to the last detail," Billy Kasker said. "You're a genius
at planning."

"You have to be a genius to stay alive. Okay, Billy. Here is where we go
into our act."

They had moved into the street and the group had seen them. The voice
that came from the brown native's mouth was the voice of the instructor,
hot and angry.

"Billy, this sort of conduct is intolerable. You know better than to
wander off like this. What possible explanation can you offer for your
conduct?"

Billy Kasker was very penitent. He was embarrassed, he was humiliated,
and he showed both very clearly. He had lost all of his air of easy
aplomb. "I'm very sorry, sir. I didn't think--"

"That's just it, you didn't think. You saw nothing in that alley, yet
you asked me to come back and look. Is that the way you waste your and
my time?"

"It won't happen again, sir," Billy Kasker said contritely.

"See that it doesn't."

"Yah!" Joe Buckner gloated. "This is one time the class president got it
in the neck!"

"A very good point you have brought out," the instructor said. "Billy
has just demonstrated his unfitness to be class president. I am
therefore removing him from this position and appointing you in his
stead."

"What?" Joe Buckner gasped, giddy with pleasure.

Billy Kasker took his position in line. No longer did he bring up the
rear. Joe Buckner now had that position of honor. The group showed some
sympathy for Billy, but not very much or very long. When he lost his
position as president they seemed to change their minds about him.

The group moved slowly through the city. As if nothing had happened, the
instructor explained what they were seeing. When they asked questions,
he answered them. Billy Kasker asked no more questions.

They finally came to the gate and the same resplendent captain greeted
them. He accepted the _Thor_ gun and the holster, handed them to the
guard.

"How are things in the museum?"

"Everything is in good order, sir."

"Good. I've had the impression they were getting a little restless
lately."

"I saw no signs of it."

"Fine. Did you have any trouble with the group?"

"Very little. Billy Kasker wandered off for a few moments and I had to
demote him. But it was nothing. See you next year when I bring another
graduating class through to show them around."

The group began to separate to go to their own homes. Billy Kasker
lingered a little, to speak to the instructor. "I've already asked my
folks, sir, so I know it will be all right with them, so if you would
like to come home with me tonight--"

"Hmmmm."

"Trying to suck in again," Joe Buckner said. "It won't do you any good
now. You're cooked for good this time!"

Billy Kasker seemed not to hear him. His eyes were on the instructor.
"We would be very glad to have you, sir. We could talk about a great
many things."

"Why, Billy, in that case I will be glad to come home with you."

They moved away together. "There's one thing I want made completely
clear," Billy Kasker said.

"What is that?"

"When the time comes, there is one conqueror I've got on _my_ list!"

"That jerk I made class president? Of course, Billy. We will be glad to
save him for you alone." The instructor's smile was a happy one.

"Good. That's agreed then." In the gathering dusk, Billy Kasker's voice
was as sharp as the edge of a knife driving home into a throat from
which green blood spurted....




Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from _Fantastic Universe_ January 1954.
    Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed. Minor spelling and
    typographical errors have been corrected without note.





End of Project Gutenberg's Be It Ever Thus, by Robert Moore Williams

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BE IT EVER THUS ***

***** This file should be named 29240.txt or 29240.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/9/2/4/29240/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
