Project Gutenberg's The Odyssey of Sam Meecham, by Charles E. Fritch

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Odyssey of Sam Meecham

Author: Charles E. Fritch

Release Date: July 8, 2009 [EBook #29355]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ODYSSEY OF SAM MEECHAM ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









    _This story may, in a sense, be tongue-in-cheek. But the underlying
    struggle, if you look into the characters' hearts, is terrifyingly
    real and human--the kind of struggle so many of us go through. But
    Sam Meecham was lucky. He not only got what he wanted, but something
    he hadn't realized he wanted._


     the
 odyssey
      of
     sam
 meecham

 _by ... Charles E. Fritch_


 Sam Meecham did not realize that his chance discovery of unlimited
 power would bring back that which he had lost eight long years ago.


To look at Sam Meecham you'd never have dreamed he was a man of decision
and potential explorer of the unknown. In fact, there were times when
Sam wouldn't either. He was a pink, frail-looking person with a weak
chin and shoulders used to stooping, and stereotyped thinking
immediately relegated him to the ranks of the meek and mannerly. These,
oddly enough, happened to be his characteristics--but that was before he
discovered the hyperdrive.

In his capacity as an atomic engine inspector, his work was most
uncreative. He was a small cog in a large cog-laden machine. A
government worker helping to produce engines that would send supplies
and immigrants and tourists to the U.S. Sector of the Moon Colony.

Day after day, week after week, freshly made engines would come sliding
down the conveyor belt. And mechanically Sam Meecham would attach to
each two wires that led from a machine by his side, flip a switch, and
if the dial on his machine read at least fifty, he could pass the
machine on as being adequate for the job of Moon ferry. He'd been
attaching those two wires in place and watching fifties for five years,
and it looked as though he'd be doing it for fifty-five more.

Then one day a defectively wired machine came sliding along, and
dutifully Sam hooked it up and flipped the switch. Automatically, his
eyes glanced disinterestedly at the dial showing Comparative Thrust. His
eyes bugged. The needle had passed fifty, had gone to the 100 mark
(never before reached), struck the metal projection, bent, and was
whirling in a rapid circle!

Sam quickly cut off the motor, then he glanced furtively about to see if
anyone had noticed. The room was a flurry of men busy at routine tasks
and none of them seemed particularly interested in anything that was
going on at his table.

Sam checked his own machine and found the tester in perfect working
order. He hesitated a brief moment, then flipped the switch again. He
was prepared for the whir of the dial now but still it frightened him a
little. There must be something wrong; no atomic engine could have that
much Comparative Thrust. Yet--the tester was perfect.

Sam Meecham shut off the tester and stood very still for a minute and
thought about it. His glance fell on the intricate wiring within the
atomic engine and he saw with a start that it looked different from
usual. Wires were where wires had never been before, where wires were
not supposed to be.

With another quick glance about him Sam began copying the wiring pattern
on a sheet of paper. He thrust the paper into his pocket as the foreman
came up to him.

"Say, Meecham," the foreman said, "that last engine okay?"

Sam Meecham hesitated briefly, then said, "The wiring was a little
fouled up. Busted the dial on the tester."

The foreman shook his head. "I was afraid of that. Some wireman on the
third floor came in half drunk a few minutes ago. That was only his
first machine, so the others ought to be okay." He jabbed a finger at
the engine. "You'd better send it back up."

When the foreman was gone Sam checked the wiring with his diagram to
make certain he hadn't made any mistakes, and then he disconnected some
of the wires--just in case.

For the first time in years Sam Meecham felt a new freedom. He'd always
been a dreamer hampered by cold reality--a man with his head in the
stars and his feet chained to solid earth. He'd wanted to go to the Moon
when the government first started colonizing; but Dorothy, his wife,
talked him out of it.

At various times he had felt that secret longing, that beckoning of the
stars, but each time he had shelved the desire and turned to attaching
his two wires of the tester to their proper terminals on each atomic
engine, and then when his shift was up he turned homeward to face an
existence equally uninspiring.

The moment he had seen that needle pass into the hundreds, Sam Meecham
knew what he was going to do. He had planned it years ago, when he first
stood alone in the night and gazed upward at the glittering diamonds
that lay beyond reach. Even then he had known what he would do if ever
the opportunity presented itself. In those moments of self-pity that
came too often, however, he had told himself that it was only wishful
thinking and cursed himself for being a weakling and a dreamer who did
nothing about his dreams. But he had resolved that someday he _would_ go
out among the stars.

That day had come, and as Sam Meecham went homeward that evening he felt
his heart beat in time with the pulsing light of the stars overhead. But
with this new exultation he felt a desperate fear. A fear that he might
again bypass his opportunity as he had done so often before. Yet he knew
that this was his greatest chance, perhaps his last chance. He must be
brave and strong, and above all confident that his intense longing would
make his venture successful.

"How did everything go?" Dorothy asked when he came in.

It was a mechanical question and he answered it mechanically, "Okay.
Everything went as usual."

He didn't want to look at her. She had grown plump since they had
married eight years ago, and by not looking at her he could somehow
pretend she was still slim and attractive.

She was lying on a couch, wearing a housecoat, and didn't look up from
the magazine in front of her. "Supper's on the table," she said.

For eight years he'd had flat, uninspiring meals, meals that kept one
from starving and no more. His complaints had met with more hostility
than he cared to cope with, and always, meekly he had retired from
the scene of battle wishing he had submitted and thus avoided the
tongue-lashing before which he felt so helpless.

Once more in the surroundings that bred it, a familiar, distasteful
helplessness rose to envelop Sam Meecham. It came across him as a
feeling of despair and bewilderment, and he wondered sickly if he would
ever escape this.

_Yes_, he told himself, clenching his fists determinedly. But he would
have to bide his time. Slowly, not really tasting it, he ate the cold,
uninviting meal set on the table.

Securing the engine was the least of his worries--at least from a
commercial standpoint. The factory was turning out atomic engines at
almost production-line rates, and civilians could easily get them for
private use--so long as they operated them at low speeds and within the
atmosphere of Earth.

That last thought drew a long secret laugh from Sam Meecham. At low
speeds. The government considered anything above a 50 CT as high speed.
And here he was with a secret that could enable him to travel at--who
knows what speeds? He could give it to the government later, but right
now he had his own use for it.

Dorothy would prove an obstacle, however. She always was an obstacle,
and there was no reason to assume she wouldn't be one now. And he was
right about that. The following payday, when he took his check and
splurged it on an atomic engine, Dorothy was madder than a Uranium pile
approaching critical mass.

"Here I scrimp and save on that measly paycheck you bring home," she
wailed, "and you go out and buy luxuries we don't need if we could
afford them. Look at this dress! It's old--all my clothes are old. And
you know why? You want to know why?"

Sam Meecham already knew why. It was because as a manager of his
financial affairs Dorothy was a flop. Often he had wanted to tell her
so, but the more times he attempted to open his mouth the louder she had
wailed. It was a lot easier just to let her explode and then fizzle out.
Even now he had the desire to shout at her to see what would happen. But
her shrieks made him grow sullen and unsure of himself. Perhaps he _had_
wasted the money. After all, the engine they had in their outdated model
rocket was good for a few years more. But for a long trip through
space--it would never do.

The explosion was over and she was merely sizzling. She had folded her
arms resolutely, determined that he should cancel the order for the
engine immediately.

Sam Meecham felt a wave of helplessness surge over him. He felt lost and
bewildered. Perhaps she was right; maybe it _was_ foolish. Here he was:
Sam Meecham, thirty-five, whose mediocre living was made attaching two
wires to two terminals day after day, week after week--a man who
suddenly saw a pointer go unexpectedly beyond the fifty mark, and who
immediately began having delusions of grandeur. He was a dreamer--but
dreams and reality were two different things, and sometimes he confused
them. He shook his head, feeling like a fool.

"Well?" Dorothy's face was before him, determined, demanding.

Sam said, "All right, I'll take it back."

She smiled condescendingly, like a mother does when a child admits a
wrongdoing.

Conditioned responses, Sam thought bitterly; that was the whole trouble.
This cravenness, this kowtowing before any idiot with a louder voice,
certainly wasn't in his genes. The trouble was in his conditioning,
started when he was an adolescent. Give somebody an inch and they'll
take two. Pretty soon they're walking all over you, and you've become so
used to it you don't complain.

He thought of his job, of the eternal fitting of two wires in place. He
was a cog and nothing more--a cog that could be replaced as swiftly, as
efficiently as any part of an assembly-line atomic engine could be
replaced. He looked up into the blank, smiling, self-satisfied face of
his wife. He thought of the stars beckoning overhead. The _stars_!

"No," he said suddenly, decisively. The word fell like a sledgehammer
blow in the stillness of the room.

Dorothy's vacuous smile faded, uncomprehending. "What?"

"No," Sam said, trying to keep his voice even. "I've changed my mind.
I'm keeping the engine whether you like it or not."

Dorothy's mouth hung open in surprise, and before she could recover
enough to launch a fresh tirade Sam Meecham had walked out, slamming the
door behind him. He paused in the cool evening and gazed upward. The
government had gone only to the Moon. Sam Meecham was going to the
stars!

The next day he was given the silent treatment. It had begun the night
before when he returned from his walk. Dorothy was in bed, awake and
sniffling over the cruelty inflicted upon her by an unthoughtful
husband, and when he came in she turned her back and wouldn't speak. Sam
didn't mind that; in fact, it was a welcome relief. But all night long
she sniffled into her pillow, trying to win him over.

Sam felt an odd mixture of sympathy and anger. "Oh, shut up," he said
finally, and stuck his head under the pillow.

In the morning the treatment continued, but it was not totally
silent--for Dorothy's air of hostility was now accompanied by low,
sometimes indistinct mumblings.

Suddenly Sam said, "This coffee's cold."

"If you don't like it," Dorothy said, and thrust her face near his,
"make some yourself."

Sam half-rose and gripped the table. "Look, my lovely one, _I'm_ the
gent who brings home that weekly paycheck you can't get along without.
Measly or not, it's good, honest American dough that lets us live a
little decently--and the least _you_ could do is give me warm coffee in
the morning!"

His voice had risen almost to a shout and Sam himself was surprised at
it. Dorothy's eyebrows crept into a bewildered frown, and like one in a
trance she moved to turn on the heat beneath the coffee pot.

Sam's heart was beating swiftly as he sat down. Conditioned responses,
he thought a little wildly. He'd started it off last night by defying
Dorothy--and now, bit by bit, it was becoming easier. All he'd have to
do was keep it up, see that he didn't lapse.

He sipped the coffee slowly, as if tasting his recent triumph in the
black liquid.

"You'd better hurry," Dorothy said, looking at him a little uneasily.

Sam glanced at the wall clock and began gulping the hot liquid. Ten of
eight! He'd have to hurry. He paused suddenly, the cup in mid-air, and
wondered. Hurry to what? To those two wires and the tester and the
endless stream of untested engines flowing toward him?

With an infinite firmness, Sam Meecham placed his cup on the saucer.
"I'm not going in," he said.

Dorothy looked at him as though he were crazy. "What do you mean, you're
not going in?" she demanded. "Just because you've got some mulish notion
in your head, do you think we have to starve? You're going in and liking
it."

"The engine I bought is coming today," he said in a quiet voice. "I want
to install it." In Sam Meecham's eyes there was a deadly fire that even
his wife had not seen before. She gulped and backed away a little.

"But--"

"Call up the foreman," Sam said. "Tell him I'm sick. No, wait." He
paused, smiling coldly. That would leave him an out; he could always go
back to the job if he changed his mind. He said slowly, "Tell him I've
quit."

"_Sam!_"

"Tell him I've quit," Sam insisted. That was the thing. Burn your
bridges behind you so you can't turn back, so the only road is ahead.

Sam Meecham was going to the stars, and he would never return!

The atomic engine came that afternoon, neat and shiny and sleek, with
all the wires in their proper places, checked and double-checked by a
sober human cog in the prison from which Sam Meecham had just escaped.

Sam busied himself in the hangar, lifting out the old engine and
replacing it with the new one. Carefully, he settled it into its housing
and bolted it down. Then he rearranged the wires into the pattern
outlined on the sheet of paper.

Dorothy brought him coffee. That surprised him but he accepted it
gratefully.

"Can--can I help you, Sam?" she offered.

He looked at her, perhaps a little disappointed that her face was
serious. He said, "Sure you're not just trying to be nosey?"

A sharp pain darted into her eyes and she turned away.

"Wait," he said.

He called himself a fool. It was another of her tricks and he was
falling for it. He put a restraining hand on her arm and remembered
another time eight years ago when the touch would have sent electric
thrills coursing through him. Oddly, he felt a small remnant of the
pleasure stir within him.

"All right," he said gruffly. "All right, you can help."

So he was a fool. He'd been a fool before and chances were he'd be one
again more often than he'd care to admit. In a short while, hours
perhaps, he'd be gone--and he'd never see Dorothy again. Somehow the
thought was not as comforting as he had expected, and he tried to work
off a lingering doubt that rose to plague him.

They worked through the afternoon, testing any weak parts the rocket
might have, bracing the struts, checking for leaks. Sam found two
space-suits in the locker. He'd better leave one, he thought. They were
expensive and Dorothy might need one sometime. With him gone, she
couldn't afford to throw money around. Yet he might need it more than
she ever would. For a minute he stood undecided, and then he put them
both in the locker.

Dorothy came into the room and smiled wearily at him. "It'll go any
place now," she told him proudly.

In her eyes Sam saw an indefinable something. Something he might have
seen eight years ago--but mixed with it was a sadness he had not known
she could possess. Guiltily, he turned his gaze away.

"We--we'd better go in and eat," he said, looking at his watch without
seeing it.

She didn't say anything, and that was odd. Sam wished she would nag and
complain as she always had before. He wondered why he wished that, when
only a short time before he had wanted just the opposite. It was with a
start that he realized the reason. He was running away. That was it. He
was running away, and he wanted to be deathly certain that he had good
cause to run. Slowly the suspicion was creeping over him that the
situation had changed slightly, was changing more.

He would leave tonight, he told himself, before he weakened enough to
shelve his plans for another comfortable rut.

Sam's voice was a little hoarse. "What are you doing here? What do you
want?" He had finished loading enough supplies aboard the rocket to last
him months.

Dorothy came toward him from the darkness.

"It's no use," he said. "You can't talk me out of it this time."

But she only smiled sadly and said, "I know that, Sam. I came to say
good-bye."

"Good-bye?"

"You're leaving, aren't you?"

"Yes." He looked at the ground, studying the darkness.

"I'm sorry, Sam," she said. "We started out wrong. Maybe, if we tried
again--"

But Sam said quickly, "No. I'm sorry too, but people don't change."

The remark startled him. He had used it occasionally to rationalize his
position, had been convinced of its undeniable truth--yet suddenly he
realized that he himself was its living denial. People _could_ change,
just as he had changed, just as Dorothy could change. It had been partly
his fault when he first gave in to something he didn't want to do, and
then to something else, and something else after that. He had helped dig
the rut in which he had found himself, taking it for granted just as
Dorothy had taken it for granted.

Her hair was soft in the same moonlight that had shone eight years
before, and Sam Meecham felt a desire that had been too long
unfulfilled.

"Dorothy, I--"

He hesitated. The decision came hard to him, for much of his life had
been devoted to giving in to the decisions of others. This was the
moment he had been waiting for, and now at the last moment he was
uncertain.

He said suddenly, "Can you pack a few things?"

"Sam--" Her voice in the darkness was eager. Her hands touched his. Soft
hands.

"You'd better hurry," he told her.

Sam watched her go to the house, and doubts began to gnaw at him. Was he
going to destroy his plans now at a whim? He felt an impulse to get into
the rocket and leave without her--yet he thought of the cold emptiness
of space and himself drifting through alien worlds, alone, lonely.
Perhaps it was wrong but he couldn't condemn her for something that was
partly his fault. He was trying to become the person he once might have
been, and it was only fair that she should have the same chance.

Dorothy came hurrying back, a suitcase in her hand, and there was an
eagerness about her that pleased him. He helped her put the suitcase on
board.

"Dorothy--"

Her voice was soft and low. "Yes, Sam?" Starlight danced in her eyes.

He pulled her gently to him. He kissed her, and that night eight years
ago came back, and in his arms was the young eager bride he had known,
the one he loved.

Minutes later they rose on wings of fire, in a slow upward spiral that
quickened painlessly. Sam had not questioned the hyperdrive. It had
worked in the factory and it would work here. He watched the needle
cross the dial in a swift, steady movement.

Dorothy placed her hand in his. "Where are we going, darling?"

Sam Meecham smiled at her, confident that he had made the most important
decision in his life. He pointed through the forward window.

Ahead of them lay the stars.




Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from _Fantastic Universe_ January 1954.
    Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed. Minor spelling and
    typographical errors have been corrected without note.





End of Project Gutenberg's The Odyssey of Sam Meecham, by Charles E. Fritch

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ODYSSEY OF SAM MEECHAM ***

***** This file should be named 29355.txt or 29355.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/9/3/5/29355/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
