The Project Gutenberg EBook of This One Problem, by M. C. Pease

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: This One Problem

Author: M. C. Pease

Release Date: July 8, 2009 [EBook #29354]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THIS ONE PROBLEM ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









    _Piracy in the past has acquired the gaudy technicolor of high
    romance. In the present, piracy is as tawdry as tabloid headlines.
    But piracy in the far future, when presented as vividly as in this
    story, can be scary stuff._


    this
     one
 problem

 _by ... M. C. Pease_


 The shortest distance between two points may be
 the long way around--and a path of dishonor may
 well turn into the high road to virtue.


Marc Polder, Resident Comptroller of Torran, strolled idly down the
dusty littered path that passed for a street. In the half-light of the
pint-sized moon overhead the town looked almost romantic. One day, when
civilization had at last been brought to these Asteroid bases, memory
would make Torran heroic. But now, with the fact before the eyes, it was
merely dirty and squalid. Only the scum of the Solar System called it
home.

Idly Marc Polder pushed a swinging door aside and entered what passed on
Torran for a restaurant. Pushing his way through the tables until he saw
his only aide, Female Personnel Manager Lee Treynor, he sat down.

"What's new?" he asked.

"Not a thing." But for a certain softness of voice and curve of
unmade-up lips, Lee could have passed for a boy. Her light hair was
short, she wore a man's coveralls. She added, "Only the usual murder,
arson and brigandage that you don't want to hear about."

"Don't let such trifles get you down," said Marc with a crooked
half-smile.

"I'm fed up," the girl said shortly. "I must have been still wet behind
the ears when I agreed to come out here two months ago. I thought I was
going to help establish a place where decent people could live and work.
So far I've just watched my boss swig Venerian swamp beer with the worst
elements in town, and do nothing about the lawlessness that runs riot
all over the place."

"Look, lady," Marc answered gently, "I certainly admire those lofty
sentiments of yours. I admit they are maybe what ought to be. But the
way I see it they just don't fit the facts. Out here the Federation
space fleet is supposed to be the big stick. Only right now it's off
playing mumbly-peg with the Venerians.

"The Big Wheels seem to think there'll be a shooting war in a couple of
months. There's only three or four destroyers left in the whole damn
Asteroid Belt. And without the big stick behind me I'm not hankering to
commit suicide by looking for trouble."

Marc smiled again ruefully. "What I can do I try to do," he added with
sudden earnestness. "I figure the most important thing is to protect the
Asteroid Development Company so they can buy the nuclear ore the
Astrodites bring in. Without that ore the Federation's going to be in a
hell of a fix if it actually does come to war. And along with that
there's the matter of guarding the stuff the Navy's got stored here." He
waved toward the Navy warehouse that could be seen outside the window.

"Listening to and fraternizing with the characters you call the biggest
crooks in town," the comptroller went on with a shrug, "I've a chance at
getting tipped off in advance to anything that may make trouble for our
interests. As long as I ignore their rackets they accept me in their
midst, talk freely with me around. And it's a hell of a lot easier to
stop something when you know the score beforehand."

The young woman's lips parted as if she seemed about to say something.
Then they closed in a thin line. Obviously she was not happy with Marc
Polder's explanation. She was too young to be willing to compromise her
ideals, no matter how potent the logic of necessity.

She was about to leave the table when the shrill screams of a distant
whistle sliced through the noise of the crowd. Voices broke off in
mid-sentence and bodies froze into immobility. As the siren's piercing
tones faded the restaurant's customers looked at one another in silent
terror. Then, as the shock wore off and unanswered questions were
beginning to fly, a man suddenly ran in through the revolving doors.

"Raiders!" he gasped. "The listening gear's picked up a signal that's
not from any Astrodite or destroyer. Signal Corps figures it's a
pirate!"

There was a mad rush for the doors and seconds later the place was empty
except for Marc Polder, still sitting calmly at the table drinking his
beer, and Lee Treynor who sat watching him.

"What are you going to do?" she finally asked.

"I don't know. What _can_ I do?" Marc said.

"Good heavens!" the girl exploded. "Are you just going to sit there
guzzling beer while pirates take over the town?" She stared at him
incredulously.

"What do you suggest I do?" the comptroller asked. "We haven't anything
to fight with. There's no way we can get help. As far as I can see
there's nothing we _can_ do--not yet anyway." He calmly lifted his
glass.

"You mean we're just going to _sit_ here?" the girl gaped.

"Sure. The others left to hide their money and valuables. I've got
nothing to hide."

"What about that stuff the Navy has cached in their warehouse?" Lee
asked. "That new rocket fuel their destroyers use when they need a
little extra push. Isn't that worth hiding?"

"The hyper-degenerate-thorium, you mean? I'd like to hide that
somewhere," Marc conceded. "But where do you hide ten tons of stuff in
five minutes? Besides, it wouldn't do the raiders any good. Too hot.
It'll burn out their jets. They'd go up like an A-bomb two minutes after
they threw it on. They know that. Only thing they could do with it is
sell it to Venus. Not that that would be bad. Shortage of H.D.T.'s may
be the chief reason why there's been no war started yet. But for now
there's nothing you and I can do." Calmly he lit a cigarette.

"Of course," he went on, smiling, "we _could_ bum a ride out with some
of the company men. No doubt they're all hightailing it away from here
in their space-buggies."

"I'm surprised," Lee said with a trace of sarcasm, "that you're not
doing just that, leaving me and the other women to the beasts!"

Marc eyed her unblinkingly. "You know as well as I do that most of the
females on this asteroid take pirates in their stride. They might even
welcome a change of partners. As for you"--he paused--"you stick close
to me and keep your pretty mouth shut. I think we'll manage somehow."

In silence they walked back to the comptroller's office.

"Marc," Lee said as they entered, "what about the new radar? Maybe we
could get a message out with it, in code or something."

"What?" Marc turned, astonished. "You want to play our only hole-card on
an off-chance like that? There aren't more than four or five people
here who even know it's been set up on the other side of the asteroid.
There's hardly a chance the raiders will find out about it. And you want
to blast the news at them!" He looked disgusted.

The girl said stubbornly, "You can't just give up without a fight. And
that's our only weapon."

"Look," Marc said grimly, "that's only a second-hand destroyer radar, so
it wouldn't carry far. No. I'm not going to use it on any such
harebrained scheme as that. And if you breathe a word about it I'll take
you apart." He added with a faint smile, "Not that _that_ wouldn't be a
pleasure."

Looking at him she knew he meant the tender joke and the knowledge
helped her.

"I think," Marc went on after a moment, "I'd better warn the boys over
on the radar project or they might accidentally start it up while the
raiders are here." He closed the door as he went into the inner office
to make the call.

A moment later he emerged and studied the still angry girl through
half-closed eyes. She blushed under his scrutiny, said coldly, "What's
the matter? Afraid I'm not attractive enough for our visitors?"

He grinned. "You could do with a mite of padding here and there. But I
was thinking the other way, as a matter of fact. It's a pity you don't
have a small mustache."

"You don't have to insult me!" Lee cried bitterly. "I'm _glad_ I'm
thin!"

"I'm not insulting you," Marc said mildly. "I even wish you were a bit
skinnier. It's the plump girls our guests are going to be looking at
first. Remember now--you stick right with me and keep your mouth shut,
d'you hear?"

"I hear," she said shortly. But he could see the fear she was trying to
hide and he knew she was honestly frightened for the first time in her
adult life. She said, "What will they--be like?"

"If it's John Mantor, and I suspect it is, they'll be rough," Marc
informed her. "He's a tough ex-pilot who got bounced off Space Patrol
and turned outlaw. He seems to hold a grudge against the whole human
race. If it's one of the others--it may be a lot worse."

"I don't see why outlaws are allowed to exist at all," she said.

Marc sighed, shook his head. "A lot of people have felt that way over a
lot of pirates over a lot of eras. But somehow they keep turning up."

A few minutes later the space-scarred pirate ship had made a rocky
landing in the middle of the small spaceport and John Mantor, pirate
chief, drove up to the comptroller's office in a cloud of dust. He was
tall and dirty and thin and tough. "Which one of you is the
comptroller?" he demanded, as he faced Marc Polder and Lee Treynor.

"I am," Marc said, not rising from behind the desk.

"Then you're the guy responsible for any trouble here," Mantor said. "So
I'm going to tell you how to avoid trouble." His brutally scarred face
twisted into a grin.

"There's a lot of loot around here. I'm not going to ask you where it
is. My boys can take care of that matter. But there's also the Navy
warehouse. Maybe we won't know what some of the stuff in there is for,
so you're going to tell us."

Mantor leaned across the desk, his eyes as hard and cold as chips of
duratite. "And if you won't, there's going to be trouble and you'll be
it--you and your friend here."

Marc sat impassively, meeting the hard-eyed gaze. "That warehouse is
government property," he said. "So far, there's only piracy against you.
But if you raid that building you're going to be the personal problem of
the Navy. If I were you I'd leave it alone."

"You let me worry about that," said Mantor.

"Besides," Marc went on, "I don't see what good the stuff in that
warehouse can be to you. There's little of cash value in there. And I
doubt if you can use any of the parts on your ship."

"That could be," Mantor replied. "But on the other hand, maybe we can
find a market for certain items." He smiled coldly. Watching, Lee knew
he referred to Venus. She sat perfectly still, praying for him not to
notice her.

Mantor spread his hands on the desk, a look of hatred and ferocity on
his face. "What I want to know is--are you or are you not going to
cooperate? And I want to know fast."

"Don't get me wrong," Marc said softly. "I'm not telling you what to do
or what not to do. But that warehouse is the thing I'm here to protect.
And if I were to agree to help you, the Navy would be after me, too. So
I've got to say to hell with you."

John Mantor rocked back on his heels, hooking his thumbs in his belt. A
slow smile spread over his face. "Okay," he said. "I think I get what
you mean. So I guess we got to work you over. And we'll do it where
there aren't any outside witnesses."

Marc grinned back at him.

Lee was puzzled. It took her a moment to realize that the grins sealed a
contract between the two men. Marc would cooperate if he were beaten up
enough first to satisfy a later investigation--but not too severely for
his own comfort!

Lee found it difficult to hide her contempt. She stared at her hands,
clenched in her lap, and waited for Mantor to leave.

The looting and destruction were well under way an hour later when a
couple of Mantor's men joined their chief, who stood with a somewhat
bruised Marc Polder and an unharmed but furious Lee Treynor. Between
them they carried a small, obviously heavy box.

"You know what this stuff is, boss?" one of the men asked. "They got a
hundred or a hundred-fifty boxes like this in there." He nodded at the
Navy warehouse.

They set the box down and Mantor flung back its lid. It was filled with
small grey pellets. Mantor picked up a handful and stood fingering them.

"Looks like rocket fuel," he said. "Only I've never seen any this color.
And it's too heavy, also." He turned to the comptroller. "_You_ tell me
what it is."

Marc shrugged. "I don't know. It's a Navy secret."

Mantor's eyes glinted. Without warning his fist flew out, sent the
comptroller sprawling in the dust where he lay stunned. Lee's hands flew
to her mouth barely in time to suppress a cry.

After a few moments Marc rolled over slowly and pushed himself painfully
to a sitting position. He looked up at Mantor who stood watching him
coldly, his fist flexing.

The comptroller licked his lips and looked around at the several men who
stood watching, their faces impassive. "Okay," he said in a
none-too-steady voice. "I'll tell you. You'd find out anyway from the
files."

"Cut the alibis and give," Mantor growled.

"Keep your shirt on." Marc's voice indicated he was regaining control of
himself. "It's H.D.T.--Hyper-Degenerate-Thorium--the stuff the
destroyers use to get extra push."

Mantor roared his glee. "Pack it aboard, boys--_all_ of it! And put it
where it will be handy, just in case."

This was it, Lee thought as she stood by, watching--the final bitter
pill. Mantor had as much as told them he was working for Venus. And the
H.D.T. was all Venus needed to be ready for war--a war that might well
blast civilization from the Solar System. Strange that so much should
depend upon one man; tragic that the one man was a weakling.

With an effort Lee forced herself to be fair. It might have done no good
to lie, she conceded. But anyone with even a normal amount of simple
courage would have tried.

It was about two hours later when the siren went off again like a
banshee wailing to a low-hanging moon. Men came running from all
directions, shouting questions at the tops of their voices.

A midget auto came skidding down the pirate ship's ramp, its driver
standing on the accelerator. The car knifed through the swirling crowd,
barely missing several people, and skidded to a dusty stop directly in
front of Mantor.

"_Radar signal!_" the driver yelled. "The search receiver picked up a
signal that sounds like a destroyer's radar. It suddenly came in strong.
Probably sneaked up on us from behind that damn moon. It's coming in
fast and braking hard!"

There was a mad scramble as the looters raced for their ship.
Heavy-handed horseplay was forgotten. They knew they were helpless
against a Navy destroyer. Their only hope lay in a fast getaway. Seconds
could easily spell the difference between safety and defeat.

In less than ten minutes the ship's locks were sealed and they fired
off. As the flames roared out and the huge ship lifted swiftly it was
obvious that they were throwing on all the fuel their jets could take.

Marc Polder had faded back into the crowd at the first sound of the
siren. As he stood watching the blastoff Lee joined him, hands in her
pockets, looking more than ever like a boy.

"Maybe my idea of asking for help wasn't so far-fetched," she said
quietly. "Maybe the patrol might have been here in time. Maybe you
wouldn't have had to tell them about the H.D.T."

"Maybe," Marc answered without turning his eyes from the dwindling point
of reddish light high in the dark sky.

"And just by way of keeping the record straight," the girl went on in a
voice that began to rasp, "you know as well as I do that the files don't
list any H.D.T. It's under a code name."

"Maybe," Marc replied in a noncommittal tone.

The point of light in the sky suddenly turned blue. Lee was staring at
it too, now. And she knew also what the change of color meant. Mantor
had started to use the new fuel!

       *       *       *       *       *

Suddenly there was a blinding flash. Lee cried out and staggered back,
covering her eyes. Marc, who had closed his eyes when the color change
came, took hold of the girl's arm.

"I told you what would happen if they used the stuff," he said gently.
"It's too hot for their jet chambers. It melts the walls. A lot of gas
piles up in the tubes. The pressure pushes the fire back. And when it
gets shoved back into the recoil chamber and you lose the protective
layers of cold gas there--well, then you've got to look for your ship
with an ionization gauge!

"I told you all that long ago. The trouble is, you're too idealistic,
Lee. That's not the same as _having ideals_. I admire ideals--I might
even confess to a few of my own. But _you_ don't stop to figure out just
what your ideals are--exactly what you're fighting for.

"You come to a crisis like this one and you forget about the _big_ goal.
All you see is this one problem. And by giving them yes-or-no
answers--good or bad, brave or cowardly--to the problem of the
moment--you may miss a simple solution to the big one.

"You've got to keep a cool head and never forget for even a moment
exactly what it is you want to accomplish." His voice was gentle, and it
held no rebuke.

"All right," said Lee unhappily, "you win. You needn't bother to rub in
the salt. I was going to chase you through all the inquiry courts for
this. Instead, you got a lucky break, so I can't do a thing. You ought
to be tarred and feathered through every city of the Federation, but
because a destroyer happened to stumble in here at the right time you'll
end up a hero." Her voice caught in a sob.

"Oh, the destroyer," Marc replied. "Ah, yes, that _was_ lucky, wasn't
it? The only hitch is--there wasn't any destroyer. Probably not one
within a million miles!" He laughed as Lee turned surprise-widened eyes
toward him.

"What they thought was a destroyer was the radar system on the side of
the rock, bouncing a signal off the moon. I gave the radar boys the word
just before Mantor dropped in on us. The crew did a damned good job of
juggling the power and frequency and all." He grinned. "Remind me to buy
them a beer sometime."

He laughed then at the girl's expression as it changed from bitter
disillusion to something akin to awe, close to hero-worship.

"And this, by the way," Polder said, "is as good a time as any to tell
you that I'd like to see you look like a woman, for a change. How about
changing into a dress before we go into town. You know, I've never seen
you out of that uniform?"

She hesitated, unsure of herself now. "That will take a little time,"
she said doubtfully.

He put hands on her slim shoulders, gave her a gentle shove toward her
quarters. "We've got time," he told her. "Lots of it. But I've been
waiting quite a while."




Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from _Fantastic Universe_ March 1954.
    Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed. Minor spelling and
    typographical errors have been corrected without note.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of This One Problem, by M. C. Pease

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THIS ONE PROBLEM ***

***** This file should be named 29354.txt or 29354.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/9/3/5/29354/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
