The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Man from Time, by Frank Belknap Long

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Man from Time

Author: Frank Belknap Long

Release Date: July 15, 2009 [EBook #29418]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MAN FROM TIME ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









    _The method by which one man might be pinpointed in the vastness of
    all Eternity was the problem tackled by the versatile Frank Belknap
    Long in this story. And as all minds of great perceptiveness know,
    it would be a simple, human quality he'd find most effective even in
    solving Time-Space._


  the
  man
 from
 time

 _by ... Frank Belknap Long_


 Deep in the Future he found the
 answer to Man's age-old problem.


Daring Moonson, he was called. It was a proud name, a brave name. But
what good was a name that rang out like a summons to battle if the man
who bore it could not repeat it aloud without fear?

Moonson had tried telling himself that a man could conquer fear if he
could but once summon the courage to laugh at all the sins that ever
were, and do as he damned well pleased. An ancient phrase that--damned
well. It went clear back to the Elizabethan Age, and Moonson had tried
picturing himself as an Elizabethan man with a ruffle at his throat and
a rapier in his clasp, brawling lustily in a tavern.

In the Elizabethan Age men had thrown caution to the winds and lived
with their whole bodies, not just with their minds alone. Perhaps that
was why, even in the year 3689, defiant names still cropped up. Names
like Independence Forest and Man, Live Forever!

It was not easy for a man to live up to a name like Man, Live Forever!
But Moonson was ready to believe that it could be done. There was
something in human nature which made a man abandon caution and try to
live up to the claims made for him by his parents at birth.

It must be bad, Moonson thought. It must be bad if I can't control the
trembling of my hands, the pounding of the blood at my temples. I am
like a child shut up alone in the dark, hearing rats scurrying in a
closet thick with cobwebs and the tapping of a blind man's cane on a
deserted street at midnight.

_Tap, tap, tap_--nearer and nearer through the darkness. How soon would
the rats be swarming out, blood-fanged and wholly vicious? How soon
would the cane strike?

He looked up quickly, his eyes searching the shadows. For almost a month
now the gleaming intricacies of the machine had given him a complete
sense of security. As a scholar traveling in Time he had been accepted
by his fellow travelers as a man of great courage and firm
determination.

For twenty-seven days a smooth surface of shining metal had walled him
in, enabling him to grapple with reality on a completely adult level.
For twenty-seven days he had gone pridefully back through Time, taking
creative delight in watching the heritage of the human race unroll
before him like a cineramoscope under glass.

Watching a green land in the dying golden sunlight of an age lost to
human memory could restore a man's strength of purpose by its serenity
alone. But even an age of war and pestilence could be observed without
torment from behind the protective shields of the Time Machine. Danger,
accidents, catastrophe could not touch him personally.

To watch death and destruction as a spectator in a traveling Time
Observatory was like watching a cobra poised to strike from behind a
pane of crystal-bright glass in a zoological garden.

You got a tremendous thrill in just thinking: How dreadful if the glass
should not be there! How lucky I am to be alive, with a thing so deadly
and monstrous within striking distance of me!

For twenty-seven days now he had traveled without fear. Sometimes the
Time Observatory would pinpoint an age and hover over it while his
companions took painstaking historical notes. Sometimes it would retrace
its course and circle back. A new age would come under scrutiny and more
notes would be taken.

But a horrible thing that had happened to him, had awakened in him a
lonely nightmare of restlessness. Childhood fears he had thought buried
forever had returned to plague him and he had developed a sudden,
terrible dread of the fogginess outside the moving viewpane, the way the
machine itself wheeled and dipped when an ancient ruin came sweeping
toward him. He had developed a fear of Time.

There was no escape from that Time Fear. The instant it came upon him he
lost all interest in historical research. 1069, 732, 2407, 1928--every
date terrified him. The Black Plague in London, the Great Fire, the
Spanish Armada in flames off the coast of a bleak little island that
would soon mold the destiny of half the world--how meaningless it all
seemed in the shadow of his fear!

Had the human race really advanced so much? Time had been conquered but
no man was yet wise enough to heal himself if a stark, unreasoning fear
took possession of his mind and heart, giving him no peace.

Moonson lowered his eyes, saw that Rutella was watching him in the
manner of a shy woman not wishing to break in too abruptly on the
thoughts of a stranger.

Deep within him he knew that he had become a stranger to his own wife
and the realization sharply increased his torment. He stared down at her
head against his knee, at her beautiful back and sleek, dark hair.
Violet eyes she had, not black as they seemed at first glance but a
deep, lustrous violet.

He remembered suddenly that he was still a young man, with a young man's
ardor surging strong in him. He bent swiftly, kissed her lips and eyes.
As he did so her arms tightened about him until he found himself
wondering what he could have done to deserve such a woman.

She had never seemed more precious to him and for an instant he could
feel his fear lessening a little. But it came back and was worse than
before. It was like an old pain returning at an unexpected moment to
chill a man with the sickening reminder that all joy must end.

His decision to act was made quickly.

The first step was the most difficult but with a deliberate effort of
will he accomplished it to his satisfaction. His secret thoughts he
buried beneath a continuous mental preoccupation with the vain and the
trivial. It was important to the success of his plan that his companions
should suspect nothing.

The second step was less difficult. The mental block remained firm and
he succeeded in carrying on actual preparations for his departure in
complete secrecy.

The third step was the final one and it took him from a large
compartment to a small one, from a high-arching surface of metal to a
maze of intricate control mechanisms in a space so narrow that he had to
crouch to work with accuracy.

Swiftly and competently his fingers moved over instruments of science
which only a completely sane man would have known how to manipulate. It
was an acid test of his sanity and he knew as he worked that his
reasoning faculties at least had suffered no impairment.

Beneath his hands the Time Observatory's controls were solid shafts of
metal. But suddenly as he worked he found himself thinking of them as
fluid abstractions, each a milestone in man's long progress from the
jungle to the stars. Time and space--mass and velocity.

How incredible that it had taken centuries of patient technological
research to master in a practical way the tremendous implications of
Einstein's original postulate. Warp space with a rapidly moving object,
move away from the observer with the speed of light--and the whole of
human history assumed the firm contours of a landscape in space. Time
and space merged and became one. And a man in an intricately-equipped
Time Observatory could revisit the past as easily as he could travel
across the great curve of the universe to the farthest planet of the
farthest star.

The controls were suddenly firm in his hands. He knew precisely what
adjustments to make. The iris of the human eye dilates and contracts
with every shift of illumination, and the Time Observatory had an iris
too. That iris could be opened without endangering his companions in the
least--if he took care to widen it just enough to accommodate only one
sturdily built man of medium height.

Sweat came out in great beads on his forehead as he worked. The light
that came through the machine's iris was faint at first, the barest
glimmer of white in deep darkness. But as he adjusted controls the light
grew brighter and brighter, beating in upon him until he was kneeling in
a circle of radiance that dazzled his eyes and set his heart to
pounding.

I've lived too long with fear, he thought. I've lived like a man
imprisoned, shut away from the sunlight. Now, when freedom beckons, I
must act quickly or I shall be powerless to act at all.

He stood erect, took a slow step forward, his eyes squeezed shut.
Another step, another--and suddenly he knew he was at the gateway to
Time's sure knowledge, in actual contact with the past for his ears were
now assailed by the high confusion of ancient sounds and voices!

He left the Time machine in a flying leap, one arm held before his face.
He tried to keep his eyes covered as the ground seemed to rise to meet
him. But he lurched in an agony of unbalance and opened his eyes--to see
the green surface beneath him flashing like a suddenly uncovered jewel.

He remained on his feet just long enough to see his Time Observatory dim
and vanish. Then his knees gave way and he collapsed with a despairing
cry as the fear enveloped him ...

       *       *       *       *       *

There were daisies in the field where he lay, his shoulders and naked
chest pressed to the earth. A gentle wind stirred the grass, and the
flute-like warble of a song bird was repeated close to his ear, over and
over with a tireless persistence.

Abruptly he sat up and stared about him. Running parallel to the field
was a winding country road and down it came a yellow and silver vehicle
on wheels, its entire upper section encased in glass which mirrored the
autumnal landscape with a startling clearness.

The vehicle halted directly in front of him and a man with ruddy cheeks
and snow-white hair leaned out to wave at him.

"Good morning, mister!" the man shouted. "Can I give you a lift into
town?"

Moonson rose unsteadily, alarm and suspicion in his stare. Very
cautiously he lowered the mental barrier and the man's thoughts impinged
on his mind in bewildering confusion.

_He's not a farmer, that's sure ... must have been swimming in the
creek, but those bathing trunks he's wearing are out of this world!_

_Huh! I wouldn't have the nerve to parade around in trunks like that
even on a public beach. Probably an exhibitionist ... But why should he
wear 'em out here in the woods? No blonds or redheads to knock silly out
here!_

_Huh! He might have the courtesy to answer me ... Well, if he doesn't
want a lift into town it's no concern of mine!_

Moonson stood watching the vehicle sweep away out of sight. Obviously he
had angered the man by his silence, but he could answer only by shaking
his head.

He began to walk, pausing an instant in the middle of the bridge to
stare down at a stream of water that rippled in the sunlight over
moss-covered rocks. Tiny silver fish darted to and fro beneath a
tumbling waterfall and he felt calmed and reassured by the sight.
Shoulders erect now, he walked on ...

It was high noon when he reached the tavern. He went inside, saw men and
women dancing in a dim light, and there was a huge, rainbow-colored
musical instrument by the door which startled him by its resonance. The
music was wild, weird, a little terrifying.

He sat down at a table near the door and searched the minds of the
dancers for a clue to the meaning of what he saw.

The thoughts which came to him were startlingly primitive, direct and
sometimes meaningless to him.

_Go easy, baby! Swing it! Sure, we're in the groove now, but you never
can tell! I'll buy you an orchid, honey! Not roses, just one
orchid--black like your hair! Ever see a black orchid, hon? They're rare
and they're expensive!_

_Oh, darl, darl, hold me closer! The music goes round and round! It will
always be like that with us, honey! Don't ever be a square! That's all I
ask! Don't ever be a square! Cuddle up to me, let yourself go! When
you're dancing with one girl you should never look at another! Don't you
know that, Johnny!_

_Sure I know it, Doll! But did I ever claim I wasn't human?_

_Darl, doll, doll baby! Look all you want to! But if you ever dare--_

Moonson found himself relaxing a little. Dancing in all ages was closely
allied to love-making, but it was pursued here with a careless rapture
which he found creatively stimulating. People came here not only to
dance but to eat, and the thoughts of the dancers implied that there was
nothing stylized about a tavern. The ritual was a completely natural
one.

In Egyptian bas-reliefs you saw the opposite in dancing. Every movement
rigidly prescribed, arms held rigid and sharply bent at the elbows. Slow
movements rather than lively ones, a bowing and a scraping with bowls of
fruit extended in gift offerings at every turn.

There was obviously no enthroned authority here, no bejeweled king to
pacify when emotions ran wild, but complete freedom to embrace joy with
corybantic abandonment.

A tall man in ill-fitting black clothes approached Moonson's table,
interrupting his reflections with thoughts that seemed designed to
disturb and distract him out of sheer perversity. So even here there
were flies in every ointment, and no dream of perfection could remain
unchallenged.

He sat unmoving, absorbing the man's thoughts.

_What does he think this is, a bath house? Mike says it's okay to serve
them if they come in from the beach just as they are. But just one quick
beer, no more. This late in the season you'd think they'd have the
decency to get dressed!_

The sepulchrally-dressed man gave the table a brush with a cloth he
carried, then thrust his head forward like an ill-tempered scavenger
bird.

"Can't serve you anything but beer. Boss's orders. Okay?"

Moonson nodded and the man went away.

Then he turned to watching the girl. She was frightened. She sat all
alone, plucking nervously at the red-and-white checkered tablecloth. She
sat with her back to the light, bunching the cloth up into little folds,
then smoothing it out again.

She'd ground out lipstick-smudged cigarettes until the ash tray was
spilling over.

Moonson began to watch the fear in her mind ...

Her fear grew when she thought that Mike wasn't gone for good. The phone
call wouldn't take long and he'd be coming back any minute now. And Mike
wouldn't be satisfied until she was broken into little bits. Yes, Mike
wanted to see her on her knees, begging him to kill her!

_Kill me, but don't hurt Joe! It wasn't his fault! He's just a kid--he's
not twenty yet, Mike!_

That would be a lie but Mike had no way of knowing that Joe would be
twenty-two on his next birthday, although he looked eighteen at most.
There was no pity in Mike but would his pride let him hot-rod an
eighteen-year-old?

_Mike won't care! Mike will kill him anyway! Joe couldn't help falling
in love with me, but Mike won't care what Joe could help! Mike was never
young himself, never a sweet kid like Joe!_

_Mike killed a man when he was fourteen years old! He spent seven years
in a reformatory and the kids there were never young. Joe will be just
one of those kids to Mike ..._

Her fear kept growing.

You couldn't fight men like Mike. Mike was strong in too many different
ways. When you ran a tavern with an upstairs room for special customers
you had to be tough, strong. You sat in an office and when people came
to you begging for favors you just laughed. Ten grand isn't hay, buddy!
My wheels aren't rigged. If you think they are get out. It's your
funeral.

It's your funeral, Mike would say, laughing until tears came into his
eyes.

You couldn't fight that kind of strength. Mike could push his knuckles
hard into the faces of people who owed him money, and he'd never even be
arrested.

Mike could take money crisp and new out of his wallet, spread it out
like a fan, say to any girl crazy enough to give him a second glance:
"I'm interested in you, honey! Get rid of him and come over to my
table!"

He could say worse things to girls too decent and self-respecting to
look at him at all.

You could be so cold and hard nothing could ever hurt you. You could be
Mike Galante ...

How could she have loved such a man? And dragged Joe into it, a good kid
who had made only one really bad mistake in his life--the mistake of
asking her to marry him.

She shivered with a chill of self-loathing and turned her eyes
hesitantly toward the big man in bathing trunks who sat alone by the
door.

For a moment she met the big man's eyes and her fears seemed to fade
away! She stared at him ... sunburned almost black. Muscles like a
lifeguard. All alone and not on the make. When he returned her stare his
eyes sparkled with friendly interest, but no suggestive, flirtatious
intent.

He was too rugged to be really handsome, she thought, but he wouldn't
have to start digging in his wallet to get a girl to change tables,
either.

Guiltily she remembered Joe, now it could only be Joe.

Then she saw Joe enter the room. He was deathly pale and he was coming
straight toward her between the tables. Without pausing to weigh his
chances of staying alive he passed a man and a woman who relished Mike's
company enough to make them eager to act ugly for a daily handout. They
did not look up at Joe as he passed but the man's lips curled in a sneer
and the woman whispered something that appeared to fan the flames of her
companion's malice.

Mike had friends--friends who would never rat on him while their police
records remained in Mike's safe and they could count on him for
protection.

She started to rise, to go to Joe and warn him that Mike would be coming
back. But despair flooded her and the impulse died. The way Joe felt
about her was a thing too big to stop ...

Joe saw her slim against the light, and his thoughts were like the sea
surge, wild, unruly.

_Maybe Mike will get me. Maybe I'll be dead by this time tomorrow. Maybe
I'm crazy to love her the way I do ..._

Her hair against the light, a tumbled mass of spun gold.

_Always a woman bothering me for as long as I can remember. Molly, Anne,
Janice ... Some were good for me and some were bad._

_You see a woman on the street walking ahead of you, hips swaying, and
you think: I don't even know her name but I'd like to crush her in my
arms!_

_I guess every guy feels like that about every pretty woman he sees.
Even about some that aren't so pretty. But then you get to know and like
a woman, and you don't feel that way so much. You respect her and you
don't let yourself feel that way._

_Then something happens. You love her so much it's like the first time
again but with a whole lot added. You love her so much you'd die to make
her happy._

       *       *       *       *       *

Joe was shaking when he slipped into the chair left vacant by Mike and
reached out for both her hands.

"I'm taking you away tonight," he said. "You're coming with me."

Joe was scared, she knew. But he didn't want her to know. His hands were
like ice and his fear blended with her own fear as their hands met.

"He'll kill you, Joe! You've got to forget me!" she sobbed.

"I'm not afraid of him. I'm stronger than you think. He won't dare come
at me with a gun, not here before all these people. If he comes at me
with his fists I'll hook a solid left to his jaw that will stretch him
out cold!"

She knew he wasn't deceiving himself. Joe didn't want to die any more
than she did.

The Man from Time had an impulse to get up, walk over to the two
frightened children and comfort them with a reassuring smile. He sat
watching, feeling their fear beating in tumultuous waves into his brain.
Fear in the minds of a boy and a girl because they desperately wanted
one another!

He looked steadily at them and his eyes spoke to them ...

_Life is greater than you know. If you could travel in Time, and see how
great is man's courage--if you could see all of his triumphs over
despair and grief and pain--you would know that there is nothing to
fear! Nothing at all!_

Joe rose from the table, suddenly calm, quiet.

"Come on," he said quietly. "We're getting out of here right now. My
car's outside and if Mike tries to stop us I'll fix him!"

The boy and the girl walked toward the door together, a young and
extremely pretty girl and a boy grown suddenly to the full stature of a
man.

Rather regretfully Moonson watched them go. As they reached the door the
girl turned and smiled and the boy paused too--and they both smiled
suddenly at the man in the bathing trunks.

Then they were gone.

Moonson got up as they disappeared, left the tavern.

It was dark when he reached the cabin. He was dog-tired, and when he saw
the seated man through the lighted window a great longing for
companionship came upon him.

He forgot that he couldn't talk to the man, forgot the language
difficulty completely. But before this insurmountable element occurred
to him he was inside the cabin.

Once there he saw that the problem solved itself--the man was a writer
and he had been drinking steadily for hours. So the man did all of the
talking, not wanting or waiting for an answer.

A youngish, handsome man he was, with graying temples and keenly
observant eyes. The instant he saw Moonson he started to talk.

"Welcome, stranger," he said. "Been taking a dip in the ocean, eh? Can't
say I'd enjoy it, this late in the season!"

Moonson was afraid at first that his silence might discourage the
writer, but he did not know writers ...

"It's good to have someone to talk to," the writer went on. "I've been
sitting here all day trying to write. I'll tell you something you may
not know--you can go to the finest hotels, and you can open case after
case of the finest wine, and you still can't get started sometimes."

The writer's face seemed suddenly to age. Fear came into his eyes and he
raised the bottle to his lips, faced away from his guest as he drank as
if ashamed of what he must do to escape despair every time he faced his
fear.

He was trying to write himself back into fame. His greatest moment had
come years before when his golden pen had glorified a generation of
madcaps.

For one deathless moment his genius had carried him to the heights, and
a white blaze of publicity had given him a halo of glory. Later had come
lean and bitter years until finally his reputation dwindled like a
gutted candle in a wintry room at midnight.

He could still write but now fear and remorse walked with him and would
give him no peace. He was cruelly afraid most of the time.

Moonson listened to the writer's thoughts in heart-stricken
silence--thoughts so tragic they seemed out of keeping with the natural
and beautiful rhythms of his speech. He had never imagined that a
sensitive and imaginative man--an artist--could be so completely
abandoned by the society his genius had helped to enrich.

Back and forth the writer paced, baring his inmost thoughts ... His wife
was desperately ill and the future looked completely black. How could he
summon the strength of will to go on, let alone to write?

He said fiercely, "It's all right for you to talk--"

He stopped, seeming to realize for the first time that the big man
sitting in an easy chair by the window had made no attempt to speak.

It seemed incredible, but the big man had listened in complete silence,
and with such quiet assurance that his silence had taken on an eloquence
that inspired absolute trust.

He had always known there were a few people like that in the world,
people whose sympathy and understanding you could take for granted.
There was a fearlessness in such people which made them stand out from
the crowd, stone-markers in a desert waste to lend assurance to a tired
wayfarer by its sturdy permanence, its sun-mirroring strength.

There were a few people like that in the world but you sometimes went a
lifetime without meeting one. The big man sat there smiling at him,
calmly exuding the serenity of one who has seen life from its tangled,
inaccessible roots outward and testifies from experience that the
entire growth is sound.

The writer stopped pacing suddenly and drew himself erect. As he stared
into the big man's eyes his fears seemed to fade away. Confidence
returned to him like the surge of the sea in great shining waves of
creativeness.

       *       *       *       *       *

He knew suddenly that he could lose himself in his work again, could tap
the bright resonant bell of his genius until its golden voice rang out
through eternity. He had another great book in him and it would get
written now. It would get written ...

"You've helped me!" he almost shouted. "You've helped me more than you
know. I can't tell you how grateful I am to you. You don't know what it
means to be so paralyzed with fright that you can't write at all!"

The Man from Time was silent but his eyes shone curiously.

The writer turned to a bookcase and removed a volume in a faded cover
that had once been bright with rainbow colors. He sat down and wrote an
inscription on the flyleaf.

Then he rose and handed the book to his visitor with a slight bow. He
was smiling now.

"This was my first-born!" he said.

The Man from Time looked at the title first ... THIS SIDE OF PARADISE.

Then he opened the book and read what the author had written on the
flyleaf:

    _With warm gratefulness for a courage which brought back the sun._

                                                _F. Scott Fitzgerald._

Moonson bowed his thanks, turned and left the cabin.

Morning found him walking across fresh meadowlands with the dew
glistening on his bare head and broad, straight shoulders.

They'd never find him, he told himself hopelessly. They'd never find him
because Time was too vast to pinpoint one man in such a vast waste of
years. The towering crests of each age might be visible but there could
be no returning to one tiny insignificant spot in the mighty ocean of
Time.

As he walked his eyes searched for the field and the winding road he'd
followed into town. Only yesterday this road had seemed to beckon and he
had followed, eager to explore an age so primitive that mental
communication from mind to mind had not yet replaced human speech.

Now he knew that the speech faculty which mankind had long outgrown
would never cease to act as a barrier between himself and the men and
women of this era of the past. Without it he could not hope to find
complete understanding and sympathy here.

He was still alone and soon winter would come and the sky grow cold and
empty ...

The Time machine materialized so suddenly before him that for an instant
his mind refused to accept it as more than a torturing illusion conjured
up by the turbulence of his thoughts. All at once it towered in his
path, bright and shining, and he moved forward over the dew-drenched
grass until he was brought up short by a joy so overwhelming that it
seemed to him that his heart must burst.

       *       *       *       *       *

Rutella emerged from the machine with a gay little laugh, as if his
stunned expression was the most amusing in the world.

"Hold still and let me kiss you, darling," her mind said to his.

She stood in the dew-bright grass on tiptoe, her sleek dark hair falling
to her shoulders, an extraordinarily pretty girl to be the wife of a man
so tormented.

"You found me!" his thoughts exulted. "You came back alone and searched
until you found me!"

She nodded, her eyes shining. So Time wasn't too vast to pinpoint after
all, not when two people were so securely wedded in mind and heart that
their thoughts could build a bridge across Time.

"The Bureau of Emotional Adjustment analyzed everything I told them.
Your psycho-graph ran to fifty-seven pages, but it was your desperate
loneliness which guided me to you."

She raised his hand to her lips and kissed it.

"You see, darling, a compulsive fear isn't easy to conquer. No man or
woman can conquer it alone. Historians tell us that when the first
passenger rocket started out for Mars, Space Fear took men by surprise
in the same way your fear gripped you. The loneliness, the utter
desolation of space, was too much for a human mind to endure."

She smiled her love. "We're going back. We'll face it together and we'll
conquer it together. You won't be alone now. Darling, don't you
see--it's because you aren't a clod, because you're sensitive and
imaginative that you experience fear. It's not anything to be ashamed
of. You were simply the first man on Earth to develop a new and
completely different kind of fear--Time Fear."

Moonson put out his hand and gently touched his wife's hair.

Ascending into the Time Observatory a thought came unbidden into his
mind: _Others he saved, himself he could not save._

But that wasn't true at all now.

He _could_ help himself now. He would never be alone again! When guided
by the sure hand of love and complete trust, self-knowledge could be a
shining weapon. The trip back might be difficult, but holding tight to
his wife's hand he felt no misgivings, no fear.




Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from _Fantastic Universe_ March 1954.
    Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed. Minor spelling and
    typographical errors have been corrected without note.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Man from Time, by Frank Belknap Long

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MAN FROM TIME ***

***** This file should be named 29418.txt or 29418.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/9/4/1/29418/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
