The Project Gutenberg EBook of Forever, by Robert Sheckley

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Forever

Author: Robert Sheckley

Illustrator: Dick Francis

Release Date: July 22, 2009 [EBook #29487]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FOREVER ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









FOREVER

By NED LANG


 _Of all the irksome, frustrating,
 maddening discoveries--was there
 no way of keeping it discovered?_


Illustrated by DICK FRANCIS


With so much at stake, Charles Dennison should not have been careless.
An inventor cannot afford carelessness, particularly when his invention
is extremely valuable and obviously patentable. There are too many
grasping hands ready to seize what belongs to someone else, too many men
who feast upon the creativity of the innocent.

A touch of paranoia would have served Dennison well; but he was lacking
in that vital characteristic of inventors. And he didn't even realize
the full extent of his carelessness until a bullet, fired from a
silenced weapon, chipped a granite wall not three inches from his head.

Then he knew. But by then it was too late.

Charles Dennison had been left a more than adequate income by his
father. He had gone to Harvard, served a hitch in the Navy, then
continued his education at M.I.T. Since the age of thirty-two, he had
been engaged in private research, working in his own small laboratory in
Riverdale, New York. Plant biology was his field. He published several
noteworthy papers, and sold a new insecticide to a development
corporation. The royalties helped him to expand his facilities.

Dennison enjoyed working alone. It suited his temperament, which was
austere but not unfriendly. Two or three times a year, he would come to
New York, see some plays and movies, and do a little serious drinking.
He would then return gratefully to his seclusion. He was a bachelor and
seemed destined to remain that way.

Not long after his fortieth birthday, Dennison stumbled across an
intriguing clue which led him into a different branch of biology. He
pursued his clue, developed it, extended it slowly into a hypothesis.
After three more years, a lucky accident put the final proofs into his
hands.

He had invented a most effective longevity drug. It was not proof
against violence; aside from that, however, it could fairly be called an
immortality serum.

       *       *       *       *       *

Now was the time for caution. But years of seclusion had made Dennison
unwary of people and their motives. He was more or less heedless of the
world around him; it never occurred to him that the world was not
equally heedless of him.

He thought only about his serum. It was valuable and patentable. But was
it the sort of thing that should be revealed? Was the world ready for an
immortality drug?

He had never enjoyed speculation of this sort. But since the atom bomb,
many scientists had been forced to look at the ethics of their
profession. Dennison looked at his and decided that immortality was
inevitable.

Mankind had, throughout its existence, poked and probed into the
recesses of nature, trying to figure out how things worked. If one man
didn't discover fire, or the use of the lever, or gunpowder, or the atom
bomb, or immortality, another would. Man willed to know all nature's
secrets, and there was no way of keeping them hidden.

Armed with this bleak but comforting philosophy, Dennison packed his
formulas and proofs into a briefcase, slipped a two-ounce bottle of the
product into a jacket pocket, and left his Riverdale laboratory. It was
already evening. He planned to spend the night in a good midtown hotel,
see a movie, and proceed to the Patent Office in Washington the
following day.

On the subway, Dennison was absorbed in a newspaper. He was barely
conscious of the men sitting on either side of him. He became aware of
them only when the man on his right poked him firmly in the ribs.

Dennison glanced over and saw the snub nose of a small automatic,
concealed from the rest of the car by a newspaper, resting against his
side.

"What is this?" Dennison asked.

"Hand it over," the man said.

Dennison was stunned. How could anyone have known about his discovery?
And how could they dare try to rob him in a public subway car?

Then he realized that they were probably just after his money.

"I don't have much on me," Dennison said hoarsely, reaching for his
wallet.

The man on his left leaned over and slapped the briefcase. "Not money,"
he said. "The immortality stuff."

       *       *       *       *       *

In some unaccountable fashion, they knew. What if he refused to give up
his briefcase? Would they dare fire the automatic in the subway? It was
a very small caliber weapon. Its noise might not even be heard above the
subway's roar. And probably they felt justified in taking the risk for a
prize as great as the one Dennison carried.

He looked at them quickly. They were mild-looking men, quietly, almost
somberly dressed. Something about their clothing jogged Dennison's
memory unpleasantly, but he didn't have time to place the recollection.
The automatic was digging painfully into his ribs.

The subway was coming to a station. Dennison glanced at the man on his
left and caught the glint of light on a tiny hypodermic.

Many inventors, involved only in their own thoughts, are slow of
reaction. But Dennison had been a gunnery officer in the Navy and had
seen his share of action. He was damned if he was going to give up his
invention so easily.

He jumped from his seat and the hypo passed through the sleeve of his
coat, just missing his arm. He swung the briefcase at the man with the
automatic, catching him across the forehead with the metal edge. As the
doors opened, he ran past a popeyed subway guard, up the stairs and into
the street.

The two men followed, one of them streaming blood from his forehead.
Dennison ran, looking wildly around for a policeman.

The men behind him were screaming, "Stop, thief! Police! Police! Stop
that man!"

Apparently they were also prepared to face the police and to claim the
briefcase and bottle as their own. Ridiculous! Yet the complete and
indignant confidence in their shrill voices unnerved Dennison. He hated
a scene.

Still, a policeman would be best. The briefcase was filled with proof of
who he was. Even his name was initialed on the outside of the briefcase.
One glance would tell anyone ...

He caught a flash of metal from his briefcase, and, still running,
looked at it. He was shocked to see a metal plate fixed to the cowhide,
over the place where his initials had been. The man on his left must
have done that when he slapped the briefcase.

Dennison dug at the plate with his fingertips, but it would not come
off.

It read, _Property of Edward James Flaherty, Smithfield Institute_.

Perhaps a policeman wouldn't be so much help, after all.

But the problem was academic, for Dennison saw no policeman along the
crowded Bronx street. People stood aside as he ran past, staring
open-mouthed, offering neither assistance nor interference. But the men
behind him were still screaming, "Stop the thief! Stop the thief!"

The entire long block was alerted. The people, like some sluggish beast
goaded reluctantly into action, began to make tentative movements toward
Dennison, impelled by the outraged cries of his pursuers.

       *       *       *       *       *

Unless he balanced the scales of public opinion, some do-gooder was
going to interfere soon. Dennison conquered his shyness and pride, and
called out, "Help me! They're trying to rob me! Stop them!"

But his voice lacked the moral indignation, the absolute conviction of
his two shrill-voiced pursuers. A burly young man stepped forward to
block Dennison's way, but at the last moment a woman pulled him back.

"Don't get into trouble, Charley."

"Why don't someone call a cop?"

"Yeah, where are the cops?"

"Over at a big fire on 178th Street, I hear."

"We oughta stop that guy."

"I'm willing if you're willing."

Dennison's way was suddenly blocked by four grinning youths, teen-agers
in black motorcycle jackets and boots, excited by the chance for a
little action, delighted at the opportunity to hit someone in the name
of law and order.

[Illustration]

Dennison saw them, swerved suddenly and sprinted across the street. A
bus loomed in front of him.

He hurled himself out of its way, fell, got up again and ran on.

His pursuers were delayed by the dense flow of traffic. Their
high-pitched cries faded as Dennison turned into a side street, ran down
its length, then down another.

He was in a section of massive apartment buildings. His lungs felt like
a blast furnace and his left side seemed to be sewed together with
red-hot wire. There was no help for it, he had to rest.

It was then that the first bullet, fired from a silenced weapon, chipped
a granite wall not three inches from his head. That was when Dennison
realized the full extent of his carelessness.

He pulled the bottle out of his pocket. He had hoped to carry out more
experiments on the serum before trying it on human beings. Now there was
no choice.

Dennison yanked out the stopper and drained the contents.

Immediately he was running again, as a second bullet scored the granite
wall. The great blocks of apartments loomed endlessly ahead of him,
silent and alien. There were no walkers upon the streets. There was only
Dennison, running more slowly now past the immense, blank-faced
apartments.

       *       *       *       *       *

A long black car came up behind him, its searchlight probing into doors
and alleys. Was it the police?

"That's him!" cried the shrill, unnerving voice of one of Dennison's
pursuers.

Dennison ducked into a narrow alley between buildings, raced down it and
into the next street.

There were two cars on that street, at either end of the block, their
headlights shining toward each other, moving slowly to trap him in the
middle. The alley gleamed with light now, from the first car's
headlights shining down it. He was surrounded.

Dennison raced to the nearest apartment building and yanked at the door.
It was locked. The two cars were almost even with him. And, looking at
them, Dennison remembered the unpleasant jog his memory had given him
earlier.

The two cars were hearses.

The men in the subway, with their solemn faces, solemn clothing, subdued
neckties, shrill, indignant voices--they had reminded him of
undertakers. They _had_ been undertakers!

Of course! Of course! Oil companies might want to block the invention of
a cheap new fuel which could put them out of business; steel
corporations might try to stop the development of an inexpensive,
stronger-than-steel plastic ...

And the production of an immortality serum would put the undertakers out
of business.

His progress, and the progress of thousands of other researchers in
biology, must have been watched. And when he made his discovery, they
had been ready.

The hearses stopped, and somber-faced, respectable-looking men in black
suits and pearl-gray neckties poured out and seized him. The briefcase
was yanked out of his hand. He felt the prick of a needle in his
shoulder. Then, with no transitional dizziness, he passed out.

       *       *       *       *       *

He came to sitting in an armchair. There were armed men on either side
of him. In front of him stood a small, plump, undistinguished-looking
man in sedate clothing.

"My name is Mr. Bennet," the plump man said. "I wish to beg your
forgiveness, Mr. Dennison, for the violence to which you were subjected.
We found out about your invention only at the last moment and therefore
had to improvise. The bullets were meant only to frighten and delay you.
Murder was not our intention."

"You merely wanted to steal my discovery," Dennison said.

"Not at all," Mr. Bennet told him. "The secret of immortality has been
in our possession for quite some time."

"I see. Then you want to keep immortality from the public in order to
safeguard your damned undertaking business!"

"Isn't that rather a naive view?" Mr. Bennet asked, smiling. "As it
happens, my associates and I are _not_ undertakers. We took on the
disguise in order to present an understandable motive if our plan to
capture you had misfired. In that event, others would have believed
exactly--and only--what you thought: that our purpose was to safeguard
our business."

Dennison frowned and watchfully waited.

"Disguises come easily to us," Mr. Bennet said, still smiling. "Perhaps
you have heard rumors about a new carburetor suppressed by the gasoline
companies, or a new food source concealed by the great food suppliers,
or a new synthetic hastily destroyed by the cotton-owning interests.
That was us. And the inventions ended up here."

"You're trying to impress me," Dennison said.

"Certainly."

"Why did you stop me from patenting my immortality serum?"

"The world is not ready for it yet," said Mr. Bennet.

"It isn't ready for a lot of things," Dennison said. "Why didn't you
block the atom bomb?"

"We tried, disguised as mercenary coal and oil interests. But we failed.
However, we have succeeded with a surprising number of things."

"But what's the purpose behind it all?"

"Earth's welfare," Mr. Bennet said promptly. "Consider what would happen
if the people were given your veritable immortality serum. The problems
of birth rate, food production, living space all would be aggravated.
Tensions would mount, war would be imminent--"

"So what?" Dennison challenged. "That's how things are right now,
_without_ immortality. Besides, there have been cries of doom about
every new invention or discovery. Gunpowder, the printing press,
nitroglycerin, the atom bomb, they were all supposed to destroy the
race. But mankind has learned how to handle them. It had to! You can't
turn back the clock, and you can't un-discover something. If it's there,
mankind must deal with it!"

"Yes, in a bumbling, bloody, inefficient fashion," said Mr. Bennet, with
an expression of distaste.

"Well, that's how Man is."

"Not if he's properly led," Mr. Bennet said.

"No?"

       *       *       *       *       *

"Certainly not," said Mr. Bennet. "You see, the immortality serum
provides a solution to the problem of political power. Rule by a
permanent and enlightened elite is by far the best form of government;
infinitely better than the blundering inefficiencies of democratic rule.
But throughout history, this elite, whether monarchy, oligarchy,
dictatorship or junta, has been unable to perpetuate itself. Leaders
die, the followers squabble for power, and chaos is close behind. With
immortality, this last flaw would be corrected. There would be no
discontinuity of leadership, for the leaders would always be there."

"A permanent dictatorship," Dennison said.

"Yes. A permanent, benevolent rule by small, carefully chosen elite
corps, based upon the sole and exclusive possession of immortality. It's
historically inevitable. The only question is, who is going to get
control first?"

"And you think you are?" Dennison demanded.

"Of course. Our organization is still small, but absolutely solid. It is
bolstered by every new invention that comes into our hands and by every
scientist who joins our ranks. Our time will come, Dennison! We'd like
to have you with us, among the elite."

"You want _me_ to join you?" Dennison asked, bewildered.

"We do. Our organization needs creative scientific minds to help us in
our work, to help us save mankind from itself."

"Count me out," Dennison said, his heart beating fast.

"You won't join us?"

"I'd like to see you all hanged."

Mr. Bennet nodded thoughtfully and pursed his small lips. "You have
taken your own serum, have you not?"

Dennison nodded. "I suppose that means you kill me now?"

"We don't kill," Mr. Bennet said. "We merely wait. I think you are a
reasonable man, and I think you'll come to see things our way. We'll be
around a long time. So will you. Take him away."

Dennison was led to an elevator that dropped deep into the Earth. He was
marched down a long passageway lined with armed men. They went through
four massive doors. At the fifth, Dennison was pushed inside alone, and
the door was locked behind him.

He was in a large, well-furnished apartment. There were perhaps twenty
people in the room, and they came forward to meet him.

One of them, a stocky, bearded man, was an old college acquaintance of
Dennison's.

"Jim Ferris?"

"That's right," Ferris said. "Welcome to the Immortality Club,
Dennison."

"I read you were killed in an air crash last year."

"I merely--disappeared," Ferris said, with a rueful smile, "after
inventing the immortality serum. Just like the others."

"All of them?"

"Fifteen of the men here invented the serum independently. The rest are
successful inventors in other fields. Our oldest member is Doctor Li, a
serum discoverer, who disappeared from San Francisco in 1911. You are
our latest acquisition. Our clubhouse is probably the most carefully
guarded place on Earth."

       *       *       *       *       *

Dennison said, "Nineteen-eleven!" Despair flooded him and he sat down
heavily in a chair. "Then there's no possibility of rescue?"

"None. There are only four choices available to us," Ferris said. "Some
have left us and joined the Undertakers. Others have suicided. A few
have gone insane. The rest of us have formed the Immortality Club."

"What for?" Dennison bewilderedly asked.

"To get out of this place!" said Ferris. "To escape and give our
discoveries to the world. To stop those hopeful little dictators
upstairs."

"They must know what you're planning."

"Of course. But they let us live because, every so often, one of us
gives up and joins them. And they don't think we can ever break out.
They're much too smug. It's the basic defect of all power-elites, and
their eventual undoing."

"You said this was the most closely guarded place on Earth?"

"It is," Ferris said.

"And some of you have been trying to break out for fifty years? Why,
it'll take forever to escape!"

"Forever is exactly how long we have," said Ferris. "But we hope it
won't take quite that long. Every new man brings new ideas, plans. One
of them is bound to work."

"_Forever_," Dennison said, his face buried in his hands.

"You can go back upstairs and join them," Ferris said, with a hard note
to his voice, "or you can suicide, or just sit in a corner and go
quietly mad. Take your pick."

Dennison looked up. "I must be honest with you and with myself. I don't
think we can escape. Furthermore, I don't think any of you really
believe we can."

Ferris shrugged his shoulders.

"Aside from that," Dennison said, "I think it's a damned good idea. If
you'll bring me up to date, I'll contribute whatever I can to the
Forever Project. And let's hope their complacency lasts."

"It will," Ferris said.

       *       *       *       *       *

The escape did not take forever, of course. In one hundred and
thirty-seven years, Dennison and his colleagues made their successful
breakout and revealed the Undertakers' Plot. The Undertakers were tried
before the High Court on charges of kidnapping, conspiracy to overthrow
the government, and illegal possession of immortality. They were found
guilty on all counts and summarily executed.

Dennison and his colleagues were also in illegal possession of
immortality, which is the privilege only of our governmental elite. But
the death penalty was waived in view of the Immortality Club's service
to the State.

This mercy was premature, however. After some months the members of the
Immortality Club went into hiding, with the avowed purpose of
overthrowing the Elite Rule and disseminating immortality among the
masses. Project Forever, as they termed it, has received some support
from dissidents, who have not yet been apprehended. It cannot be
considered a serious threat.

But this deviationist action in no way detracts from the glory of the
Club's escape from the Undertakers. The ingenious way in which Dennison
and his colleagues broke out of their seemingly impregnable prison,
using only a steel belt buckle, a tungsten filament, three hens' eggs,
and twelve chemicals that can be readily obtained from the human body,
is too well known to be repeated here.

                                                            --NED LANG




Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from _Galaxy Science Fiction_ February 1959.
    Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed. Minor spelling and
    typographical errors have been corrected without note.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Forever, by Robert Sheckley

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FOREVER ***

***** This file should be named 29487.txt or 29487.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/9/4/8/29487/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
