The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Hated, by Frederik Pohl

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Hated

Author: Frederik Pohl

Illustrator: Dick Francis

Release Date: July 24, 2009 [EBook #29503]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HATED ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









THE HATED

By PAUL FLEHR


 _After space, there was always
 one more river to cross ... the
 far side of hatred and murder!_


Illustrated by DICK FRANCIS


The bar didn't have a name. No name of any kind. Not even an indication
that it had ever had one. All it said on the outside was:

       Cafe
        EAT
    _Cocktails_

which doesn't make a lot of sense. But it was a bar. It had a big TV set
going ya-ta-ta ya-ta-ta in three glorious colors, and a jukebox that
tried to drown out the TV with that lousy music they play. Anyway, it
wasn't a kid hangout. I kind of like it. But I wasn't supposed to be
there at all; it's in the contract. I was supposed to stay in New York
and the New England states.

Cafe-EAT-_Cocktails_ was right across the river. I think the name of the
place was Hoboken, but I'm not sure. It all had a kind of dreamy feeling
to it. I was--

Well, I couldn't even remember going there. I remembered one minute I
was downtown New York, looking across the river. I did that a lot. And
then I was there. I don't remember crossing the river at all.

I was drunk, you know.

       *       *       *       *       *

You know how it is? Double bourbons and keep them coming. And after a
while the bartender stops bringing me the ginger ale because gradually I
forget to mix them. I got pretty loaded long before I left New York. I
realize that. I guess I had to get pretty loaded to risk the pension and
all.

Used to be I didn't drink much, but now, I don't know, when I have one
drink, I get to thinking about Sam and Wally and Chowderhead and Gilvey
and the captain. If I don't drink, I think about them, too, and then I
take a drink. And that leads to another drink, and it all comes out to
the same thing. Well, I guess I said it already, I drink a pretty good
amount, but you can't blame me.

There was a girl.

I always get a girl someplace. Usually they aren't much and this one
wasn't either. I mean she was probably somebody's mother. She was around
thirty-five and not so bad, though she had a long scar under her ear
down along her throat to the little round spot where her larynx was. It
wasn't ugly. She smelled nice--while I could still smell, you know--and
she didn't talk much. I liked that. Only--

Well, did you ever meet somebody with a nervous cough? Like when you say
something funny--a little funny, not a big yock--they don't laugh and
they don't stop with just smiling, but they sort of cough? She did that.
I began to itch. I couldn't help it. I asked her to stop it.

She spilled her drink and looked at me almost as though she was
scared--and I had tried to say it quietly, too.

"Sorry," she said, a little angry, a little scared. "_Sorry._ But you
don't have to--"

"Forget it."

"Sure. But you asked me to sit down here with you, remember? If you're
going to--"

"_Forget it!_" I nodded at the bartender and held up two fingers. "You
need another drink," I said. "The thing is," I said, "Gilvey used to do
that."

"What?"

"That cough."

She looked puzzled. "You mean like this?"

"_Goddam it, stop it!_" Even the bartender looked over at me that time.
Now she was really mad, but I didn't want her to go away. I said,
"Gilvey was a fellow who went to Mars with me. Pat Gilvey."

"_Oh._" She sat down again and leaned across the table, low. "_Mars._"

       *       *       *       *       *

The bartender brought our drinks and looked at me suspiciously. I said,
"Say, Mac, would you turn down the air-conditioning?"

"My name isn't Mac. No."

"Have a heart. It's too cold in here."

"Sorry." He didn't sound sorry.

I was cold. I mean that kind of weather, it's always cold in those
places. You know around New York in August? It hits eighty, eighty-five,
ninety. All the places have air-conditioning and what they really want
is for you to wear a shirt and tie.

But I like to walk a lot. You would, too, you know. And you can't walk
around much in long pants and a suit coat and all that stuff. Not around
there. Not in August. And so then, when I went into a bar, it'd have one
of those built-in freezers for the used-car salesmen with their dates,
or maybe their wives, all dressed up. For what? But I froze.

"_Mars_," the girl breathed. "_Mars._"

I began to itch again. "Want to dance?"

"They don't have a license," she said. "Byron, _I_ didn't know you'd
been to _Mars_! Please _tell_ me about it."

"It was all right," I said.

That was a lie.

She was interested. She forgot to smile. It made her look nicer. She
said, "I knew a man--my brother-in-law--he was my husband's brother--I
mean my ex-husband--"

"I get the idea."

"He worked for General Atomic. In Rockford, Illinois. You know where
that is?"

"Sure." I couldn't go there, but I knew where Illinois was.

"He worked on the first Mars ship. Oh, fifteen years ago, wasn't it? He
always wanted to go himself, but he couldn't pass the tests." She
stopped and looked at me.

I knew what she was thinking. But I didn't always look this way, you
know. Not that there's anything wrong with me now, I mean, but I
couldn't pass the tests any more. Nobody can. That's why we're all
one-trippers.

I said, "The only reason I'm shaking like this is because I'm cold."

It wasn't true, of course. It was that cough of Gilvey's. I didn't like
to think about Gilvey, or Sam or Chowderhead or Wally or the captain. I
didn't like to think about any of them. It made me shake.

You see, we couldn't kill each other. They wouldn't let us do that.
Before we took off, they did something to our minds to make sure. What
they did, it doesn't last forever. It lasts for two years and then it
wears off. That's long enough, you see, because that gets you to Mars
and back; and it's plenty long enough, in another way, because it's like
a strait-jacket.

You know how to make a baby cry? Hold his hands. It's the most basic
thing there is. What they did to us so we couldn't kill each other, it
was like being tied up, like having our hands held so we couldn't get
free. Well. But two years was long enough. Too long.

The bartender came over and said, "Pal, I'm sorry. See, I turned the
air-conditioning down. You all right? You look so--"

I said, "Sure, I'm all right."

He sounded worried. I hadn't even heard him come back. The girl was
looking worried, too, I guess because I was shaking so hard I was
spilling my drink. I put some money on the table without even counting
it.

"It's all right," I said. "We were just going."

"We were?" She looked confused. But she came along with me. They always
do, once they find out you've been to Mars.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the next place, she said, between trips to the powder room, "It must
take a lot of courage to sign up for something like that. Were you
scientifically inclined in school? Don't you have to know an awful lot
to be a space-flyer? Did you ever see any of those little monkey
characters they say live on Mars? I read an article about how they lived
in little cities of pup-tents or something like that--only they didn't
make them, they grew them. Funny! Ever see those? That trip must have
been a real drag, I bet. What is it, nine months? You couldn't have a
baby! Excuse me-- Say, tell me. All that time, how'd you--well, manage
things? I mean didn't you ever have to go to the you-know or anything?"

"We managed," I said.

She giggled, and that reminded her, so she went to the powder room
again. I thought about getting up and leaving while she was gone, but
what was the use of that? I'd only pick up somebody else.

It was nearly midnight. A couple of minutes wouldn't hurt. I reached in
my pocket for the little box of pills they give us--it isn't refillable,
but we get a new prescription in the mail every month, along with the
pension check. The label on the box said:

    CAUTION

    _Use only as directed by physician. Not to be taken by persons
    suffering heart condition, digestive upset or circulatory disease.
    Not to be used in conjunction with alcoholic beverages._

I took three of them. I don't like to start them before midnight, but
anyway I stopped shaking.

I closed my eyes, and then I was on the ship again. The noise in the bar
became the noise of the rockets and the air washers and the sludge
sluicers. I began to sweat, although this place was air-conditioned,
too.

I could hear Wally whistling to himself the way he did, the sound
muffled by his oxygen mask and drowned in the rocket noise, but still
perfectly audible. The tune was _Sophisticated Lady_. Sometimes it was
_Easy to Love_ and sometimes _Chasing Shadows_, but mostly
_Sophisticated Lady_. He was from Juilliard.

Somebody sneezed, and it sounded just like Chowderhead sneezing. You
know how everybody sneezes according to his own individual style?
Chowderhead had a ladylike little sneeze; it went _hutta_, real quick,
all through the mouth, no nose involved. The captain went _Hrasssh_;
Wally was Ashoo, ashoo, _ashoo_. Gilvey was _Hutch_-uh. Sam didn't
sneeze much, but he sort of coughed and sprayed, and that was worse.

Sometimes I used to think about killing Sam by tying him down and having
Wally and the captain sneeze him to death. But that was a kind of a
joke, naturally, when I was feeling good. Or pretty good. Usually I
thought about a knife for Sam. For Chowderhead it was a gun, right in
the belly, one shot. For Wally it was a tommy gun--just stitching him up
and down, you know, back and forth. The captain I would put in a cage
with hungry lions, and Gilvey I'd strangle with my bare hands. That was
probably because of the cough, I guess.

       *       *       *       *       *

She was back. "Please tell me about it," she begged. "I'm _so_ curious."

I opened my eyes. "You want me to tell you about it?"

"Oh, please!"

"About what it's like to fly to Mars on a rocket?"

"Yes!"

"All right," I said.

It's wonderful what three little white pills will do. I wasn't even
shaking.

"There's six men, see? In a space the size of a Buick, and that's all
the room there is. Two of us in the bunks all the time, four of us on
watch. Maybe you want to stay in the sack an extra ten minutes--because
it's the only place on the ship where you can stretch out, you know, the
only place where you can rest without somebody's elbow in your side. But
you can't. Because by then it's the next man's turn.

"And maybe you don't have elbows in your side while it's your turn off
watch, but in the starboard bunk there's the air-regenerator master
valve--I bet I could still show you the bruises right around my
kidneys--and in the port bunk there's the emergency-escape-hatch handle.
That gets you right in the temple, if you turn your head too fast.

"And you can't really sleep, I mean not soundly, because of the noise.
That is, when the rockets are going. When they aren't going, then you're
in free-fall, and that's bad, too, because you dream about falling. But
when they're going, I don't know, I think it's worse. It's pretty loud.

"And even if it weren't for the noise, if you sleep too soundly you
might roll over on your oxygen line. Then you dream about drowning. Ever
do that? You're strangling and choking and you can't get any air? It
isn't dangerous, I guess. Anyway, it always woke me up in time. Though I
heard about a fellow in a flight six years ago--

"Well. So you've always got this oxygen mask on, all the time, except if
you take it off for a second to talk to somebody. You don't do that very
often, because what is there to say? Oh, maybe the first couple of
weeks, sure--everybody's friends then. You don't even need the mask, for
that matter. Or not very much. Everybody's still pretty clean. The place
smells--oh, let's see--about like the locker room in a gym. You know?
You can stand it. That's if nobody's got space sickness, of course. We
were lucky that way.

"But that's about how it's going to get anyway, you know. Outside the
masks, it's soup. It isn't that you smell it so much. You kind of
_taste_ it, in the back of your mouth, and your eyes sting. That's after
the first two or three months. Later on, it gets worse.

"And with the mask on, of course, the oxygen mixture is coming in under
pressure. That's funny if you're not used to it. Your lungs have to work
a little bit harder to get rid of it, especially when you're asleep, so
after a while the muscles get sore. And then they get sorer. And then--

"Well.

"Before we take off, the psych people give us a long doo-da that keeps
us from killing each other. But they can't stop us from thinking about
it. And afterward, after we're back on Earth--this is what you won't
read about in the articles--they keep us apart. You know how they work
it? We get a pension, naturally. I mean there's got to be a pension,
otherwise there isn't enough money in the world to make anybody go. But
in the contract, it says to get the pension we have to stay in our own
area.

[Illustration]

"The whole country's marked off. Six sections. Each has at least one big
city in it. I was lucky, I got a lot of them. They try to keep it so
every man's home town is in his own section, but--well, like with us,
Chowderhead and the captain both happened to come from Santa Monica. I
think it was Chowderhead that got California, Nevada, all that Southwest
area. It was the luck of the draw. God knows what the captain got.

"Maybe New Jersey," I said, and took another white pill.

       *       *       *       *       *

We went on to another place and she said suddenly, "I figured something
out. The way you keep looking around."

"What did you figure out?"

"Well, part of it was what you said about the other fellow getting New
Jersey. This is New Jersey. You don't belong in this section, right?"

"Right," I said after a minute.

"So why are you here? I know why. You're here because you're looking for
somebody."

"That's right."

She said triumphantly, "You want to find that other fellow from your
crew! You want to fight him!"

I couldn't help shaking, white pills or no white pills. But I had to
correct her.

"No. I want to kill him."

"How do you know he's here? He's got a lot of states to roam around in,
too, doesn't he?"

"Six. New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Delaware, Maryland--all the way down to
Washington."

"Then how do you know--"

"He'll be here." I didn't have to tell her how I knew. But I knew.

I wasn't the only one who spent his time at the border of his assigned
area, looking across the river or staring across a state line, knowing
that somebody was on the other side. I knew. You fight a war and you
don't have to guess that the enemy might have his troops a thousand
miles away from the battle line. You know where his troops will be. You
know he wants to fight, too.

_Hutta. Hutta._

I spilled my drink.

I looked at her. "You--you didn't--"

She looked frightened. "What's the matter?"

"_Did you just sneeze?_"

"Sneeze? Me? Did I--"

I said something quick and nasty, I don't know what. No! It hadn't been
her. I knew it.

It was Chowderhead's sneeze.

       *       *       *       *       *

Chowderhead. Marvin T. Roebuck, his name was. Five feet eight inches
tall. Dark-complected, with a cast in one eye. Spoke with a Midwest kind
of accent, even though he came from California--"shrick" for "shriek,"
"hawror" for "horror," like that. It drove me crazy after a while.
Maybe that gives you an idea what he talked about mostly. A skunk. A
thoroughgoing, deep-rooted, mother-murdering skunk.

I kicked over my chair and roared, "Roebuck! Where are you, damn you?"

The bar was all at once silent. Only the jukebox kept going.

"I know you're here!" I screamed. "Come out and get it! You louse, I
told you I'd get you for calling me a liar the day Wally sneaked a
smoke!"

Silence, everybody looking at me.

Then the door of the men's room opened.

He came out.

He looked _lousy_. Eyes all red-rimmed and his hair falling out--the
poor crumb couldn't have been over twenty-nine. He shrieked, "You!" He
called me a million names. He said, "You thieving rat, I'll teach you to
try to cheat me out of my candy ration!"

He had a knife.

I didn't care. I didn't have anything and that was stupid, but it didn't
matter. I got a bottle of beer from the next table and smashed it
against the back of a chair. It made a good weapon, you know; I'd take
that against a knife any time.

I ran toward him, and he came all staggering and lurching toward me,
looking crazy and desperate, mumbling and raving--I could hardly hear
him, because I was talking, too. Nobody tried to stop us. Somebody went
out the door and I figured it was to call the cops, but that was all
right. Once I took care of Chowderhead, I didn't care what the cops did.

I went for the face.

He cut me first. I felt the knife slide up along my left arm but, you
know, it didn't even hurt, only kind of stung a little. I didn't care
about that. I got him in the face, and the bottle came away, and it was
all like gray and white jelly, and then blood began to spring out. He
screamed. Oh, that scream! I never heard anything like that scream. It
was what I had been waiting all my life for.

I kicked him as he staggered back, and he fell. And I was on top of him,
with the bottle, and I was careful to stay away from the heart or the
throat, because that was too quick, but I worked over the face, and I
felt his knife get me a couple times more, and--

And--

       *       *       *       *       *

And I woke up, you know. And there was Dr. Santly over me with a
hypodermic needle that he'd just taken out of my arm, and four male
nurses in fatigues holding me down. And I was drenched with sweat.

For a minute, I didn't know where I was. It was a horrible queasy
falling sensation, as though the bar and the fight and the world were
all dissolving into smoke around me.

Then I knew where I was.

It was almost worse.

I stopped yelling and just lay there, looking up at them.

Dr. Santly said, trying to keep his face friendly and noncommittal,
"You're doing much better, Byron, boy. _Much_ better."

I didn't say anything.

He said, "You worked through the whole thing in two hours and eight
minutes. Remember the first time? You were sixteen hours killing him.
Captain Van Wyck it was that time, remember? Who was it this time?"

"Chowderhead." I looked at the male nurses. Doubtfully, they let go of
my arms and legs.

"Chowderhead," said Dr. Santly. "Oh--Roebuck. That boy," he said
mournfully, his expression saddened, "he's not coming along nearly as
well as you. _Nearly._ He can't run through a cycle in less than five
hours. And, that's peculiar, it's usually you he-- Well, I better not
say that, shall I? No sense setting up a counter-impression when your
pores are all open, so to speak?" He smiled at me, but he was a little
worried in back of the smile.

I sat up. "Anybody got a cigarette?"

"Give him a cigarette, Johnson," the doctor ordered the male nurse
standing alongside my right foot.

Johnson did. I fired up.

"You're coming along _splendidly_," Dr. Santly said. He was one of these
psych guys that thinks if you say it's so, it makes it so. You know that
kind? "We'll have you down under an hour before the end of the week.
That's _marvelous_ progress. Then we can work on the conscious level!
You're doing extremely well, whether you know it or not. Why, in six
months--say in eight months, because I like to be conservative--" he
twinkled at me--"we'll have you out of here! You'll be the first of your
crew to be discharged, you know that?"

"That's nice," I said. "The others aren't doing so well?"

"No. Not at all well, most of them. Particularly Dr. Gilvey. The
run-throughs leave him in terrible shape. I don't mind admitting I'm
worried about him."

"That's nice," I said, and this time I meant it.

       *       *       *       *       *

He looked at me thoughtfully, but all he did was say to the male nurses,
"He's all right now. Help him off the table."

It was hard standing up. I had to hold onto the rail around the table
for a minute. I said my set little speech: "Dr. Santly, I want to tell
you again how grateful I am for this. I was reconciled to living the
rest of my life confined to one part of the country, the way the other
crews always did. But this is much better. I appreciate it. I'm sure the
others do, too."

"Of course, boy. Of course." He took out a fountain pen and made a note
on my chart; I couldn't see what it was, but he looked gratified. "It's
no more than you have coming to you, Byron," he said. "I'm grateful that
I could be the one to make it come to pass."

He glanced conspiratorially at the male nurses. "You know how important
this is to me. It's the triumph of a whole new approach to psychic
rehabilitation. I mean to say our heroes of space travel are entitled to
freedom when they come back home to Earth, aren't they?"

"Definitely," I said, scrubbing some of the sweat off my face onto my
sleeve.

"So we've got to end this system of designated areas. We can't avoid the
tensions that accompany space travel, no. But if we can help you
eliminate harmful tensions with a few run-throughs, why, it's not too
high a price to pay, is it?"

"Not a bit."

"I mean to say," he said, warming up, "you can look forward to the time
when you'll be able to mingle with your old friends from the rocket,
free and easy, without any need for restraint. That's a lot to look
forward to, isn't it?"

"It is," I said. "I look forward to it very much," I said. "And I know
exactly what I'm going to do the first time I meet one--I mean without
any restraints, as you say," I said. And it was true; I did. Only it
wouldn't be a broken beer bottle that I would do it with.

I had much more elaborate ideas than that.

                                                          --PAUL FLEHR




Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from _Galaxy Science Fiction_ January 1958.
    Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed. Minor spelling and
    typographical errors have been corrected without note.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Hated, by Frederik Pohl

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HATED ***

***** This file should be named 29503.txt or 29503.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/9/5/0/29503/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
