Project Gutenberg's The Valor of Cappen Varra, by Poul William Anderson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Valor of Cappen Varra

Author: Poul William Anderson

Release Date: July 29, 2009 [EBook #29542]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE VALOR OF CAPPEN VARRA ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









    _We have said that there are many and strange shadows, memories
    surviving from dim pasts, in this FANTASTIC UNIVERSE of ours. Poul
    Anderson turns to a legend from the Northern countries, countries
    where even today the pagan past seems only like yesterday, and tells
    the story of Cappen Varra, who came to Norren a long, long time
    ago._


    the
  valor
     of
 cappen
  varra

 by ... _POUL ANDERSON_


 "Let little Cappen go," they
 shouted. "Maybe he can sing
 the trolls to sleep--"


The wind came from the north with sleet on its back. Raw shuddering
gusts whipped the sea till the ship lurched and men felt driven
spindrift stinging their faces. Beyond the rail there was winter night,
a moving blackness where the waves rushed and clamored; straining into
the great dark, men sensed only the bitter salt of sea-scud, the nettle
of sleet and the lash of wind.

Cappen lost his footing as the ship heaved beneath him, his hands were
yanked from the icy rail and he went stumbling to the deck. The bilge
water was new coldness on his drenched clothes. He struggled back to his
feet, leaning on a rower's bench and wishing miserably that his quaking
stomach had more to lose. But he had already chucked his share of
stockfish and hardtack, to the laughter of Svearek's men, when the gale
started.

Numb fingers groped anxiously for the harp on his back. It still seemed
intact in its leather case. He didn't care about the sodden wadmal
breeks and tunic that hung around his skin. The sooner they rotted off
him, the better. The thought of the silks and linens of Croy was a sigh
in him.

Why had he come to Norren?

A gigantic form, vague in the whistling dark, loomed beside him and gave
him a steadying hand. He could barely hear the blond giant's bull tones:
"Ha, easy there, lad. Methinks the sea horse road is too rough for yer
feet."

"Ulp," said Cappen. His slim body huddled on the bench, too miserable to
care. The sleet pattered against his shoulders and the spray congealed
in his red hair.

Torbek of Norren squinted into the night. It made his leathery face a
mesh of wrinkles. "A bitter feast Yolner we hold," he said. "'Twas a
madness of the king's, that he would guest with his brother across the
water. Now the other ships are blown from us and the fire is drenched
out and we lie alone in the Wolf's Throat."

Wind piped shrill in the rigging. Cappen could just see the longboat's
single mast reeling against the sky. The ice on the shrouds made it a
pale pyramid. Ice everywhere, thick on the rails and benches, sheathing
the dragon head and the carved stern-post, the ship rolling and
staggering under the great march of waves, men bailing and bailing in
the half-frozen bilge to keep her afloat, and too much wind for sail or
oars. Yes--a cold feast!

"But then, Svearek has been strange since the troll took his daughter,
three years ago," went on Torbek. He shivered in a way the winter had
not caused. "Never does he smile, and his once open hand grasps tight
about the silver and his men have poor reward and no thanks. Yes,
strange--" His small frost-blue eyes shifted to Cappen Varra, and the
unspoken thought ran on beneath them: Strange, even, that he likes you,
the wandering bard from the south. Strange, that he will have you in his
hall when you cannot sing as his men would like.

Cappen did not care to defend himself. He had drifted up toward the
northern barbarians with the idea that they would well reward a minstrel
who could offer them something more than their own crude chants. It had
been a mistake; they didn't care for roundels or sestinas, they yawned
at the thought of roses white and red under the moon of Caronne, a moon
less fair than my lady's eyes. Nor did a man of Croy have the size and
strength to compel their respect; Cappen's light blade flickered swiftly
enough so that no one cared to fight him, but he lacked the power of
sheer bulk. Svearek alone had enjoyed hearing him sing, but he was
niggardly and his brawling thorp was an endless boredom to a man used to
the courts of southern princes.

If he had but had the manhood to leave-- But he had delayed, because of
a lusty peasant wench and a hope that Svearek's coffers would open
wider; and now he was dragged along over the Wolf's Throat to a
midwinter feast which would have to be celebrated on the sea.

"Had we but fire--" Torbek thrust his hands inside his cloak, trying to
warm them a little. The ship rolled till she was almost on her beam
ends; Torbek braced himself with practiced feet, but Cappen went into
the bilge again.

He sprawled there for a while, his bruised body refusing movement. A
weary sailor with a bucket glared at him through dripping hair. His
shout was dim under the hoot and skirl of wind: "If ye like it so well
down here, then help us bail!"

"'Tis not yet my turn," groaned Cappen, and got slowly up.

The wave which had nearly swamped them had put out the ship's fire and
drenched the wood beyond hope of lighting a new one. It was cold fish
and sea-sodden hardtack till they saw land again--if they ever did.

As Cappen raised himself on the leeward side, he thought he saw
something gleam, far out across the wrathful night. A wavering red
spark-- He brushed a stiffened hand across his eyes, wondering if the
madness of wind and water had struck through into his own skull. A gust
of sleet hid it again. But--

He fumbled his way aft between the benches. Huddled figures cursed him
wearily as he stepped on them. The ship shook herself, rolled along the
edge of a boiling black trough, and slid down into it; for an instant,
the white teeth of combers grinned above her rail, and Cappen waited for
an end to all things. Then she mounted them again, somehow, and wallowed
toward another valley.

King Svearek had the steering oar and was trying to hold the longboat
into the wind. He had stood there since sundown, huge and untiring, legs
braced and the bucking wood cradled in his arms. More than human he
seemed, there under the icicle loom of the stern-post, his gray hair and
beard rigid with ice. Beneath the horned helmet, the strong moody face
turned right and left, peering into the darkness. Cappen felt smaller
than usual when he approached the steersman.

He leaned close to the king, shouting against the blast of winter: "My
lord, did I not see firelight?"

"Aye. I spied it an hour ago," grunted the king. "Been trying to steer
us a little closer to it."

Cappen nodded, too sick and weary to feel reproved. "What is it?"

"Some island--there are many in this stretch of water--now shut up!"

Cappen crouched down under the rail and waited.

The lonely red gleam seemed nearer when he looked again. Svearek's tones
were lifting in a roar that hammered through the gale from end to end of
the ship: "Hither! Come hither to me, all men not working!"

Slowly, they groped to him, great shadowy forms in wool and leather,
bulking over Cappen like storm-gods. Svearek nodded toward the
flickering glow. "One of the islands, somebody must be living there. I
cannot bring the ship closer for fear of surf, but one of ye should be
able to take the boat thither and fetch us fire and dry wood. Who will
go?"

They peered overside, and the uneasy movement that ran among them came
from more than the roll and pitch of the deck underfoot.

Beorna the Bold spoke at last, it was hardly to be heard in the noisy
dark: "I never knew of men living hereabouts. It must be a lair of
trolls."

"Aye, so ... aye, they'd but eat the man we sent ... out oars, let's
away from here though it cost our lives ..." The frightened mumble was
low under the jeering wind.

Svearek's face drew into a snarl. "Are ye men or puling babes? Hack yer
way through them, if they be trolls, but bring me fire!"

"Even a she-troll is stronger than fifty men, my king," cried Torbek.
"Well ye know that, when the monster woman broke through our guards
three years ago and bore off Hildigund."

"Enough!" It was a scream in Svearek's throat. "I'll have yer craven
heads for this, all of ye, if ye gang not to the isle!"

They looked at each other, the big men of Norren, and their shoulders
hunched bear-like. It was Beorna who spoke it for them: "No, that ye
will not. We are free housecarls, who will fight for a leader--but not
for a madman."

Cappen drew back against the rail, trying to make himself small.

"All gods turn their faces from ye!" It was more than weariness and
despair which glared in Svearek's eyes, there was something of death in
them. "I'll go myself, then!"

"No, my king. That we will not find ourselves in."

"I am the king!"

"And we are yer housecarls, sworn to defend ye--even from yerself. Ye
shall not go."

The ship rolled again, so violently that they were all thrown to
starboard. Cappen landed on Torbek, who reached up to shove him aside
and then closed one huge fist on his tunic.

"Here's our man!"

"Hi!" yelled Cappen.

Torbek hauled him roughly back to his feet. "Ye cannot row or bail yer
fair share," he growled, "nor do ye know the rigging or any skill of a
sailor--'tis time ye made yerself useful!"

"Aye, aye--let little Cappen go--mayhap he can sing the trolls to
sleep--" The laughter was hard and barking, edged with fear, and they
all hemmed him in.

"My lord!" bleated the minstrel. "I am your guest--"

Svearek laughed unpleasantly, half crazily. "Sing them a song," he
howled. "Make a fine roun--whatever ye call it--to the troll-wife's
beauty. And bring us some fire, little man, bring us a flame less hot
than the love in yer breast for yer lady!"

Teeth grinned through matted beards. Someone hauled on the rope from
which the ship's small boat trailed, dragging it close. "Go, ye scut!" A
horny hand sent Cappen stumbling to the rail.

He cried out once again. An ax lifted above his head. Someone handed him
his own slim sword, and for a wild moment he thought of fighting.
Useless--too many of them. He buckled on the sword and spat at the men.
The wind tossed it back in his face, and they raved with laughter.

Over the side! The boat rose to meet him, he landed in a heap on
drenched planks and looked up into the shadowy faces of the northmen.
There was a sob in his throat as he found the seat and took out the
oars.

An awkward pull sent him spinning from the ship, and then the night had
swallowed it and he was alone. Numbly, he bent to the task. Unless he
wanted to drown, there was no place to go but the island.

He was too weary and ill to be much afraid, and such fear as he had was
all of the sea. It could rise over him, gulp him down, the gray horses
would gallop over him and the long weeds would wrap him when he rolled
dead against some skerry. The soft vales of Caronne and the roses in
Croy's gardens seemed like a dream. There was only the roar and boom of
the northern sea, hiss of sleet and spindrift, crazed scream of wind, he
was alone as man had ever been and he would go down to the sharks alone.

The boat wallowed, but rode the waves better than the longship. He grew
dully aware that the storm was pushing him toward the island. It was
becoming visible, a deeper blackness harsh against the night.

He could not row much in the restless water, he shipped the oars and
waited for the gale to capsize him and fill his mouth with the sea. And
when it gurgled in his throat, what would his last thought be? Should he
dwell on the lovely image of Ydris in Seilles, she of the long bright
hair and the singing voice? But then there had been the tomboy laughter
of dark Falkny, he could not neglect her. And there were memories of
Elvanna in her castle by the lake, and Sirann of the Hundred Rings, and
beauteous Vardry, and hawk-proud Lona, and-- No, he could not do justice
to any of them in the little time that remained. What a pity it was!

No, wait, that unforgettable night in Nienne, the beauty which had
whispered in his ear and drawn him close, the hair which had fallen like
a silken tent about his cheeks ... ah, that had been the summit of his
life, he would go down into darkness with her name on his lips ... But
hell! What _had_ her name been, now?

Cappen Varra, minstrel of Croy, clung to the bench and sighed.

The great hollow voice of surf lifted about him, waves sheeted across
the gunwale and the boat danced in madness. Cappen groaned, huddling
into the circle of his own arms and shaking with cold. Swiftly, now, the
end of all sunlight and laughter, the dark and lonely road which all men
must tread. _O Ilwarra of Syr, Aedra in Tholis, could I but kiss you
once more--_

Stones grated under the keel. It was a shock like a sword going through
him. Cappen looked unbelievingly up. The boat had drifted to land--he
was alive!

It was like the sun in his breast. Weariness fell from him, and he
leaped overside, not feeling the chill of the shallows. With a grunt, he
heaved the boat up on the narrow strand and knotted the painter to a
fang-like jut of reef.

Then he looked about him. The island was small, utterly bare, a savage
loom of rock rising out of the sea that growled at its feet and streamed
off its shoulders. He had come into a little cliff-walled bay, somewhat
sheltered from the wind. He was here!

For a moment he stood, running through all he had learned about the
trolls which infested these northlands. Hideous and soulless dwellers
underground, they knew not old age; a sword could hew them asunder, but
before it reached their deep-seated life, their unhuman strength had
plucked a man apart. Then they ate him--

Small wonder the northmen feared them. Cappen threw back his head and
laughed. He had once done a service for a mighty wizard in the south,
and his reward hung about his neck, a small silver amulet. The wizard
had told him that no supernatural being could harm anyone who carried a
piece of silver.

The northmen said that a troll was powerless against a man who was not
afraid; but, of course, only to see one was to feel the heart turn to
ice. They did not know the value of silver, it seemed--odd that they
shouldn't, but they did not. Because Cappen Varra did, he had no reason
to be afraid; therefore he was doubly safe, and it was but a matter of
talking the troll into giving him some fire. If indeed there was a troll
here, and not some harmless fisherman.

He whistled gaily, wrung some of the water from his cloak and ruddy
hair, and started along the beach. In the sleety gloom, he could just
see a hewn-out path winding up one of the cliffs and he set his feet on
it.

At the top of the path, the wind ripped his whistling from his lips. He
hunched his back against it and walked faster, swearing as he stumbled
on hidden rocks. The ice-sheathed ground was slippery underfoot, and the
cold bit like a knife.

Rounding a crag, he saw redness glow in the face of a steep bluff. A
cave mouth, a fire within--he hastened his steps, hungering for warmth,
until he stood in the entrance.

"_Who comes?_"

It was a hoarse bass cry that rang and boomed between walls of rock;
there was ice and horror in it, for a moment Cappen's heart stumbled.
Then he remembered the amulet and strode boldly inside.

"Good evening, mother," he said cheerily.

The cave widened out into a stony hugeness that gaped with tunnels
leading further underground. The rough, soot-blackened walls were hung
with plundered silks and cloth-of-gold, gone ragged with age and damp;
the floor was strewn with stinking rushes, and gnawed bones were heaped
in disorder. Cappen saw the skulls of men among them. In the center of
the room, a great fire leaped and blazed, throwing billows of heat
against him; some of its smoke went up a hole in the roof, the rest
stung his eyes to watering and he sneezed.

The troll-wife crouched on the floor, snarling at him. She was quite the
most hideous thing Cappen had ever seen: nearly as tall as he, she was
twice as broad and thick, and the knotted arms hung down past bowed
knees till their clawed fingers brushed the ground. Her head was
beast-like, almost split in half by the tusked mouth, the eyes wells of
darkness, the nose an ell long; her hairless skin was green and cold,
moving on her bones. A tattered shift covered some of her monstrousness,
but she was still a nightmare.

"Ho-ho, ho-ho!" Her laughter roared out, hungry and hollow as the surf
around the island. Slowly, she shuffled closer. "So my dinner comes
walking in to greet me, ho, ho, ho! Welcome, sweet flesh, welcome, good
marrow-filled bones, come in and be warmed."

"Why, thank you, good mother." Cappen shucked his cloak and grinning at
her through the smoke. He felt his clothes steaming already. "I love you
too."

Over her shoulder, he suddenly saw the girl. She was huddled in a
corner, wrapped in fear, but the eyes that watched him were as blue as
the skies over Caronne. The ragged dress did not hide the gentle curves
of her body, nor did the tear-streaked grime spoil the lilt of her face.
"Why, 'tis springtime in here," cried Cappen, "and Primavera herself is
strewing flowers of love."

"What are you talking about, crazy man?" rumbled the troll-wife. She
turned to the girl. "Heap the fire, Hildigund, and set up the roasting
spit. Tonight I feast!"

"Truly I see heaven in female form before me," said Cappen.

The troll scratched her misshapen head.

"You must surely be from far away, moonstruck man," she said.

"Aye, from golden Croy am I wandered, drawn over dolorous seas and empty
wild lands by the fame of loveliness waiting here; and now that I have
seen you, my life is full." Cappen was looking at the girl as he spoke,
but he hoped the troll might take it as aimed her way.

"It will be fuller," grinned the monster. "Stuffed with hot coals while
yet you live." She glanced back at the girl. "What, are you not working
yet, you lazy tub of lard? Set up the spit, I said!"

The girl shuddered back against a heap of wood. "No," she whispered. "I
cannot--not ... not for a man."

"Can and will, my girl," said the troll, picking up a bone to throw at
her. The girl shrieked a little.

"No, no, sweet mother. I would not be so ungallant as to have beauty
toil for me." Cappen plucked at the troll's filthy dress. "It is not
meet--in two senses. I only came to beg a little fire; yet will I bear
away a greater fire within my heart."

"Fire in your guts, you mean! No man ever left me save as picked bones."

Cappen thought he heard a worried note in the animal growl. "Shall we
have music for the feast?" he asked mildly. He unslung the case of his
harp and took it out.

The troll-wife waved her fists in the air and danced with rage. "Are you
mad? I tell you, you are going to be eaten!"

The minstrel plucked a string on his harp. "This wet air has played the
devil with her tone," he murmured sadly.

The troll-wife roared wordlessly and lunged at him. Hildigund covered
her eyes. Cappen tuned his harp. A foot from his throat, the claws
stopped.

"Pray do not excite yourself, mother," said the bard. "I carry silver,
you know."

"What is that to me? If you think you have a charm which will turn me,
know that there is none. I've no fear of your metal!"

Cappen threw back his head and sang:

    "_A lovely lady full oft lies.
    The light that lies within her eyes
    And lies and lies, in no surprise.
    All her unkindness can devise
    To trouble hearts that seek the prize
    Which is herself, are angel lies--_"

"_Aaaarrrgh!_" It was like thunder drowning him out. The troll-wife
turned and went on all fours and poked up the fire with her nose.

Cappen stepped softly around her and touched the girl. She looked up
with a little whimper.

"You are Svearek's only daughter, are you not?" he whispered.

"Aye--" She bowed her head, a strengthless despair weighting it down.
"The troll stole me away three winters agone. It has tickled her to have
a princess for slave--but soon I will roast on her spit, even as ye,
brave man--"

"Ridiculous. So fair a lady is meant for another kind of, um, never
mind! Has she treated you very ill?"

"She beats me now and again--and I have been so lonely, naught here at
all save the troll-wife and I--" The small work-roughened hands clutched
desperately at his waist, and she buried her face against his breast.

"Can ye save us?" she gasped. "I fear 'tis for naught ye ventured yer
life, bravest of men. I fear we'll soon both sputter on the coals."

Cappen said nothing. If she wanted to think he had come especially to
rescue her, he would not be so ungallant to tell her otherwise.

The troll-wife's mouth gashed in a grin as she walked through the fire
to him. "There is a price," she said. "If you cannot tell me three
things about myself which are true beyond disproving, not courage nor
amulet nor the gods themselves may avail to keep that red head on your
shoulders."

Cappen clapped a hand to his sword. "Why, gladly," he said; this was a
rule of magic he had learned long ago, that three truths were the
needful armor to make any guardian charm work. "Imprimis, yours is the
ugliest nose I ever saw poking up a fire. Secundus, I was never in a
house I cared less to guest at. Tertius, ever among trolls you are
little liked, being one of the worst."

Hildigund moaned with terror as the monster swelled in rage. But there
was no movement. Only the leaping flames and the eddying smoke stirred.

Cappen's voice rang out, coldly: "Now the king lies on the sea, frozen
and wet, and I am come to fetch a brand for his fire. And I had best
also see his daughter home."

The troll shook her head, suddenly chuckling. "No. The brand you may
have, just to get you out of this cave, foulness; but the woman is in my
thrall until a man sleeps with her--here--for a night. And if he does, I
may have him to break my fast in the morning!"

Cappen yawned mightily. "Thank you, mother. Your offer of a bed is most
welcome to these tired bones, and I accept gratefully."

"You will die tomorrow!" she raved. The ground shook under the huge
weight of her as she stamped. "Because of the three truths, I must let
you go tonight; but tomorrow I may do what I will!"

"Forget not my little friend, mother," said Cappen, and touched the cord
of the amulet.

"I tell you, silver has no use against me--"

Cappen sprawled on the floor and rippled fingers across his harp. "_A
lovely lady full oft lies--_"

The troll-wife turned from him in a rage. Hildigund ladled up some
broth, saying nothing, and Cappen ate it with pleasure, though it could
have used more seasoning.

After that he indited a sonnet to the princess, who regarded him
wide-eyed. The troll came back from a tunnel after he finished, and said
curtly: "This way." Cappen took the girl's hand and followed her into a
pitchy, reeking dark.

She plucked an arras aside to show a room which surprised him by being
hung with tapestries, lit with candles, and furnished with a fine broad
featherbed. "Sleep here tonight, if you dare," she growled. "And
tomorrow I shall eat you--and you, worthless lazy she-trash, will have
the hide flayed off your back!" She barked a laugh and left them.

Hildigund fell weeping on the mattress. Cappen let her cry herself out
while he undressed and got between the blankets. Drawing his sword, he
laid it carefully in the middle of the bed.

The girl looked at him through jumbled fair locks. "How can ye dare?"
she whispered. "One breath of fear, one moment's doubt, and the troll is
free to rend ye."

"Exactly." Cappen yawned. "Doubtless she hopes that fear will come to me
lying wakeful in the night. Wherefore 'tis but a question of going
gently to sleep. O Svearek, Torbek, and Beorna, could you but see how I
am resting now!"

"But ... the three truths ye gave her ... how knew ye...?"

"Oh, those. Well, see you, sweet lady, Primus and Secundus were my own
thoughts, and who is to disprove them? Tertius was also clear, since you
said there had been no company here in three years--yet are there many
trolls in these lands, ergo even they cannot stomach our gentle
hostess." Cappen watched her through heavy-lidded eyes.

She flushed deeply, blew out the candles, and he heard her slip off her
garment and get in with him. There was a long silence.

Then: "Are ye not--"

"Yes, fair one?" he muttered through his drowsiness.

"Are ye not ... well, I am here and ye are here and--"

"Fear not," he said. "I laid my sword between us. Sleep in peace."

"I ... would be glad--ye have come to deliver--"

"No, fair lady. No man of gentle breeding could so abuse his power.
Goodnight." He leaned over, brushing his lips gently across hers, and
lay down again.

"Ye are ... I never thought man could be so noble," she whispered.

Cappen mumbled something. As his soul spun into sleep, he chuckled.
Those unresting days and nights on the sea had not left him fit for that
kind of exercise. But, of course, if she wanted to think he was being
magnanimous, it could be useful later--

       *       *       *       *       *

He woke with a start and looked into the sputtering glare of a torch.
Its light wove across the crags and gullies of the troll-wife's face and
shimmered wetly off the great tusks in her mouth.

"Good morning, mother," said Cappen politely.

Hildigund thrust back a scream.

"Come and be eaten," said the troll-wife.

"No, thank you," said Cappen, regretfully but firmly. "'Twould be ill
for my health. No, I will but trouble you for a firebrand and then the
princess and I will be off."

"If you think that stupid bit of silver will protect you, think again,"
she snapped. "Your three sentences were all that saved you last night.
Now I hunger."

"Silver," said Cappen didactically, "is a certain shield against all
black magics. So the wizard told me, and he was such a nice
white-bearded old man I am sure even his attendant devils never lied.
Now please depart, mother, for modesty forbids me to dress before your
eyes."

The hideous face thrust close to his. He smiled dreamily and tweaked her
nose--hard.

She howled and flung the torch at him. Cappen caught it and stuffed it
into her mouth. She choked and ran from the room.

"A new sport--trollbaiting," said the bard gaily into the sudden
darkness. "Come, shall we not venture out?"

The girl trembled too much to move. He comforted her, absentmindedly,
and dressed in the dark, swearing at the clumsy leggings. When he left,
Hildigund put on her clothes and hurried after him.

The troll-wife squatted by the fire and glared at them as they went by.
Cappen hefted his sword and looked at her. "I do not love you," he said
mildly, and hewed out.

She backed away, shrieking as he slashed at her. In the end, she
crouched at the mouth of a tunnel, raging futilely. Cappen pricked her
with his blade.

"It is not worth my time to follow you down underground," he said, "but
if ever you trouble men again, I will hear of it and come and feed you
to my dogs. A piece at a time--a very small piece--do you understand?"

She snarled at him.

"An _extremely_ small piece," said Cappen amiably. "Have you heard me?"

Something broke in her. "Yes," she whimpered. He let her go, and she
scuttled from him like a rat.

He remembered the firewood and took an armful; on the way, he
thoughtfully picked up a few jeweled rings which he didn't think she
would be needing and stuck them in his pouch. Then he led the girl
outside.

The wind had laid itself, a clear frosty morning glittered on the sea
and the longship was a distant sliver against white-capped blueness. The
minstrel groaned. "What a distance to row! Oh, well--"

       *       *       *       *       *

They were at sea before Hildigund spoke. Awe was in the eyes that
watched him. "No man could be so brave," she murmured. "Are ye a god?"

"Not quite," said Cappen. "No, most beautiful one, modesty grips my
tongue. 'Twas but that I had the silver and was therefore proof against
her sorcery."

"But the silver was no help!" she cried.

Cappen's oar caught a crab. "What?" he yelled.

"No--no--why, she told ye so her own self--"

"I thought she lied. I _know_ the silver guards against--"

"But she used no magic! Trolls have but their own strength!"

Cappen sagged in his seat. For a moment he thought he was going to
faint. Then only his lack of fear had armored him; and if he had known
the truth, that would not have lasted a minute.

He laughed shakily. Another score for his doubts about the overall value
of truth!

The longship's oars bit water and approached him. Indignant voices
asking why he had been so long on his errand faded when his passenger
was seen. And Svearek the king wept as he took his daughter back into
his arms.

The hard brown face was still blurred with tears when he looked at the
minstrel, but the return of his old self was there too. "What ye have
done, Cappen Varra of Croy, is what no other man in the world could have
done."

"Aye--aye--" The rough northern voices held adoration as the warriors
crowded around the slim red-haired figure.

"Ye shall have her whom ye saved to wife," said Svearek, "and when I die
ye shall rule all Norren."

Cappen swayed and clutched the rail.

Three nights later he slipped away from their shore camp and turned his
face southward.




Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from _Fantastic Universe_ January 1957.
    Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed. Minor spelling and
    typographical errors have been corrected without note.





End of Project Gutenberg's The Valor of Cappen Varra, by Poul William Anderson

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE VALOR OF CAPPEN VARRA ***

***** This file should be named 29542.txt or 29542.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/9/5/4/29542/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
