The Project Gutenberg EBook of George Loves Gistla, by James McKimmey

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: George Loves Gistla

Author: James McKimmey

Release Date: August 2, 2009 [EBook #29578]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GEORGE LOVES GISTLA ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









[Illustration]


 GEORGE
 LOVES
 GISTLA

By JAMES McKIMMEY, Jr.


    _"Why don't you find yourself some nice little American girl," his
    father had often repeated. But George was on Venus ... and he loved
    pale green skin ... and globular heads and most of all, George loved
    Gistla._


George Kenington was sixteen, and, as he told himself, someone who was
sixteen knew more about love than someone who was, say, forty-two. Like
his father, for instance. A whole lot more probably. When you were
forty-two, you got narrow-minded and nervous and angry. You said this is
this, and that is that, and there is nothing else. When someone thought
and felt and talked that way, George thought bitterly, there was not
enough room inside that person to know what it was like, loving a
Venusian.

But George knew. He knew very well.

Her name was Gistla. She was not pretty in standards of American
colonists. She had the pale greenish Venusian skin, and she was too
short and rather thick. Her face, of course, was not an American face.
It was the face of native Venus. Round and smooth, with the large
lidless eyes. There were no visible ears and a lack of hair strengthened
the globular look of her head.

But she was a person. The beauty was inside of her. Did you have to
point to a girl's face and say, "Here is where the nose should be, here
is where the ears should be?" Did you have to measure the width between
eyes and test the color of the skin? Did you have to check the size of
the teeth and the existence of hair? Was all of this necessary to
understand what was _inside_ someone?

George snapped a leaf from an overhanging vine and threw it angrily to
the ground. He was walking along a thin path that led from the colony to
the tangled hills beyond, where hues of red and yellow and purple
reflected like bold sweeps of watercolor. In a moment he would see
Gistla, and with the color before his eyes and the sweet perfume of the
flowers in his lungs, he felt again the familiar rise of excitement.

George had not always lived on Venus. The Colony was very new. By 2022,
most of the Earth countries had sent colonizers to Mars. But as yet, in
June of that year, Venus had been touched by only the sparsest invasion
of American civilization. George had arrived just three years ago, when
his father had been appointed Secretary of the colonizing unit.

And that was the whole trouble, really. Father was the Secretary, Mother
was the Secretary's wife, Sister was the daughter of the Secretary.
Everybody was wrapped up in it. Except George.

George loved Gistla.

"Why don't you find yourself some nice little American girl?" his father
had said. "Say like Henry Farrel's little daughter?"

Henry Farrel's little daughter was a sweet sickening girl with a nasty
temper and a nasty tongue. Her father was Governor of the Colony. She
told you about it all the time.

"Or," his father had told him, "why not little what's-her-name, Doug
Brentwood's daughter?"

Little what's-her-name's father was the President of the Council. "My
father is President of the Council," she said. Over and over, as though
in a settlement the size of the Colony, there would be anyone who
wouldn't know her father was the President of the Council.

It was all a very tight and careful circle, chosen on Earth with a great
deal of "common sense."

There were the ordinary settlers, of course. They had daughters. Some of
them were very pretty and long-limbed. And George had thought about
that.

Certainly there wasn't a decent-looking girl in the whole Governing
circle, and the sight of a girl with flashing eyes and a nice red mouth,
who was shaped a little like something besides a tree stump, was indeed
an exciting sight.

But there were limitations to the settler girls.

They had no background to speak of, and though that didn't make any
difference, George assured himself, they knew nothing about art, music,
poetry, or anything really worth while. And, too, while George's father
had said, "Now, George, we're all one here. Each of us is as good as
another. Joe Finch, who cares for the flowers outside, is every bit as
good a man as I am"--still George knew, if he told his parents he was
going to marry Joe Finch's daughter someday, there would be hell to pay.

So as long as the restrictions had been bound around him, there was no
reason to go just half-way. George was not an ordinary boy. He did
things in extreme. He was now in love with a Venusian girl, and his
family was already starting to make him pay.

       *       *       *       *       *

George turned off the path, just beyond an arch of thick purple-green
vines that always reminded him of a gate to a garden. There was a quiet
simplicity to this small clearing where he and Gistla met. There was an
aloneness to it, and only the sound of the flat shiny leaves sliding
together and the high, trilling sound of the small Venusian birds broke
the peaceful silence. They had always met here, nowhere else.

Now, as George found himself in the clearing, he began to wonder what
Gistla would say or do when he told her he was taking her home to meet
his family. It had been a sudden decision, brought out of anger and
indignation.

George sat down upon the flat hollow of a large vine. The sky was murky
as usual, but the soft warm feel and smell of the growth around him,
with its color and brightness, made up for a sunless sky.

As he waited, he remembered what his mother had said:

"Oh, George, you're really not serious about bringing a _Venusian_ into
our home!"

And his sister, Mari, had said, "My God!" Mari, who was eighteen, said
this to most anything.

But his father, eyes bright and alert, had said, "No, now if George
wants to bring one of these, ah, Venusians home with him, that's his
privilege. I think it would be very interesting."

George knew what his father meant by interesting.

Exposing Gistla to his family would result in deliberate sarcasm and
eye-squinting and barely hidden smiles. There would be pointed remarks
and direct insults. And when it was over, George knew, he would be
expected to see the error of his ways. He would then be expected to
forget about this odd creature and find himself a nice ignorant little
Colony girl, whose father was a member of the Governing circle.

"And to hell with that, too," George said.

"What?" George heard Gistla say. He turned quickly. She was standing at
the edge of the clearing, her round green eyes looking soft and serious.
She wore the usual gray cape that reached her ankles. Her voice was a
deep round sound, and there was hardly any accent in the words she had
learned so quickly since the Colony had begun.

"Talking to myself," George grinned. The old excitement was inside of
him. There was a kind of exotic quality in meeting Gistla that never
disappeared.

She crossed the clearing, not too gracefully, and touched her fingers
against his hand. This had been the extent of their physical expression
of love.

"It is nice to see you, George."

He noticed his feeling of pleasure when he heard her speak his name.
There was something about his own name being spoken by Gistla that had
always seemed even more strange than anything else.

She sat down beside him, and they looked at each other while the leaves
whispered around them and the birds fluttered and chirped. He discovered
again the feeling of rightness, sitting beside Gistla. There was a
solidity about her, a quiet maturity that he seemed able to feel in
himself only when he was with her. And that too was strange, because in
American terms of age, she was much younger than he.

Sitting, as they were doing, silent, watching each other, had been most
of their activity. You did not need to entertain Gistla with foolish
small-talk or exaggerated praising.

But right now he wanted to tell her quickly, to make sure that she would
feel the enthusiasm he had felt.

"Listen, Gistla," he said, while she watched him with her soft-looking
round eyes. "I want you to come with me today to meet my family."

His words seemed to have an odd ring to them, and George waited tensely
until he was sure that she was not shocked or angry about what he had
just said.

She sat silently for a moment and then she said, "Do you think that is
right for me to do, George?"

"Sure it is! Why not? They know about you and me. They know we're in
love."

"Love--" She spoke the word as though it were an indefinite, elusive
thing that you could not offer as reason for doing anything.

Gistla was very wise, George realized, but this was a time for
enthusiasm, a time to strengthen their own relationship in this world.

"Say you will!" George said.

"Do you want me to?"

"Well, sure I do. What did you think?"

She held her hands in her lap quietly. They were not unlike his own,
George observed, except for the extreme smallness and the color.

"I do not think it will be nice for you or them," she said.

"Ah, listen, Gistla. Don't talk that way. It'll be fine!" But he knew
that he was not deceiving her with the lightness he tried to put into
his voice.

Then, although she had never done it before, she reached out and touched
his cheek. George had grown used to the emotions that reflected on her
face, and he knew she was suddenly very sad. "Yes, George," she said. "I
will go with you to meet your family." And she said it as though she
were telling him good-by.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was no better than he had expected. It was worse. Much worse. And he
was growing angrier by the moment. They were all seated in the
rock-walled patio behind the large white house. Gistla sat beside him,
looking very small and frightened and very different. And it was that
obvious difference that George had hoped everyone might ignore. But
instead, each of them, his father, his mother, his sister, appeared to
be trying to make it even more obvious.

The first strain, when everyone had sat there staring at Gistla as
though she were something behind a cage, had passed. But now his parents
and sister were moving in a new direction. They had relaxed, having
found control of the situation, and they were cutting her to pieces.

"Tell me," his sister was saying, her eyes dancing slyly, "don't you
people have some very strange tricks you can do?"

George tightened his fingers against his palms. He heard Gistla answer,
"Tricks?"

"Yes." His sister's white smile shined. "You know, like making things
disappear, things like that."

"My father," Gistla said seriously, "can do very wonderful things. He is
a musician."

George's father leaned forward, blinking amusedly. "Really? What does he
play?"

"Play?" asked Gistla.

"Yes. He's a musician. He must play something, some kind of instrument."

Gistla looked at George, but George did not know what to say. He wished
he had never tried to do this. He wished he had just ignored his family
and gone on loving Gistla in the privacy of his own emotions.

"Well, now," Mr. Kenington was saying rather impatiently. "Does he play
something like our violin or clarinet or oboe, or what?" His father,
George had noticed, was becoming impatient more frequently since he had
become Secretary. The Secretarial post was very important.

"He does not play anything," Gistla said carefully. "He just ... makes
the music and I hear it."

"But how?" Mr. Kenington insisted. "What does he play the music _on_? He
certainly can't make the music without using something to make it on."

Gistla glanced again at George and he said quickly, "It's pretty hard to
understand, Father. I don't think--"

"No, now don't interrupt just now, son. This is very interesting. We'd
like to know what she's talking about."

Mrs. Kenington spoke for the first time. "Are you just making this up?"

It was like a whip coming through the air. His mother sat there,
blinking, the suspicion and distrust she felt for this creature showing
in her eyes and upon her mouth and even in the way she was sitting.

"Now, Lois," Mr. Kenington said, as though he really sympathized with
what she had said, believing that not only Gistla was making it up, but
that all of her race made everything up. But he was stubborn. "Come now,
tell us. Tell us what you mean."

Gistla's smooth head turned this way and that. "Sometimes," she said
slowly, "my father journeys to other places, and if he cannot return
soon, he sends me music. When the light has gone from the day and I am
alone, I hear it."

"You mean he sends it by wires or by radio?" Mr. Kenington asked with
surprise.

"No."

"Now, wait a minute," George's sister leaned forward, smiling. "You just
hear this music, is that right? Up here." She tapped her forehead.

"Yes," said Gistla.

"My God," George's sister said. She looked at her parents, arching her
eyebrows.

"You shouldn't make things up," George's mother said.

"Mother," George said, his face coloring. "She's not making things up!"

"Just a moment, son," Mr. Kenington said crisply. "You don't want to
talk to your mother in that tone."

"No, but, my God," George's sister went on. "Imagine. No wires, no
loudspeakers, just ... up here." She tapped her forehead again.

"I'm not talking to my mother in any tone at all," George said,
disregarding his sister.

"Well, she shouldn't lie," said Mrs. Kenington with conviction.

George stood up. "She is not lying, Mother."

"I forbid you to argue with your mother that way, George," said Mr.
Kenington.

"I mean, my God," said George's sister happily. "This is an innovation!
Can you imagine? Gistla, or whatever your name is, could your father
make his music sometime when we have a dance?"

Gistla's eyes were hurt and she was, George knew, confused. She shook
her head.

Mrs. Kenington was blinking accusingly. "Do they teach you to make these
things up? Is that what they teach you at home?"

"Mother, will you please?" George said. "Why must you talk to her that
way?"

Mr. Kenington stood up quickly. "I did not raise my son to show an
attitude like that to his mother."

"But she isn't making this up," George said. "You asked her to tell you
and she--"

George's sister had jumped out of her chair and she was waltzing over
the patio. She began humming as she danced. "Can't you just see it?
Everyone dancing around, listening to music in their heads? No orchestra
or records or anything?"

Mr. Kenington stood very tall. "Are you taking the word of your mother,
or this ... this ..." He motioned curtly at Gistla.

George licked his lips, looking defensively at each one of his family.
"It isn't a matter of taking anyone's word at all. It's just something
we don't understand."

George's sister whirled and then suddenly she stopped, putting her hand
against her mouth. "My God, what if everyone got the music different? I
mean, does everyone hear the same music, dear? Because if they didn't,
what a mess!" She began dancing again, her skirt swirling over the
bricks of the patio.

Mr. Kenington's voice was louder. "I think we understand, all right,
George. There isn't anything about this we don't understand!"

George's lips were paling.

His sister dipped and turned. "We could call it a Music In The Head
dance. Everybody brings his own head!" She laughed merrily. "My God!"

George noticed then that Gistla was disappearing out of the rear gate.
He stood, clenching his fists and glaring at his family. His sister had
stopped dancing but she was still laughing.

"I didn't think, George," his mother said resolutely, "that you were
going to invite someone who lied."

George turned and ran after Gistla.

       *       *       *       *       *

They sat again in the clearing. George could still feel the anger
churning inside him, and he held his hands together so tightly that his
fingers began to ache. "I hate them for that," he said.

Gistla touched his arm. "No, George. It is all right. It is the way
things are."

"But they don't need to be! My family did that on purpose."

"They just don't understand. My race is very different from yours and it
seems strange."

"So does mine," George said, standing and beginning to pace back and
forth.

It had been what he really had expected. But still he had hoped,
somehow, that his family might have understood. He looked at Gistla,
sitting quietly, her large eyes watching him. He knew he loved her very
much just then, more in fact than he ever had before, because she had
been refused by his family.

"Listen, Gistla," he said, kneeling on the grass in front of her. "It
won't make any difference what anyone thinks or does or says. I love
you, and I'll go on loving you. We'll build our own life the way we want
it."

She shook her head slowly. "No, George. It does make a difference. You
cannot forget your family or your people. That is important to you. I
would only hurt you."

"Do you love me?"

"Yes."

"Then that's all that's important to me. Not what anyone thinks. Not
what my sister thinks or my father or my mother."

"We are different, you and I." She sat unmoving, her smooth face
unchanging. "My people seem strange to yours because we can do things
your people do not understand. We seem strange because we look
differently, we act differently, we value things differently."

"My values are the same as yours," George pleaded. "I love you because
of what you are, not because of some kind of stupid chart for physical
beauty, not because ..."

"George," she said. "Look at me."

George met her eyes suddenly, caught by the urgency in her voice. And
slowly, in front of his eyes, she changed. Her features shifted, until
George saw a beautiful young girl with pink white skin and red lips. He
saw shining blue eyes and shimmering golden hair that fell over her
shoulders. Gistla's body had changed to a lithe, smooth figure that
revealed its contours beneath the gray cape.

He caught his breath and wiped a hand at his eyes.

"What you see," said Gistla softly, "is an illusion. You see what would
be in your values, a beautiful girl."

George opened his mouth but was unable to find his voice.

"Do not be afraid, George. Beneath the illusion of your senses, I am
still Gistla. I am still a Venusian."

George reached out and touched his fingers against a white arm and a
white shoulder bared by the cape. He touched the golden hair. "Gistla,"
he said, amazed. "You're beautiful."

"Yes," she said sadly.

"But--you really are! Your hair and your eyes and your mouth. How did
you do it?"

She shook her head to show its unimportance. "It is something--like your
hypnotism."

George raised himself from his knees and sat beside her. "But I can't
believe it!"

"You can see, you can feel."

"Yes," George said. "Yes."

"You are happy with me this way, aren't you, George?"

"But you're so beautiful."

The golden-haired girl nodded her head, and the shining blue eyes
watched him carefully.

"You see then," Gistla said. "It does make a difference. You love me
more this way."

"No," George said, touching her hair again. "I don't love you more, but
if you can do this, why then, we'll have no more worries. Don't you
see?"

"I think so," Gistla said, looking away.

George's voice was excited, and his eyes darted over her face and body.
"Would other people see you as I do?"

"If I wished, yes."

"Then you see? It's all changed! You are what I see. Golden-haired and
pale-skinned--"

"I am still Gistla. You would always know that. Would you love something
that is not real, just because you see it with your eyes?"

       *       *       *       *       *

"But I can feel that you're real," George said, putting his hands on her
shoulders. He pulled her closer and kissed her hair. "You're Gistla," he
said, "and you're beautiful." He tipped her face up to his and bent to
kiss her mouth.

His lips touched smooth green skin and he looked into Gistla's large
round lidless eyes. He recoiled as though he had been touched by fire.

She watched him as he wiped a trembling hand across his chest, and her
globular head glistened in the reflection of the late sun.

She nodded. "When you see what I really am, the difference _is_
important." She gathered her cloak around her and stood up.

George felt the flush of his face, and he could not meet her eyes. He
heard her walk a few steps away.

"Good-by, George," she said.

He jumped up quickly. "That wasn't fair."

"No," she said slowly, "but it proved the value of things."

"It wasn't fair," George repeated. "And it didn't prove anything."

"I think it did," she said, moving away.

"No, listen, Gistla," he said. "You can't judge anything by what I did
or said. We are different, in a physical sense, but that doesn't really
matter. If a golden-haired girl materializes in front of my eyes, you
can't blame me for what my emotions did. It's still you I love. Not the
color of your skin or the shape of your mouth. But you and what you or I
or anybody else looks like isn't important!"

He followed her and caught her arm. She turned to face him. "You can say
that," she said. "Your words tell me that and your eyes, but I know it
isn't true."

The embarrassment was still inside him, but the way she denied him made
him want her more than ever. He held to her arm and then he said,
"Gistla, could you change me? I mean, so that other people, even I,
would see me as they see you--as a Venusian?"

She stood very still, staring at him.

"Could you?" he asked.

"Yes."

"Then do it, Gistla. I'll prove to you that nothing is important but you
and me. I'll be a Venusian, like you are. I'll go back to my family as a
Venusian and I'll take you with me. I'll prove that neither they nor
anybody else makes any difference in how I love you!"

Gistla watched him solemnly. Finally she said, "Would you really do
that?"

"Yes," he said quickly, "Yes."

"I love you, George," she said in her deep round voice.

He lifted his hands to touch her face and he found that his skin had
turned to pale green. He touched his own face, and he knew that if he
looked into a mirror he would see a round smooth head with large lidless
eyes.

"Is that what you wanted?" she asked.

"Yes," he said stubbornly. "That's what I wanted." He stood there for a
long time, trying to become used to it, fighting the fear that ran
through him every time he looked at his hands or touched his head.
Finally he said, quietly, "Let's go meet my family."

       *       *       *       *       *

As they drew near the house, he knew his family was still in the patio.
He could hear the voices of his mother and father and the high, piercing
laughter of his sister.

"And, my God," he heard his sister say, "did you see the way those
horrible eyes looked at you? What ever gets into George?"

"Dear, dear, dear," he heard his mother say.

Gistla was looking at him. "You do not have to do this."

"Yes," he said, feeling his heart jump. "I do."

He took her hand and they walked to the gate of the patio. He stood
there, feeling Gistla's hand tighten about his own. And as he said,
"Hello, everybody," he felt his breath shorten as though he had suddenly
gotten stage fright.

He saw his father turn around. "What's this?" Mr. Kenington said,
frowning.

"Hello, Father," George said.

"_Father_," Mr. Kenington repeated. "What are you doing in this patio?"

"I brought Gistla back."

"So I see," said Mr. Kenington, his eyes narrow as he looked at Gistla.
"Where's George?"

"I'm George."

"I'm not in the mood for joking with Venusians," his father snapped.
"What made you think you could come in here like this?"

Gistla's hand tightened again. "Try to understand," George said.
"Gistla--"

"What's going on?" his sister interrupted.

"Gistla, or whatever her name is," Mr. Kenington said, "has brought a
friend of hers, another Venusian." He said the word, Venusian, as though
it were a curse or a filthy word.

"My God," said his sister, squinting at them.

Mrs. Kenington leaned over in her chair, peering. "Tell them not to come
into the patio, Harry," she said to her husband.

"Listen, Father," George said, feeling the panic begin. "Gistla changed
my appearance, so that I seem to look like a Venusian. I came here to
tell you that it doesn't make any difference what I look like, whether I
look like a Venusian or a leaf on a vine or anything else. I still love
her, and it doesn't make any difference." He heard his voice rising and
becoming louder.

"My God," said his sister, giggling. "More black magic. Can you make
music?" she asked George.

"Harry," his mother said. "They frighten me. Can't you make them keep
off the patio?"

"Mother--" George began.

"Now see here," Mr. Kenington growled. "You know we don't allow
Venusians around here. I'd advise you to get out of here. Quick!"

"Why does he keep calling you father and mother?" his sister asked.
"Isn't that queer, how he keeps doing that? Make some music," she said
to George.

George could see the hatred in his father's eyes and in his mother's.
And behind his sister's sarcastic smile, he could see the hatred there,
too. He felt himself getting more tense, and the panic raced through
him.

"Listen," he shouted. "I'm George, don't you understand? George!"

"I don't want to tell you again," his father said, his face very red. "I
don't know what your little game is, but it isn't coming off, and so
I'll tell you just this one time. You get the hell off this property, or
I'll ..."

"Listen," George yelled. "I'm _GEORGE_! Don't you understand?"

His father's lips thinned to a white line, and he began shouting for Joe
Finch, the gardener.

George knew what he should have done then, he should have taken Gistla
and gone. He should have walked with her, hand in hand, down the road
and away from there. But instead, the panic made his heart pound and he
saw the hatred all around him. He couldn't help it when he shouted to
her, "Gistla! For God's sake, change me back! Right now! Gistla!"

He stood there, breathing hard, his muscles knotted like steel, while
she stared at him, looking into his eyes.

Suddenly, he heard his father gasp and say, "_George!_"

He looked at his hands and they were white and he felt of his face and
it was his own. He saw his sister's hand against her mouth, and his
father stared at him with unbelieving eyes. His mother had gotten up and
was coming over to him, her eyes blinking. "George," she said, "what did
they do to you?" She patted his shoulder, her hands fluttering like bird
wings.

He turned back to Gistla and she was gone. Beyond the gate now, he knew,
and walking slowly, alone, down the road. Only this time he would not go
after her. He couldn't. And as he stood there, feeling his mother's hand
patting his shoulder, hearing his sister say, "My God," seeing his
father shake his head slowly, he felt very young and at the same time,
very old, and he wanted to cry.




Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from _Planet Stories_ January 1954.
    Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed. Minor spelling and
    typographical errors have been corrected without note.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of George Loves Gistla, by James McKimmey

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GEORGE LOVES GISTLA ***

***** This file should be named 29578.txt or 29578.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/9/5/7/29578/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
