The Project Gutenberg EBook of Teething Ring, by James Causey

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Teething Ring

Author: James Causey

Illustrator: Dick Francis

Release Date: August 6, 2009 [EBook #29625]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TEETHING RING ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









Teething Ring

By JAMES CAUSEY

[Illustration: Illustrated by DICK FRANCIS]


 _Anyone can make an error, but the higher the
 society ... the more disastrous the mistake!_


Half an hour before, while she had been engrossed in the current soap
opera and Harry Junior was screaming in his crib, Melinda would
naturally have slammed the front door in the little man's face. However,
when the bell rang, she was wearing her new Chinese red housecoat, had
just lustered her nails to a blinding scarlet, and Harry Junior was
sleeping like an angel.

Yawning, Melinda answered the door and the little man said, beaming,
"Excellent day. I have geegaws for information."

Melinda did not quite recoil. He was perhaps five feet tall, with a
gleaming hairless scalp and a young-old face. He wore a plain gray
tunic, and a peddler's tray hung from his thin shoulders.

"Don't want any," Melinda stated flatly.

"_Please._" He had great, beseeching amber eyes. "They all say that. I
haven't much time. I must be back at the University by noon."

"You working your way through college?"

He brightened. "Yes. I suppose you could call it that. Alien
anthropology major."

Melinda softened. The initiations those frats pulled nowadays--shaving
the poor guy's head, eating goldfish--it was criminal.

"Well?" she asked grudgingly. "What's in the tray?"

"Flanglers," said the little man eagerly. "Oscilloscopes. Portable
force-field generators. A neural distorter." Melinda's face was blank.
The little man frowned. "You use them, of course? This _is_ a Class IV
culture?" Melinda essayed a weak shrug and the little man sighed with
relief. His eyes fled past her to the blank screen of the TV set. "Ah, a
monitor." He smiled. "For a moment I was afraid--May I come in?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Melinda shrugged, opened the door. This might be interesting, like a
vacuum-cleaner salesman who had cleaned her drapes last week for free.
And Kitty Kyle Battles Life wouldn't be on for almost an hour.

"My name is Porteous," said the little man with an eager smile. "I'm
doing a thematic on Class IV cultures." He whipped out a stylus, began
jotting down notes. The TV set fascinated him.

"It's turned off right now," Melinda said.

Porteous's eyes widened impossibly. "You mean," he whispered in horror,
"that you're exercising Class V privileges? This is terribly confusing.
I get doors slammed in my face, when Class Fours are supposed to have a
splendid gregarian quotient--you _do_ have atomic power, don't you?"

"Oh, sure," said Melinda uncomfortably. This wasn't going to be much
fun.

"Space travel?" The little face was intent, sharp.

"Well," Melinda yawned, looking at the blank screen, "they've got Space
Patrol, Space Cadet, Tales of Tomorrow ..."

"Excellent. Rocket ships or force-fields?" Melinda blinked. "Does your
husband own one?" Melinda shook her blonde head helplessly. "What are
your economic circumstances?"

Melinda took a deep rasping breath, said, "Listen, mister, is this a
demonstration or a quiz program?"

"Oh, my excuse. Demonstration, certainly. You will not mind the
questions?"

"Questions?" There was an ominous glint in Melinda's blue eyes.

"Your delightful primitive customs, art-forms, personal habits--"

"Look," Melinda said, crimsoning. "This is a respectable neighborhood,
and I'm not answering any Kinsey report, understand?"

The little man nodded, scribbling. "Personal habits are tabu? I so
regret. The demonstration." He waved grandly at the tray. "Anti-grav
sandals? A portable solar converter? Apologizing for this miserable
selection, but on Capella they told me--" He followed Melinda's
entranced gaze, selected a tiny green vial. "This is merely a
regenerative solution. You appear to have no cuts or bruises."

"Oh," said Melinda nastily. "Cures warts, cancer, grows hair, I
suppose."

Porteous brightened. "Of course. I see you can scan. Amazing." He
scribbled further with his stylus, glanced up, blinked at the obvious
scorn on Melinda's face. "Here. Try it."

"You try it." Now watch him squirm!

Porteous hesitated. "Would you like me to grow an extra finger, hair--"

"Grow some hair." Melinda tried not to smile.

The little man unstopped the vial, poured a shimmering green drop on his
wrist, frowning.

"Must concentrate," he said. "Thorium base, suspended solution. Really
jolts the endocrines, complete control ... see?"

Melinda's jaw dropped. She stared at the tiny tuft of hair which had
sprouted on that bare wrist. She was thinking abruptly, unhappily, about
that chignon she had bought yesterday. They had let her buy that for
eight dollars when with this stuff she could have a natural one.

"How much?" she inquired cautiously.

"A half hour of your time only," said Porteous.

Melinda grasped the vial firmly, settled down on the sofa with one leg
tucked carefully under her.

"Okay, shoot. But nothing personal."

       *       *       *       *       *

Porteous was delighted. He asked a multitude of questions, most of them
pointless, some naive, and Melinda dug into her infinitesimal fund of
knowledge and gave. The little man scribbled furiously, clucking like a
gravid hen.

"You mean," he asked in amazement, "that you live in these primitive
huts of your own volition?"

"It's a G.I. housing project," Melinda said, ashamed.

"Astonishing." He wrote: _Feudal anachronisms and atomic power, side by
side. Class Fours periodically "rough it" in back-to-nature movements._

Harry Junior chose that moment to begin screaming for his lunch.
Porteous sat, trembling. "Is that a Security Alarm?"

"My son," said Melinda despondently, and went into the nursery.

Porteous followed, and watched the ululating child with some
trepidation. "Newborn?"

"Eighteen months," said Melinda stiffly, changing diapers. "He's cutting
teeth."

Porteous shuddered. "What a pity. Obviously atavistic. Wouldn't the
creche accept him? You shouldn't have to keep him here."

"I keep after Harry to get a maid, but he says we can't afford one."

"Manifestly insecure," muttered the little man, studying Harry Junior.
"Definite paranoid tendencies."

"He was two weeks premature," volunteered Melinda. "He's real
sensitive."

"I know just the thing," Porteous said happily. "Here." He dipped into
the glittering litter on the tray and handed Harry Junior a translucent
prism. "A neural distorter. We use it to train regressives on Rigel Two.
It might be of assistance."

Melinda eyed the thing doubtfully. Harry Junior was peering into the
shifting crystal depths with a somewhat strained expression.

"Speeds up the neural flow," explained the little man proudly. "Helps
tap the unused eighty per cent. The pre-symptomatic memory is
unaffected, due to automatic cerebral lapse in case of overload. I'm
afraid it won't do much more than cube his present IQ, and an
intelligent idiot is still an idiot, but--"

"How dare you?" Melinda's eyes flashed. "My son is _not_ an idiot! You
get out of here this minute and take your--things with you." As she
reached for the prism, Harry Junior squalled. Melinda relented. "Here,"
she said angrily, fumbling with her purse. "How much are they?"

"Medium of exchange?" Porteous rubbed his bald skull. "Oh, I really
shouldn't--but it'll make such a wonderful addendum to the chapter on
malignant primitives. What is your smallest denomination?"

"Is a dollar okay?" Melinda was hopeful.

Porteous was pleased with the picture of George Washington. He turned
the bill over and over in his fingers, at last bowed low and formally,
apologized for any tabu violations, and left via the front door.

"Crazy fraternities," muttered Melinda, turning on the TV set.

       *       *       *       *       *

Kitty Kyle was dull that morning. At length Melinda used some of the
liquid in the green vial on her eyelashes, was quite pleased at the
results, and hid the rest in the medicine cabinet.

Harry Junior was a model of docility the rest of that day. While Melinda
watched TV and munched chocolates, did and re-did her hair, Harry Junior
played quietly with the crystal prism.

Toward late afternoon, he crawled over to the bookcase, wrestled down
the encyclopedia and pawed through it, gurgling with delight. He
definitely, Melinda decided, would make a fine lawyer someday, not a
useless putterer like Big Harry, who worked all hours overtime in that
damned lab. She scowled as Harry Junior, bored with the encyclopedia,
began reaching for one of Big Harry's tomes on nuclear physics. One
putterer in the family was enough! But when she tried to take the book
away from him, Harry Junior howled so violently that she let well enough
alone.

At six-thirty, Big Harry called from the lab, with the usual despondent
message that he would not be home for supper. Melinda said a few
resigned things about cheerless dinners eaten alone, hinted darkly what
lonesome wives sometimes did for company, and Harry said he was very
sorry, but this might be _it_, and Melinda hung up on him in a temper.

Precisely fifteen minutes later, the doorbell rang. Melinda opened the
front door and gaped. This little man could have been Porteous's double,
except for the black metallic tunic, the glacial gray eyes.

"Mrs. Melinda Adams?" Even the voice was frigid.

"Y-Yes. Why--"

"Major Nord, Galactic Security." The little man bowed. "You were visited
early this morning by one Porteous." He spoke the name with a certain
disgust. "He left a neural distorter here. Correct?"

Melinda's nod was tremulous. Major Nord came quietly into the living
room, shut the door behind him. "My apologies, madam, for the intrusion.
Porteous mistook your world for a Class IV culture, instead of a Class
VII. Here--" He handed her the crumpled dollar bill. "You may check the
serial number. The distorter, please."

       *       *       *       *       *

Melinda shrunk limply onto the sofa. "I don't understand," she said
painfully. "Was he a thief?"

"He was--careless about his spatial coordinates." Major Nord's teeth
showed in the faintest of smiles. "He has been corrected. Where is it?"

"Now look," said Melinda with some asperity. "That thing's kept Harry
Junior quiet all day. I bought it in good faith, and it's not my
fault--say, have you got a warrant?"

"Madam," said the Major with dignity, "I dislike violating local tabus,
but must I explain the impact of a neural distorter on a backwater
culture? What if your Neanderthal had been given atomic blasters? Where
would you have been today? Swinging through trees, no doubt. What if
your Hitler had force-fields?" He exhaled. "Where is your son?"

In the nursery, Harry Junior was contentedly playing with his blocks.
The prism lay glinting in the corner.

Major Nord picked it up carefully, scrutinized Harry Junior. His voice
was very soft.

"You said he was--playing with it?"

Some vestigial maternal instinct prompted Melinda to shake her head
vigorously. The little man stared hard at Harry Junior, who began
whimpering. Trembling, Melinda scooped up Harry Junior.

"Is _that_ all you have to do--run around frightening women and
children? Take your old distorter and get out. Leave decent people
alone!"

Major Nord frowned. If only he could be sure. He peered stonily at Harry
Junior, murmured, "Definite egomania. It doesn't seem to have affected
him. Strange."

"Do you want me to scream?" Melinda demanded.

Major Nord sighed. He bowed to Melinda, went out, closed the door,
touched a tiny stud on his tunic, and vanished.

"The manners of some people," Melinda said to Harry Junior. She was
relieved that the Major had not asked for the green vial.

Harry Junior also looked relieved, although for quite a different
reason.

       *       *       *       *       *

Big Harry arrived home a little after eleven. There were small worry
creases about his mouth and forehead, and the leaden cast of defeat in
his eyes. He went into the bedroom and Melinda sleepily told him about
the little man working his way through college by peddling silly goods,
and about that rude cop named Nord, and Harry said that was simply
astonishing and Melinda said, "Harry, you had a drink!"

"I had two drinks," Harry told her owlishly. "You married a failure,
dear. Part of the experimental model vaporized, _wooosh_, just like
that. On paper it looked so good--"

Melinda had heard it all before. She asked him to see if Harry Junior
was covered, and Big Harry went unsteadily into the nursery, sat down by
his son's crib.

"Poor little guy," he mused. "Your old man's a bum, a useless tinker. He
thought he could send Man to the stars on a string of helium nuclei. Oh,
he was smart. Thought of everything. Auxiliary jets to kick off the
negative charge, bigger mercury vapor banks--a fine straight thrust of
positive Alpha particles." He hiccuped, put his face in his hands.

"Didn't you ever stop to think that a few air molecules could defocus
the stream? Try a vacuum, stupid."

Big Harry stood up.

"Did you say something, son?"

"Gurfle," said Harry Junior.

Big Harry reeled into the living room like a somnambulist.

He got pencil and paper, began jotting frantic formulae. Presently he
called a cab and raced back to the laboratory.

       *       *       *       *       *

Melinda was dreaming about little bald men with diamond-studded trays.
They were chasing her, they kept pelting her with rubies and emeralds,
all they wanted was to ask questions, but she kept running, Harry Junior
clasped tightly in her arms. Now they were ringing alarm bells. The
bells kept ringing and she groaned, sat up in bed, and seized the
telephone.

"Darling." Big Harry's voice shook. "I've got it! More auxiliary
shielding plus a vacuum. We'll be rich!"

"That's just fine," said Melinda crossly. "You woke the baby."

Harry Junior was sobbing bitterly into his pillow. He was sick with
disappointment. Even the most favorable extrapolation showed it would
take him nineteen years to become master of the world.

An eternity. Nineteen years!

                                                        --JAMES CAUSEY




Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from _Galaxy Science Fiction_ January 1953.
    Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed. Minor spelling and
    typographical errors have been corrected without note.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Teething Ring, by James Causey

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TEETHING RING ***

***** This file should be named 29625.txt or 29625.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/9/6/2/29625/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
