The Project Gutenberg EBook of Competition, by James Causey

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Competition

Author: James Causey

Illustrator: Stone

Release Date: August 7, 2009 [EBook #29632]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK COMPETITION ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









COMPETITION

By JAMES CAUSEY


 _They would learn what caused
 the murderous disease--if it
 was the last thing they did!_


GRETA

_January 18, Earth Time_

I wish Max would treat me like a _woman_.

An hour ago, at dinner, John Armitage proposed a toast, especially for
my benefit. He loves to play the gallant. Big man, silver mane, very
blue eyes, a porcelain smile. The head of WSC, the perfect example of
the politician-scientist.

"To the colony," he announced, raising his glass. "May Epsilon love them
and keep them. May it only be transmittal trouble."

"Amen," Max said.

We drank. Taylor Bishop put down his glass precisely. Bishop is a gray
little man with a diffident voice that belies his reputation as the best
biochemist in the system. "Has Farragut hinted otherwise?" he asked
mildly.

Armitage frowned. "It would be scarcely prudent for Senator Farragut to
alarm the populace with disaster rumors."

Bishop looked at him out of his pale eyes. "Besides, it's an election
year."

The silence was suddenly ugly.

Then Armitage chuckled. "All right," he said. "So the Senator wants to
be a national hero. The fact still remains that Epsilon had better be
habitable or Pan-Asia will scream we're hogging it. They want war
anyway. Within a month--boom."

       *       *       *       *       *

For a moment, I was afraid he was going to make a speech about Earth's
suffocating billions, the screaming tension of the cold war, and the
sacred necessity of Our Mission. If he had, I'd have gotten the weeping
shrieks. Some responsibilities are too great to think about. But instead
he winked at me. For the first time, I began to realize why Armitage was
the Director of the Scientists' World Council.

"Hypothesis, Greta," he said. "Epsilon is probably a paradise. Why
should the test colony let the rest of the world in on it? They're being
selfish."

I giggled. We relaxed.

After supper, Armitage played chess with Bishop while I followed Max
into the control room.

"Soon?" I said.

"Planetfall in eighteen hours, Doctor." He said it stiffly, busying
himself at the controls. Max is a small dark man with angry eyes and the
saddest mouth I've ever seen. He is also a fine pilot and magnificent
bacteriologist. I wanted to slap him. I hate these professional British
types that think a female biochemist is some sort of freak.

"Honestly," I said. "What do you think?"

"Disease," he said bitterly. "For the first six months they reported on
schedule, remember? A fine clean planet, no dominant life-forms, perfect
for immigration; unique, one world in a billion. Abruptly they stopped
sending. You figure it."

I thought about it.

"I read your thematic on Venusian viruses," he said abruptly. "Good
show. You should be an asset to us, Doctor."

"Thanks!" I snapped. I was so furious that I inadvertently looked into
the cabin viewplate.

Bishop had warned me. It takes years of deep-space time to enable a
person to stare at the naked Universe without screaming.

It got me. The crystal thunder of the stars, that horrible hungry
blackness. I remember I was sort of crying and fighting, then Max had me
by the shoulders, holding me gently. He was murmuring and stroking my
hair. After a time, I stopped whimpering.

[Illustration: Illustrated by STONE]

"Thanks," I whispered.

"You'd better get some sleep, Greta," he said.

I turned in.

I think I'm falling in love.

       *       *       *       *       *

_January 19_

Today we made planetfall. It took Max a few hours to home in on the test
colony ship. He finally found it, on the shore of an inland sea that
gleamed like wrinkled blue satin. For a time we cruised in widening
spirals, trying to detect some signs of life. There was nothing.

We finally landed. Max and Armitage donned spacesuits and went toward
the colony ship. They came back in a few hours, very pale.

"They're dead." Armitage's voice cracked as he came out of the airlock.
"All of them."

"Skeletons," Max said.

"How?" Bishop said.

Armitage's hands were shaking as he poured a drink. "Looks like civil
war."

"But there were a hundred of them," I whispered. "They were
_dedicated_--"

"I wonder," Bishop said thoughtfully. "White and brown and yellow.
Russian and British and French and German and Chinese and Spanish. They
were chosen for technical background rather than emotional stability."

"Rot!" Armitage said like drums beating. "It's some alien bug, some
toxin. We've got to isolate it, find an antibody."

He went to work.

       *       *       *       *       *

_January 22_

I'm scared.

It's taken three days to finalize the atmospheric tests. Oxygen,
nitrogen, helium, with trace gases. Those trace gases are stinkers.
Bishop discovered a new inert gas, heavier than Xenon. He's excited. I'm
currently checking stuff that looks like residual organic, and am not
too happy about it. Still, this atmosphere seems pure.

Armitage is chafing.

"It's in the flora," he insisted today. "Something, perhaps, that they
ate." He stood with a strained tautness, staring feverishly at the
chronometer. "Senator Farragut's due to make contact soon. What'll I
tell him?"

"That we're working on it," Bishop said dryly. "That the four best
scientists in the Galaxy are working toward the solution."

"That's good," Armitage said seriously. "But they'll worry. You _are_
making progress?"

I wanted to wrap a pestle around his neck.

We were all in the control room an hour later. Armitage practically
stood at attention while Farragut's voice boomed from the transmitter.

It was very emetic. The Senator said the entire hemisphere was waiting
for us to announce the planet was safe for immigration. He said the
stars were a challenge to Man. He spoke fearfully of the Coming World
Crisis. Epsilon was Man's last chance for survival. Armitage assured him
our progress was satisfactory, that within a few days we would have
something tangible to report. The Senator said we were heroes.

Finally it was over. Max yawned. "Wonder how many voters start field
work at once."

Armitage frowned. "It's not funny, Cizon. Not funny at all. Inasmuch as
we've checked out the atmosphere, I suggest we start field work at
once."

Taylor blinked. "We're still testing a few residual--"

"I happen to be nominal leader of this party." Armitage stood very tall,
very determined. "Obviously the atmosphere is pure. Let's make some
progress!"

       *       *       *       *       *

_February 2_

This is progress?

For the past ten days, we've worked the clock around. Quantitative
analysis, soil, water, flora, fauna, cellular, microscopic. Nothing. Max
has discovered a few lethal alkaloids in some greenish tree fungus, but
I doubt if the colony were indiscriminate fungus eaters. Bishop has
found a few new unicellular types, but nothing dangerous. There's one
tentacled thing that reminds me of a frightened rotifer. Max named it
_Armitagium_. Armitage is pleased.

Perhaps the fate of the hundred colonists will remain one of those
forever unsolved mysteries, like the fate of the _Mary Celeste_ or the
starship _Prometheus_.

This planet's _clean_.

       *       *       *       *       *

_February 4_

Today Max and I went specimen-hunting.

It must be autumn on Epsilon. Everywhere the trees are a riot of scarlet
and ocher, the scrubby bushes are shedding their leaves. Once we came
upon a field of thistlelike plants with spiny seed-pods that opened as
we watched, the purple spores drifting afield in an eddy of tinted mist.
Max said it reminded him of Scotland. He kissed me.

On the way back to the ship we saw two skeletons. Each had its fingers
tightly locked about the other's throat.

       *       *       *       *       *

_February 20_

We have, to date, analyzed nine hundred types of plant life for toxin
content. Bishop has tested innumerable spores and bacteria. Our slide
file is immense and still growing. Max has captured several insects.
There is one tiny yellow bush-spider with a killing bite, but the
species seem to be rare. Bishop has isolated a mold bacterium that could
cause a high fever, but its propagation rate is far too low to enable it
to last long in the bloodstream.

The most dangerous animal seems to be a two-foot-tall arthropod. They're
rare and peaceable. Bishop vivisected one yesterday and found nothing
alarming.

Last night I dreamed about the first expedition. I dreamed they all
committed suicide because Epsilon was too good for them.

This is ridiculous!

We're working in a sort of quiet madness getting no closer to the
solution.

Armitage talked to Senator Farragut yesterday and hinted darkly that the
first ship's hydroponics system went haywire and that an improper
carbohydrate imbalance killed the colony. Pretty thin. Farragut's
getting impatient. Bishop looks haggard. Max looks grim.

       *       *       *       *       *

_February 23_

Our quantitative tests are slowing down. We play a rubber of bridge each
night before retiring. Last night I trumped Max's ace and he snarled at
me. We had a fight. This morning I found a bouquet of purple
spore-thistles at my cabin door. Max is sweet.

This afternoon, by mutual consent, we all knocked off work and played
bridge. Bishop noticed the thistle bouquet in a vase over the
chronometer. He objected.

"They're harmless," Max said. "Besides, they smell nice."

I can hardly wait for tomorrow's rubber. Our work is important, but one
does need relaxation.

       *       *       *       *       *

_February 25_

Armitage is cheating.

Yesterday he failed to score one of my overtricks. We argued bitterly
about it. Taylor, of course, sided with him. Three hands later, Armitage
got the bid in hearts. "One hundred and fifty honors," he announced.

"That's a lie," I said.

"It was only a hundred," he grinned. "But thank you, Greta. Now I shan't
try the queen finesse."

No wonder they've won the last three evenings! Max is furious with them
both.

       *       *       *       *       *

_February 28_

We played all day. Max and I kept losing. I always knew Armitage was a
pompous toad, but I never realized he was _slimy_.

This afternoon it was game all, and Armitage overcalled my diamond
opener with three spades. Bishop took him to four and I doubled,
counting on my ace-king of hearts and diamonds.

I led out my diamond ace and Armitage trumped from his hand. Bishop laid
down his dummy. He had clubs and spades solid, with doubleton heart and
diamonds.

"None?" Max asked Armitage dangerously.

Armitage tittered. I wanted to scratch his eyes out. He drew trump
immediately and set up clubs on board, dumping the heart losers from his
hand, and finally sluffing--_two diamonds_.

"Made seven," he said complacently, "less two for the diamond renege
makes five, one overtrick doubled. We were vulnerable, so it's game and
rubber."

I gasped. "You reneged deliberately!"

"Certainly. Doubleton in hearts and diamonds in my hand. If you get in,
I'm down one. As it was, I made an overtrick. The only penalty for a
renege is two tricks. The rule book does not differentiate between
deliberate and accidental reneges. Sorry."

I stared at his florid throat, at his jugular. I could feel my mouth
twitching.

On the next hand I was dummy. I excused myself and went into the lab. I
found a scalpel. I came up quietly behind Armitage and Bishop saw what I
was going to do and shouted and I was not nearly fast enough. Armitage
ducked and Bishop tackled me.

"Thanks, dear," Max said thoughtfully, looking at the cards scattered on
the floor. "We would have been set one trick. Club finesse fails."

"She's crazy!" Armitage's mouth worked. "The strain's too much for her!"

I cried. I apologized hysterically. After a while, I convinced them I
was all right. Max gave me a sedative. We did not play any more bridge.
Over supper I kept staring at Armitage's throat.

After eating, I went for a long walk. When I got back to the ship,
everyone was sleeping.

       *       *       *       *       *

_March 1_

Bishop found Armitage this morning, in his cabin. He came out, very
pale, staring at me.

"You bitch," he said. "Ear to ear. Now what'll I do for a partner?"

"You can't prove it," I said.

"We'll have to confine her to quarters," Max said wearily. "I'll tell
Farragut."

"And let him know the expedition is failing?"

Max sighed. "You're right. We'll tell them Armitage had an accident."

I said seriously, "It was obviously suicide. His mind snapped."

"Oh, God," Max said.

They buried Armitage this afternoon. From my cabin, I watched them dig
the grave.

Cheaters never prosper.

       *       *       *       *       *

_March 2_

Max talked with Senator Farragut this morning. He said Armitage had died
a hero's death. Farragut sounds worried. The Pan-Asians have withdrawn
their embassy from Imperial Africa. Tension is mounting on the home
front. Immigration _must_ start this week. Max was very reassuring.
"Just a few final tests, Senator. We want to make sure."

We puttered in our laboratories all afternoon. Bishop seemed bored.
After dinner he suggested three-handed bridge and Max said he knew a
better game, a friendly game his grandmother had taught him--hearts.

       *       *       *       *       *

_March 5_

It's a plot!

All day long Bishop and Max have managed to give me the queen of spades.
It's deliberate, of course. Three times I've tried for the moon and
Bishop has held out one damned little heart at the end. Once Max was
slightly ahead on points and Bishop demanded to see the score. I thought
for a moment they would come to blows, but Bishop apologized.

"It's just that I hate to lose," he said.

"Quite," Max said.

When we finally turned in, Bishop was ahead on points.

Too far ahead.

       *       *       *       *       *

_March 6_

I suppose it's Bishop's laugh. It has a peculiar horselike stridency
that makes me want to tear out his throat. Twice today I've broken down
and cried when he made a jackpot.

I'm not going to cry any more.

Supper was the usual, beef-yeast and vita-ale. I remember setting
Bishop's plate in front of him, and the way his pale eyes gleamed
between mouthfuls. "Three thousand points ahead," he gloated. "You'll
never catch me now. Never, never!"

That was when he gripped his throat and began writhing on the floor.

Max felt his pulse. He stared at me.

"Very nice," he said. "Quick. Did you use a derivative of that green
fungus?"

I said nothing. Max's nostrils were white and pinched. "Must I make an
autopsy?"

"Why bother?" I said. "It's obviously heart failure."

"Yes, why bother?" he said. He looked tired. "Stay in your cabin,
Greta. I'll bring your meals."

"I don't trust you."

His laughter had a touch of madness.

       *       *       *       *       *

_March 10_

Max unlocked my cabin door this morning. He looked drawn. "Listen," he
said. "I've checked my respiration, pulse, saliva, temperature. All
normal."

"So?"

"Come here," he said. I followed him into the lab. He indicated a
microscope. His eyes were bright.

"Well?"

"A drop of my blood," he said. "Look."

I squinted into the microscope. I saw purple discs. Oddly, they did not
attack the red blood cells. There was no fission, no mitosis. The
leucocytes, strangely enough, let them alone.

My hands were shaking as I took a sterile slide and pricked my finger. I
put the slide under the microscope. I adjusted the lens and stared.

Purple discs, swimming in my bloodstream. Thriving. Minding their own
business.

"Me, too," I said.

"They're inert," Max said hoarsely. "They don't affect metabolism, cause
fever, or interfere with the body chemistry in any way. Do they remind
you of anything?"

I thought about it. Then I went to the slide file that was marked
_flora--negative_.

"Right," Max said. "The purple thistle. Spores! The atmosphere is
clogged with them. Greta, my sweet, we're infected."

"I feel fine," I said.

All day long we ran tests. Negative tests. We seem to be disgustingly
healthy. "Symbiosis," Max said finally. "Live and let live. Apparently
we're hosts."

Only one thing disturbs me.

Most symbiotes _do_ something for their host. Something to enhance the
host's survival potential.

We played chess this evening. I won. Max is furious. He's such a poor
sport.

       *       *       *       *       *

_March 11_

Max talked with Senator Farragut this morning. He gave Epsilon a clean
bill of health and the Senator thanked God. "The first starship will
leave tonight," the Senator said. "Right on schedule, with ten thousand
colonists aboard. You're world heroes!"

Max and I played chess the rest of the day. Max won consistently. He
utilizes a fianchetto that is utterly impregnable. If he wins tomorrow,
I shall have to kill him.

       *       *       *       *       *

MAX

_March 13_

It was, of course, necessary for me to destroy Armitage and Bishop. They
won far too often. But I am sorry about Greta. Yet I had to strangle
her.

If she hadn't started that infernal queen's pawn opening it would have
been different. She beat me six times running, and on the last game I
pulled a superb orang-outang, but it was too late. She saw mate in four
and gave me that serpent smirk I know so well.

How could I have ever been in love with her?

       *       *       *       *       *

_March 14_

Frightfully boring to be alone. I have a thought. Chess. Right hand
against left. White and black. Jolly good.

       *       *       *       *       *

_March 16_

I haven't much time.

Left was black this morning and I beat him, four out of five. We're in
the lab now. He's watching me scribble this. His thumb and forefinger
are twitching in fury. He looks like some great white spider about to
spring.

He sees the scalpel, by the microscope. Now his fingers are inching
toward it. Treacherous beast. I'm stronger. If he tries to amputate ...

                                                        --JAMES CAUSEY




Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from _Galaxy Science Fiction_ May 1955.
    Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed. Minor spelling and
    typographical errors have been corrected without note.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Competition, by James Causey

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK COMPETITION ***

***** This file should be named 29632.txt or 29632.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/9/6/3/29632/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
