The Project Gutenberg EBook of Lighter Than You Think, by Nelson Bond

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Lighter Than You Think

Author: Nelson Bond

Release Date: August 15, 2009 [EBook #29698]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LIGHTER THAN YOU THINK ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









    _It's possible that you won't agree with us that Pat Pending's
    latest adventure is a delightful story--possible IF you haven't been
    used to laughing in recent years. Blue Book printed more than a
    dozen of these stories by Nelson Bond about the "greatest
    inventulator of all time"._


 lighter
    than
     you
   think

 _by NELSON BOND_


 Sandy's eyes needed only jet propulsion to become flying
 saucers. Wasn't Pat wonderful? she beamed, at everyone.


Some joker in the dear, dead days now virtually beyond recall won
two-bit immortality by declaring that, "What this country needs is a
good five-cent cigar."

Which is, of course, Victorian malarkey. What this country _really_
needs is a good five-cent nickel. Or perhaps a good cigar-shaped
spaceship. There's a fortune waiting somewhere out in space for the man
who can go out there and claim it. A fortune! And if you think I'm just
talking through my hat, lend an ear ...

Joyce started the whole thing. Or maybe I did when for the umpteenth
time I suggested she should marry me. She smiled in a way that showed
she didn't disapprove of my persistence, but loosed a salvo of
devastating negatives.

"No deal," she crisped decisively. "Know why? No dough!"

"But, sugar," I pleaded, "two can live as cheaply as one--"

"This is true," replied Joyce, "only of guppies. Understand, Don, I
don't mind changing my name from Carter to Mallory. In fact, I'd rather
like to. But I have no desire whatever to be known to the neighbors as
'that poor little Mrs. Mallory in last year's coat.'

"I'll marry you," she continued firmly, "when, as and if you get a
promotion."

Her answer was by no stretch of the imagination a reason for loud
cheers, handsprings and cartwheels. Because I'm a Federal employee. The
United States Patent Office is my beat. There's one nice thing to be
said about working for the bewhiskered old gentleman in the
star-spangled stovepipe and striped britches: it's permanent. Once you
get your name inscribed on the list of Civil Service employees it takes
an act of Congress to blast it off again. And of course I don't have to
remind you how long it takes _that_ body of vote-happy windbags to act.
Terrapins in treacle are greased lightning by comparison.

But advancement is painfully slow in a department where discharges are
unheard of and resignations rare. When I started clerking for this
madhouse I was assistant to the assistant Chief Clerk's assistant. Now,
ten years later, by dint of mighty effort and a cultivated facility for
avoiding Senatorial investigations, I've succeeded in losing only one of
those redundant adjectives.

Being my secretary, Joyce certainly realized this. But women have a
remarkable ability to separate business and pleasure. So:

"A promotion," she insisted. "Or at least a good, substantial raise."

"In case you don't know it," I told her gloomily, "you are displaying a
lamentably vulgar interest in one of life's lesser values. Happiness,
not money, should be man's chief goal."

"What good is happiness," demanded Joyce, "if you can't buy money with
it?"

"Why hoard lucre?" I sniffed. "You can't take it with you."

"In that case," said Joyce flatly, "I'm not going. There's no use
arguing, Don. I've made up my mind--"

At this moment our dreary little impasse was ended by a sudden tumult
outside my office. There was a squealing shriek, the shuffle of
footsteps, the pounding of fists upon my door. And over all the shrill
tones of an old, familiar voice high-pitched in triumph.

"Let me in! I've got to see him instantaceously. This time I've got it;
I've absolutely _got_ it!"

Joyce and I gasped, then broke simultaneously for the door as it flew
open to reveal a tableau resembling the Laocoon group _sans_ snake and
party of the third part. Back to the door and struggling valiantly to
defend it stood the receptionist, Miss Thomas. Held briefly but volubly
at bay was a red-thatched, buck-toothed individual--and I _do_ mean
individual!--with a face like the map of Eire, who stopped wrestling as
he saw us, and grinned delightedly.

"Hello, Mr. Mallory," he said. "Hi, Miss Joyce."

"Pat!" we both cried at once. "Pat Pending!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Miss Thomas, a relative newcomer to our bailiwick, seemed baffled by the
warmth of our greeting. She entered the office with our visitor, and as
Joyce and I pumphandled him enthusiastically she asked, "You--you _know_
this gentleman, Mr. Mallory?"

"I should say we do!" I chortled. "Pat, you old naughty word! Where on
earth have you been hiding lately?"

"Surely you've heard of the great Patrick Pending, Miss Thomas?" asked
Joyce.

"Pending?" faltered Miss Thomas. "I seem to have heard the name. Or seen
it somewhere--"

Pat beamed upon her companionably. Stepping to my desk, he up-ended the
typewriter and pointed to a legend in tiny letters stamped into the
frame: _Reg. U.S. Pat. Off.--Pat. Pending._

"Here, perhaps?" he suggested. "I invented this. And the airplane, and
the automobile, and--oh, ever so many things. You'll find my name
inscribed on every one.

"I," he announced modestly, "am Pat Pending--the greatest inventulator
of all time."

Miss Thomas stared at me goggle-eyed.

"_Is_ he?" she demanded. "I mean--_did_ he?"

I nodded solemnly.

"Not only those, but a host of other marvels. The bacular clock, the
transmatter, the predictograph--"

Miss Thomas turned on Pat a gaze of fawning admiration. "How wonderful!"
she breathed.

"Oh, nothing, really," said Pat, wriggling.

"But it is! Most of the things brought here are so absurd. Automatic
hat-tippers, self-defrosting galoshes, punching bags that defend
themselves--" Disdainfully she indicated the display collection of
screwball items we call our Chamber of Horrors. "It's simply marvelous
to meet a man who has invented things really worth while."

Honestly, the look in her eyes was sickening. But was Pat nauseated? Not
he! The big goon was lapping it up like a famished feline. His simpering
smirk stretched from ear to there as he murmured, "Now, Miss Thomas--"

"Sandra, Mr. Pending," she sighed softly. "To you just plain ... Sandy.
Please?"

"Well, Sandy--" Pat gulped.

I said disgustedly, "Look, you two--break it up! Love at first sight is
wonderful in books, but in a Federal office I'm pretty sure it's
unconstitutional, and it _may_ be subversive. Would you mind coming down
to earth? Pat, you barged in here squalling about some new invention. Is
that correct?"

With an effort Pat wrenched his gaze from his new-found admirer and
nodded soberly.

"That's right, Mr. Mallory. And a great one, too. One that will
revolutionate the world. Will you give me an applicaceous form, please?
I want to file it immediately."

"Not so fast, Pat. You know the routine. What's the nature of this
remarkable discovery?"

"You may write it down," said Pat grandiloquently, "as Pat Pending's
lightening rod."

I glanced at Joyce, and she at me, then both of us at Pending.

"But, Pat," I exclaimed, "that's ridiculous! Ben Franklin invented the
lightning rod two hundred years ago."

"I said _lightening_," retorted my redheaded friend, "not _lightning_.
My invention doesn't conduct electricity _to_ the ground, but _from_
it." He brandished a slim baton which until then I had assumed to be an
ordinary walking-stick. "With this," he claimed, "I can make things
weigh as much or as little as I please!"

The eyes of Sandy Thomas needed only jet propulsion to become flying
saucers.

"Isn't he wonderful, Mr. Mallory?" she gasped.

But her enthusiasm wasn't contagious. I glowered at Pending coldly.

"Oh, come now, Pat!" I scoffed. "You can't really believe that yourself.
After all, there _are_ such things as basic principles. Weight is not a
variable factor. And so far as I know, Congress hasn't repealed the Law
of Gravity."

Pat sighed regretfully.

"You're always so hard to convince, Mr. Mallory," he complained.
"But--oh, well! Take this."

He handed me the baton. I stared at it curiously. It looked rather like
a British swagger stick: slim, dainty, well balanced. But the ornamental
gadget at its top was not commonplace. It seemed to be a knob or a dial
of some kind, divided into segments scored with vernier markings. I
gazed at Pending askance.

"Well, Pat? What now?"

"How much do you weigh, Mr. Mallory?"

"One sixty-five," I answered.

"You're sure of that?"

"I'm not. But my bathroom scales appeared to be. This morning. Why?"

"Do you think Miss Joyce could lift you?"

I said thoughtfully, "Well, that's an idea. But I doubt it. She won't
even let me try to support _her_."

"I'm serious, Mr. Mallory. Do you think she could lift you with one
hand?"

"Don't be silly! Of course not. Nor could you."

"There's where you're wrong," said Pending firmly. "She can--and will."

He reached forward suddenly and twisted the metal cap on the stick in my
hands. As he did so, I loosed a cry of alarm and almost dropped the
baton. For instantaneously I experienced a startling, flighty giddiness,
a sudden loss of weight that made me feel as if my soles were treading
on sponge rubber, my shoulders sprouting wings.

"Hold on to it!" cried Pat. Then to Joyce, "Lift him, Miss Joyce."

Joyce faltered, "How? Like th-this?" and touched a finger to my midriff.
Immediately my feet left the floor. I started flailing futilely to
trample six inches of ozone back to the solid floorboards. To no avail.
With no effort whatever Joyce raised me high above her head until my
dazed dome was shedding dandruff on the ceiling!

"Well, Mr. Mallory," said Pat, "do you believe me now?"

"Get me down out of here!" I howled. "You _know_ I can't stand high
places!"

"You now weigh less than ten pounds--"

"Never mind the statistics. I feel like a circus balloon. How do I get
down again?"

"Turn the knob on the cane," advised Pat, "to your normal weight.
Careful, now! _Not so fast!_"

His warning came too late. I hit the deck with a resounding thud, and
the cane came clattering after. Pat retrieved it hurriedly, inspected it
to make sure it was not damaged. I glared at him as I picked myself off
the floor.

"You might show some interest in _me_," I grumbled. "I doubt if that
stick will need a liniment rubdown tonight. Okay, Pat. You're right and
I'm wrong, as you usually are. That modern variation of a witch's
broomstick _does_ operate. Only--how?"

"That dial at the top governs weight," explained Pat. "When you turn
it--"

"Skip that. I know how it is operated. I want to know what makes it
work?"

"Well," explained Pat, "I'm not certain I can make it clear, but it's
all tied in with the elemental scientific problems of mass, weight,
gravity and electric energy. What _is_ electricity, for example--"

"I used to know," I frowned. "But I forget."

Joyce shook her head sorrowfully.

"Friends," she intoned, "let us all bow our heads. This is a moment of
great tragedy. The only man in the world who ever knew what electricity
is--and he has forgotten!"

"That's the whole point," agreed Pending. "No one knows what
electricity really is. All we know is how to use it. Einstein has
demonstrated that the force of gravity and electrical energy are
kindred; perhaps different aspects of a common phenomenon. That was my
starting point."

"So this rod, which enables you to defy the law of gravity, is
electrical?"

"Electricaceous," corrected Pat. "You see, I have transmogrified the
polarifity of certain ingredular cellulations. A series of
disentrigulated helicosities, activated by hypermagnetation, set up a
disruptular wave motion which results in--counter-gravity!"

And there you are! Ninety-nine percent of the time Pat Pending talks
like a normal human being. But ask him to explain the mechanism of one
of his inventions and linguistic hell breaks loose. He begins jabbering
like a schizophrenic parrot reading a Sanskrit dictionary backward! I
sighed and surrendered all hope of ever actually learning _how_ his
great new discovery worked. I turned my thoughts to more important
matters.

"Okay, Pat. We'll dismiss the details as trivial and get down to brass
tacks. What is your invention used for?"

"Eh?" said the redhead.

"It's not enough that an idea is practicable," I pointed out. "It must
also be practical to be of any value in this frenzied modern era. What
good is your invention?"

"What good," demanded Joyce, "is a newborn baby?"

"Don't change the subject," I suggested. "Or come to think of it, maybe
you should. At the diaper level, life is just one damp thing after
another. But how to turn Pat's brainchild into cold, hard cash--that's
the question before the board now.

"Individual flight _a la_ Superman? No dice. I can testify from personal
experience that once you get up there you're completely out of control.
And I can't see any sense in humans trying to fly with jet flames
scorching their base of operations.

"Elevators? Derricks? Building cranes? Possible. But lifting a couple
hundred pounds is one thing. Lifting a few tons is a horse of a
different color.

"No, Pat," I continued, "I don't see just how--"

Sandy Thomas squeaked suddenly and grasped my arm.

"That's it, Mr. Mallory!" she cried. "That's it!"

"Huh? What's what?"

"You wanted to know how Pat could make money from his invention. You've
just answered your own question."

"I have?"

"Horses! Horse racing, to be exact. You've heard of handicaps, haven't
you?"

"I'm overwhelmed with them," I nodded wearily. "A secretary who repulses
my honorable advances, a receptionist who squeals in my ear--"

"Listen, Mr. Mallory, what's the last thing horses do before they go to
the post?"

"Check the tote board," I said promptly, "to find out if I've got any
money on them. Horses hate me. They've formed an equine conspiracy to
prove to me the ancient adage that a fool and his money are soon
parted."

"Wait a minute!" chimed in Joyce thoughtfully. "I know what Sandy means.
They weigh in. Is that right?"

"Exactly! The more weight a horse is bearing, the slower it runs. That's
the purpose of handicapping. But if a horse that was supposed to be
carrying more than a hundred pounds was actually only carrying
_ten_--Well, you see?"

Sandy paused, breathless. I stared at her with a gathering respect.

"Never underestimate the power of a woman," I said, "when it comes to
devising new and ingenious methods of perpetrating petty larceny.
There's only one small fly in the ointment, so far as I can see. How do
we convince some racehorse owner he should become a party to this gentle
felony?"

"Oh, you don't have to," smiled Sandy cheerfully. "I'm already
convinced."

"You? You own a horse?"

"Yes. Haven't you ever heard of Tapwater?"

"Oh, sure! That drip's running all the time!"

Joyce tossed me a reproving glance.

"This is a matter of gravity, Donald," she stated, "and you keep
treating it with levity. Sandy, do you _really_ own Tapwater? He's the
colt who won the Monmouth Futurity, isn't he?"

"That's right. And four other starts this season. That's been our big
trouble. He shows such promise that the judges have placed him under a
terrific weight handicap. To run in next week's Gold Stakes, for
instance, he would have to carry 124 pounds. I was hesitant to enter him
because of that. But with Pat's new invention--" She turned to Pat, eyes
glowing--"he could enter and win!"

Pat said uncertainly, "I don't know. I don't like gambling. And it
doesn't seem quite ethical, somehow--"

I asked Sandy, "Suppose he ran carrying 124. What would be the probable
odds?"

"High," she replied, "_Very_ high. Perhaps as high as forty to one."

"In that case," I decided, "it's not only ethical, it's a moral
obligation. If you're opposed to gambling, Pat, what better way can you
think of to put the parimutuels out of business?"

"And besides," Sandy pointed out, "this would be a wonderful opportunity
to display your new discovery before an audience of thousands. Well,
Pat? What do you say?"

Pat hesitated, caught a glimpse of Sandy's pleading eyes, and was lost.

"Very well," he said. "We'll do it. Mr. Mallory, enter Tapwater in the
Gold Stakes. We'll put on the most spectaceous exhibition in the history
of gambilizing!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Thus it was that approximately one week later our piratical little crew
was assembled once again, this time in the paddock at Laurel. In case
you're an inland aborigine, let me explain that Laurel race track (from
the township of the same name) is where horse fanciers from the District
of Columbia go to abandon their Capitol and capital on weekends.

We were briefing our jockey--a scrawny youth with a pair of oversized
ears--on the use of Pat's lightening rod. Being short on gray matter as
well as on stature, he wasn't getting it at all.

"You mean," he said for the third or thirty-third time, "you don't want
I should _hit_ the nag with this bat?"

"Heavens, no!" gasped Pat, blanching. "It's much too delicate for that."

"Don't fool yourself, mister. Horses can stand a lot of leather."

"Not the horse, stupid," I said. "The bat. This is the only riding crop
of its kind in the world. We don't want it damaged. All you have to do
is _carry_ it. We'll do the rest."

"How about setting the dial, Don?" asked Joyce.

"Pat will do that just before the horses move onto the track. Now let's
get going. It's weigh-in time."

We moved to the scales with our rider. He stepped aboard the platform,
complete with silks and saddle, and the spinner leaped to a staggering
102, whereupon the officials started gravely handing him little leather
sacks.

"What's this?" I whispered to Sandy. "Prizes for malnutrition? He must
have won all the blackjacks east of the Mississippi."

"The handicap," she whispered back. "Lead weights at one pound each."

"If he starts to lose," I ruminated, "they'd make wonderful
ammunition--"

"One hundred and twenty-four," announced the chief weigher-inner. "Next
entry!"

We returned to Tapwater. The jockey fastened the weights to his gear,
saddled up and mounted. From the track came the traditional bugle call.
Sandy nodded to Pat.

"All right, Pat. Now!"

Pending twisted the knob on his lightening rod and handed the stick to
the jockey. The little horseman gasped, rose three inches in his
stirrups, and almost let go of the baton.

"H-hey!" he exclaimed. "I feel funny. I feel--"

"Never mind that," I told him. "Just you hold on to that rod until the
race is over. And when you come back, give it to Pat immediately.
Understand?"

"Yes. But I feel so--so lightheaded--"

"That's because you're featherbrained," I advised him. "Now, get going.
Giddyap, Dobbin!"

I patted Tapwater's flank, and so help me Newton, I think that one
gentle tap pushed the colt half way to the starting gate! He pattered
across the turf with a curious bouncing gait as if he were running on
tiptoe. We hastened to our seats in the grandstand.

"Did you get all the bets down?" asked Joyce.

I nodded and displayed a deck of ducats. "It may not have occurred to
you, my sweet," I announced gleefully, "but these pasteboards are
transferrable on demand to rice and old shoes, the sweet strains of _Oh,
Promise Me!_ and the scent of orange blossoms. You insisted I should
have a nest egg before you would murmur, 'I do'? Well, after this race
these tickets will be worth--" I cast a swift last glance at the tote
board's closing odds, quoting Tapwater at 35 to 1--"approximately
seventy thousand dollars!"

"Donald!" gasped Joyce. "You didn't bet all your savings?"

"Every cent," I told her cheerfully. "Why not?"

"But if something should go wrong! If Tapwater should lose!"

"He won't. See what I mean?"

For even as we were talking, the bell jangled, the crowd roared, and the
horses were off. Eight entries surged from the starting gate. And
already one full length out in front pranced the weight-free, lightfoot
Tapwater!

At the quarter post our colt had stretched his lead to three lengths,
and I shouted in Pending's ear, "How much does that jockey weigh,
anyway?"

"About six pounds," said Pat. "I turned the knob to cancel one
eighteen."

At the half, all the other horses could glimpse of Tapwater was heels.
At the three-quarter post he was so far ahead that the jockey must have
been lonely. As he rounded into the stretch I caught a binocular view of
his face, and he looked dazed and a little frightened. He wasn't
actually _riding_ Tapwater. The colt was simply skimming home, and he
was holding on for dear life to make sure he didn't blow off the horse's
back. The result was a foregone conclusion, of course. Tapwater crossed
the finish line nine lengths ahead, setting a new track record.

The crowd went wild. Over the hubbub I clutched Pat's arm and bawled,
"I'll go collect our winnings. Hurry down to the track and swap that
lightening rod for the real bat we brought along. He'll have to weigh
out again, you know. Scoot!"

The others vanished paddockward as I went for the big payoff. It was
dreary at the totalizer windows. I was one of a scant handful who had
bet on Tapwater, so it took no time at all to scoop into the valise I
had brought along the seventy thousand bucks in crisp, green lettuce
which an awed teller passed across the counter. Then I hurried back to
join the others in the winner's circle, where bedlam was not only
reigning but pouring. Flashbulbs were popping all over the place,
cameramen were screaming for just one more of the jockey, the owner, the
fabulous Tapwater. The officials were vainly striving to quiet the
tumult so they could award the prize. I found Pending worming his way
out of the heart of the crowd.

"Did you get it?" I demanded.

He nodded, thrust the knobbed baton into my hand.

"You substituted the normal one?"

Again he nodded. Hastily I thrust the lightening rod out of sight into
my valise, and we elbowed forward to share the triumphant moment. It was
a great experience. I felt giddy with joy; I was walking on little pink
clouds of happiness. Security was mine at last. And Joyce, as well.

"Ladies and gentlemen!" cried the chief official. "Your attention,
please! Today we have witnessed a truly spectacular feat: the setting of
a new track record by a champion racing under a tremendous handicap. I
give you a magnificent racehorse--_Tapwater_!"

"That's right, folks!" I bawled, carried away by the excitement. "Give
this little horse a great big hand!"

Setting the example, I laid down the bag, started clapping vigorously.
From a distance I heard Pat Pending's agonized scream.

"Mr. Mallory--the suitcase! Grab it!"

I glanced down, belatedly aware of the danger of theft. But too late.
The bag had disappeared.

"Hey!" I yelled. "Who swiped my bag? Police!"

"Up there, Mr. Mallory!" bawled Pat. "Jump!"

I glanced skyward. Three feet above my head and rising swiftly was the
valise in which I had cached not only our winnings but Pat's
gravity-defying rod! I leaped--but in vain. I was _still_ making feeble,
futile efforts to make like the moon-hurdling nursery rhyme cow when
quite a while later two strong young men in white jackets came and
jabbed me with a sedative ...

       *       *       *       *       *

Later, when time and barbiturates had dulled the biting edge of my
despair, we assembled once again in my office and I made my apologies to
my friends.

"It was all my fault," I acknowledged. "I should have realized Pat
hadn't readjusted the rod when I placed it in my bag. It felt lighter.
But I was so excited--"

"It was _my_ fault," mourned Pat, "for not changing it immediately. But
I was afraid someone might see me."

"Perhaps if we hired an airplane--?" I suggested.

Pat shook his head.

"No, Mr. Mallory. The rod was set to cancel 118 pounds. The bag weighed
less than twenty. It will go miles beyond the reach of any airplane
before it settles into an orbit around earth."

"Well, there goes my dreamed-of fortune," I said sadly. "Accompanied by
the fading strains of an unplayed wedding march. I'm sorry, Joyce."

"Isn't there one thing you folks are overlooking?" asked Sandy Thomas.
"My goodness, you'd think we had lost our last cent just because that
little old bag flew away!"

"For your information," I told her, "that is precisely what happened to
me. My entire bank account vanished into the wild blue yonder. And some
of Pat's money, too."

"But have you forgotten," she insisted, "that we _won_ the race? Of
course the track officials were a wee bit suspicious when your suitcase
took off. But they couldn't prove anything. So they paid me the Gold
Stakes prize. If we split it four ways, we all make a nice little
profit.

"Or," she added, "if you and Joyce want to make yours a double share, we
could split it three ways.

"Or," she continued hopefully, "if Pat wants to, we could make _two_
double shares, and split it fifty-fifty?"

From the look in Pat's eyes I knew he was stunned by this possibility.
And from the look in hers, I felt she was going to make every effort to
take advantage of his bewilderment.

So, as I said before, what this country needs is a good cigar-shaped
spaceship. There's a fortune waiting somewhere out in space for the man
who can go out there and claim it. Seventy thousand bucks in cold, hard
cash.

Indubitatiously!




Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from _Fantastic Universe_ August 1957.
    Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed. Minor spelling and
    typographical errors have been corrected without note.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Lighter Than You Think, by Nelson Bond

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LIGHTER THAN YOU THINK ***

***** This file should be named 29698.txt or 29698.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/9/6/9/29698/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
