The Project Gutenberg EBook of Martians Never Die, by Lucius Daniel

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Martians Never Die

Author: Lucius Daniel

Illustrator: Ed Emshwiller

Release Date: August 19, 2009 [EBook #29735]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MARTIANS NEVER DIE ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









martians never die

By LUCIUS DANIEL


 _It was a wonderful bodyguard:
 no bark, no bite, no sting ...
 just conversion of the enemy!_


At three-fifteen, a young man walked into the circular brick building
and took a flattened package of cigarettes from his shirt pocket.

"Mr. Stern?" he asked, throwing away the empty package.

Stern looked with hard eyes at the youthful reporter. He recognized the
type.

"So they're sending around cubs now," he said.

"I'm no cub--I've been on the paper a whole year," the reporter
protested, and then stopped, realizing his annoyance had betrayed him.

"Only a year. The first time they sent their best man."

"This ain't the first time," said the young man, assuming a bored look.
"It's the fourth time, and next year I don't think anybody will come at
all. Why should they?"

"Why, because they might be able to make it," Beryl spoke up. "Something
must have happened before."

Stern watched the reporter drink in Beryl's loveliness.

"Well, Mrs. Curtis," the young man said, "everyone has it figured out
that Dr. Curtis got stuck in the fourth dimension, or else lost, or
died, maybe. Even Einstein can't work out the stellar currents your
husband was depending on."

"It's very simple," replied Beryl, "but I can't explain it intelligibly.
I wish you could have talked to Dr. Curtis."

"Why is it that we have to come out here just once a year to wait for
him? Is that how the fourth dimension works?"

"It's the only time when the stellar currents permit the trip back to
Earth. And it's _not_ the fourth dimension! Clyde was always irritated
when anyone would talk about his traveling to Mars in the fourth
dimension."

"It's interdimensional," Stern put in.

"And you're his broker?" asked the reporter, throwing his cigarette down
on the brick floor and stepping on it. "You're his old friend from
college days, handled his financial affairs, and helped him raise enough
money to build his machine?"

"Yes," Stern replied, a little pompously. "It was through my efforts
that several wealthy men took an interest in the machine, so that Dr.
Curtis did not have to bear the entire expense himself."

"Yeah, yeah," the reporter sighed. "I read an old story on it before I
came here. Now I'm out of cigarettes." He looked hopefully at Stern.

Stern returned the look coldly. "There's a store where you can buy some
about three blocks down the road."

"Is that the room where he's expected to materialize with his machine?"
The reporter pointed to an inner door.

"Yes. Dr. Curtis wanted to be sure no one would be injured. This inner
circular room was built first; then he had the outer wall put up as an
added precaution. The circular passageway we're in leads all around the
old room, but this doorway is the only entrance."

"And what are those holes in the top of the door for?"

"If he returns, we can tell by the displaced air rushing out. Then the
door will open automatically."

"And when is the return scheduled for?" asked the reporter.

"Three-forty-seven and twenty-nine seconds."

"If it happens," the reporter added skeptically. "And if it doesn't, we
have to wait another year."

"Optimum conditions occur just once a year."

"Well, I'm going out to get some cigarettes. I've got time ... and
probably nothing to wait for. I'll return though."

He walked briskly through the outer door.

       *       *       *       *       *

"This is the hardest part of the year, especially now. Suppose he did
come back," Beryl said plaintively.

"You don't have to worry," Stern assured her. "Clyde himself said that
if he didn't come back the second year, he might not make it at all."
Stern opened his gold case now and offered Beryl a cigarette.

She shook her head. "But he made two trial runs in it first and came
back."

"That was for a short distance only--that is, a short distance
astronomically. Figuring for Mars was another story. Maybe he missed the
planet and ..."

"Oh, don't! It's just not _knowing_ that I can't stand."

"Well," he said drily, "we'll know in--" he stopped and looked at his
wristwatch--"in just about fifteen minutes."

"I can't wait," she moaned.

He put his arm around her. "Relax. Take it easy and stop worrying. It'll
just be like last time."

"Not the last time at all. We hadn't--"

"As soon as we are able to leave here," he said, drawing her close and
squeezing her gently, "I'll take steps to have him declared legally
dead. Then we'll get married."

"That's not much of a proposal," she smiled. "But I guess I'll have to
accept you. You have Clyde's power of attorney."

"And we'll be rich. Richer than ever. I'll be able to use some of my own
ideas about the investments. As a matter of fact, I have already." And
he frowned slightly.

"We have enough," Beryl said quickly. "Don't try to speculate. You know
how Clyde felt about that."

"But he spent so damned much on the machine. I had to make back those
expenses somehow."

Steps sounded outside and they drew apart. The reporter came in with a
companion of about his own age.

"Better wipe the lipstick off," he grinned. "It's almost time for
something to happen."

Stern dabbed at his mouth angrily with his handkerchief.

At first the sound was so soft that it could hardly be heard, but soon a
whistling grew until it became a threat to the eardrums. The reporters
looked at each other with glad, excited eyes.

The whistling stopped abruptly and, slowly, the door opened. The
reporters rushed in immediately.

Beryl gripped Stern's hand convulsively. "He's come back."

"Yes, but that mustn't change our plans, Beryl dear."

"But, Al ... Oh, why were we so foolish?"

"Not foolish, dear. Not at all foolish. Now we have to go in."

Inside the room was the large sphere of metalloy. It had lost its
original gleam and was stained and battered, standing silent, closed,
enigmatic.

"Where's the door?" called the first reporter.

The sphere rested on a number of metal stilts, reaching out from the
lower hemisphere, which held it about three feet from the floor, like a
great pincushion turned upside down.

Slowly, a round section of the sphere's wall swung outward and steps
descended. As they touched the floor, both reporters, caught by the same
idea, sprinted for it and fought to see which would climb it first.

"Wait!" shouted Stern.

The reporters stopped their scuffling and followed Stern's gaze.

       *       *       *       *       *

Something old and leathery and horrible was emerging from the circular
doorway. Several tentacles, like so many snakes, slid around the hand
rail which ran down the steps. Then, at the top, it paused.

Stern felt an immediate and unreasoning hate for the thing, whatever it
was, a hate so strong that he forgot to feel fear. It seemed to him to
combine the repulsive qualities of a spider and a toad. The body, fat
and repugnant, was covered by a loose skin, dull and leathery, and the
fatness seemed to be pulled downward below the lower tentacles like an
insect's body, until it was wider at the bottom than at the top.

Like a salt shaker, Stern thought.

It turned its head--it had no neck; the loose skin of the body just
turned with it--and looked back inside the sphere. The head resembled a
toad's, but a long trident tongue slid in and out quickly, changing the
resemblance to that of a malformed snake.

From the interior, Dr. Curtis appeared beside the creature and stood
there vaguely for a moment. Stern noticed that his clothes seemed just
as new as when he had left, but he had grown a long, untrimmed beard,
and his face had a vacant expression, as if he were hypnotized.

The creature looked upward at Curtis, who was head and shoulders taller,
and its resemblance changed again in Stern's mind, so that now it looked
like a dog, at least in attitude. From its mouth came a low hissing
noise.

[Illustration: Illustrated by WILLER]

Curtis looked down at the dog-spider-toad, his eyes slowly beginning
to focus. The creature wiggled like a seal with a fish in sight, then
slid and bumped down the steps, with Curtis following him.

"Clyde!" cried Beryl and rushed toward Curtis.

The outstretched tentacles of the beast stopped her, but at a touch from
Curtis they fell away and Beryl was in his arms.

Stern watched the scene sourly and with rage in his heart. Why hadn't
Clyde waited another year? Then nothing could have changed things. Now
he would lose not only Beryl, but the management of the money that was
left, and the marketing of new patents on the machine. Curtis did not
approve of speculation, especially when it lost money.

"You've changed, Clyde," Beryl was saying as she hugged him. "What is
the matter--do you need a doctor?"

"No, I don't want a doctor, but I have to get home," said Curtis.

Stern felt anger again beating in his brain like heavy surf on a beach.
Curtis was sick. The least he could have done was die. Well, maybe he
still would. And if he didn't he could be helped to--Stern saw the beast
looking at him intently, malevolently. Its face might have looked almost
human, now that it was so close, if it had possessed eyebrows and hair.
As it was, its nose rose abruptly and flared into two really enormous
nostrils, but its mouth looked small and wrinkled, like that of an old
grandmother without any teeth.

They turned to the doorway without noticing the absence of the
reporters, who had long since run off to telephone and get
photographers.

Curtis walked slowly. He would stop for a moment, look about as if
expecting something entirely different, and then he would move forward
again.

They all got into the car, Curtis and Beryl on the front seat, with
Beryl driving, and Stern and the creature in the rear. As Beryl drove,
Stern looked savagely at the back of Curtis's head, but he felt the
beast staring at him balefully. Could it be a mind reader? That was
ridiculous. How could anything that couldn't speak read a person's mind?

He turned to study it. The Martian, if that was what it was, had only
six tentacles, three on each side. The lower ones were heavy and almost
as thick as legs. The upper ones were small and were obviously used as
hands, while it was possible that the middle ones could be used either
way. A series of suction cups or sucking pads were at the end of each
tentacle. With equipment like this, it could walk right up the side of a
building, except, perhaps, for the higher gravity of Earth.

Stern could smell it now, a dry, desert smell, and that made it more
revolting than ever. They were born to hate each other.

       *       *       *       *       *

When they got home, Beryl was all solicitousness. The way a woman is
when she has a man to impress, Stern thought.

"Just sit right here in your old chair," she told Curtis, "and I'll call
a doctor. Then I'll put some water on to heat." But first she knelt by
his side and laid her head on his breast. "Oh, darling," she said with a
sob, "Why did you wait so long? I've missed you so."

A very good act, Stern told himself bitterly, without believing it at
all.

She got up and turned toward Stern. "Will you help me get some water on,
Al?" she asked. "I'm going to phone."

He went into the kitchen. He knew where the kettle was, the
refrigerator, the mixings. He could hear her dialing, and then, before
he got the kettle on the burner, she came inside and closed the kitchen
door.

"Clyde's sick and I have to take care of him," she said anxiously.

It wasn't entirely the money, he confessed to himself now. He hated the
situation, but he had to give in--on the surface anyway.

"Okay, let's forget the whole thing," he said.

"Oh, Al dear, I knew you'd understand! I've got to go back now and try
the phone again. I got a busy signal."

Stern followed her, still rankling at the way Curtis had forced Beryl to
live while he spent so generously on his own expensive interests.
Shortly after their marriage, he had built a home for Beryl and himself
in an exclusive suburb, on a hilly bit of land with a deep ravine at the
back. But it was small and Beryl had not even been allowed maids except
when they entertained, which was seldom. Soon he would change all that,
Stern told himself. They had not dared to while Clyde was away.

In the modern living room, Curtis sprawled in his easy chair as though
he hadn't moved since they had placed him there. But his air of
abstraction seemed to have increased. Before him sat the beast, looking,
Stern thought, more like a dog than ever. Its head wasn't cocked to one
side, but that, less than its alien appearance, was the one thing to
spoil the illusion.

Tires screeched in the driveway while Beryl was still at the telephone.
Stern went to the front door, closed it and put the chain bolt in
place. The back door would still be locked and they would hardly try to
force the screen windows.

Heavy steps pounded up the front walk. "Did Dr. Curtis really get back?"
The first man shot out. The one who followed had a camera.

"Dr. Curtis has returned," Stern spoke through the opening of the front
door which the chain permitted, "but his physical condition won't permit
questioning, at least until his doctor has seen him."

"Did he really bring back a Martian? We want to see the Martian anyway."

"We can't have Dr. Curtis disturbed in any way until after his physician
has examined him," Stern said bluntly.

"Is he in there?"

"We'll give you a report when we're ready."

       *       *       *       *       *

A second car pulled up to the house as Stern shut the front door, and
went to check the rear one. When he came back, flashes from the window
showed the cameraman was trying to take pictures through the glass.
Stern drew the shades.

"Well, poor Schaughtowl, so you had to come with me," Curtis was saying
to the monster.

The beast wiggled again as it had on the steps of the machine. A tail to
wag wasn't really necessary, Stern decided, when there was so much body
to wiggle.

Schaughtowl, as Curtis addressed it, seemed to brighten in the darkened
room.

"Poor, dear Schaughtowl," said Curtis gently.

It was unmistakable now--the skin actually brightened and emitted a sort
of eerie, luminous glow.

Curtis leaned over and put his hand on what would have been
Schaughtowl's neck. The loose skin writhed joyously, and, snakelike, the
whole body responded in rippling waves of emotion.

"Gull Lup," the monster--said wasn't the right word, but it was not a
bark, growl, mew, cheep, squawk or snarl. Gulp was as close as Stern
could come, a dry and almost painful gulping noise that expressed
devotion in some totally foreign way that Stern found revolting.

He realized that the phone had been ringing for some time. He
disconnected it, and then heard loud knocking.

"It's Dr. Anderson," he heard a man's voice calling impatiently and
angrily.

Cautiously, Stern opened the door, but his care was needless. With a few
testy remarks, the doctor quickly cleared a space about the door and
entered.

He went at once to Curtis, with only a single shocked glance at
Schaughtowl.

"Where the devil have you been and where in hell did you get that
thing?" he asked as he unbuttoned Curtis's coat and shirt.

Since playing with his pet, Curtis seemed more awake. "I went to Mars,"
he said. "They're incredibly advanced in ways we hardly guess. We're
entirely off the track. I just came back to explain how."

"Your friend doesn't look very intelligent," the doctor answered, busy
with his stethoscope.

"Animals like Schaughtowl are used for steeds or pets," said Curtis.
"The Ladonai are pretty much like mankind, only smaller."

"Why did you stay so long?"

"After I left, the Ladonai told me, they were going to shut off any
possible communication with Earth until we advance more. They think
we're at a very dangerous animal-like stage of development. Once I came
home, I knew I couldn't go back, so I wanted to learn as much as I could
before I left them."

"Stand up for a minute," ordered the doctor.

"Not right now," said Curtis. "I'm too tired."

"You'd better get to bed, then."

"I think not. It's merely caused by the difference in gravity and
heavier air. The Ladonai told me to expect it, but not to lie down.
After a while I'll try to take a short walk."

       *       *       *       *       *

So Clyde wasn't going to die, after all, Stern thought. He had come home
with a message, and, remembering the determination of the man, Stern
knew he wouldn't die until he had given it. But he had to die. He would
die, and who was competent enough to know that it wasn't from the shock
of having come home to denser air and a heavier gravity?

There were ways--an oxygen tube, for example. Pure oxygen to be inhaled
in his sleep by lungs accustomed to a rarified atmosphere, or stimulants
in his food so it would look like a little too much exertion on a heart
already overtaxed. There were ways.

Stern's scalp tingled unpleasantly, and he saw the Martian looking at
him intently, coldly. In that moment Stern knew without question that
his mind was being read. Not his idea, perhaps, but his intent toward
Curtis. The Martian would have to be attended to first.

"Is it true, Dr. Anderson? Will he be all right?" Beryl was sitting on
the arm of the chair next to Schaughtowl, and she was looking at Clyde
almost as adoringly as the Martian. A few hours had undone all that
Stern had managed to do in four years.

If Stern had been uncertain, that alone would have decided him.

"I think so," said the doctor. "He seems to be uncomfortable, rather
than in pain. I'll send you a prescription for his heart, if he breathes
too heavily. Be sure, though, not to give him more than one pill in
three hours."

"Of course." Beryl was never that solicitous toward Stern.

"And you'll be in quarantine here until the government decides what, if
any, diseases he and the Martian may have brought back with them."

"None at all, Doctor." Curtis's voice was markedly more slurred, and he
stared intently with unblinking eyes at the blank wall.

"Well, that's something we can't tell yet. Well have to keep out the
press and television men, anyway, because of your health. If I'm not
detained, I'll be back tomorrow morning. Call me if there's any change."

On his way out, the physician was besieged by reporters and
photographers, baulked of better subjects. Shortly after the doctor's
departure, police sirens came screaming up. The men waiting around the
house were moved outside the gate and a guard was set at every entrance.

       *       *       *       *       *

Later, a messenger came, was interrogated by the police sergeant who
took a small package from him and brought it to the house.

"Medicine," the sergeant said, handing it gingerly to Stern. "You can't
leave here without permission." And he walked hurriedly away.

This might be the answer. Stern had a good idea of what the doctor had
prescribed--something he'd said, for the heart. It must have been pretty
powerful, too, for the doctor to warn against an overdose. Two at once
might do it, or another two a little later.

But there was Schaughtowl.

"Al," said Beryl, "stay with Clyde while I fix something for him to
eat."

She was more beautiful than ever. Emotions, he thought wryly, become a
woman; they thrive on them. In a few minutes a woman could change like
this. It was enough to make a man lose faith in the sex.

"Certainly," he said easily.

Curtis seemed to sleep with wide open eyes gazing blankly at the far
wall. Schaughtowl sat motionless before him, watchful as a dog, yet
still like a snake or spider patiently waiting. Didn't the beast ever
sleep?

A drink was what Stern needed. He went to the closet and poured a double
brandy. He sipped it slowly. As delicious fire ran down his gullet and
warmed his stomach, he felt his tension ease and a sense of confidence
pervade his mind.

He needn't worry. He was always successful, except that once with the
stocks. And he had calm nerves.

There were guards out in front now in khaki uniform; the Governor must
have called out a company of the National Guard. Stern noticed some
state police, too. The house was well guarded on the three sides
surrounded by a neat, white picket fence. In the back, the severe drop
into the ravine made guards there unnecessary.

It was dark before Dr. Curtis moved. Beryl was watching him; she had
little to say to Stern now.

"How about some broth, dear?" she asked Curtis immediately.

Slowly, Clyde's eyes focused on her. He smiled. "Let's try it."

He let Beryl feed him, sitting on a stool beside his chair and being
unnecessarily motherly and coddling about it.

For a while after he had eaten, Clyde sat in his chair, looking at Beryl
with his new and oddly gentle smile. It seemed to activate some hidden
response in her, for she glowed with tenderness.

"I suppose," Curtis slurred, "I ought to try to walk now."

"Let me help." Stern rose and crossed the room.

The Martian rustled like snakes in the weeds, and hissed.

Beryl said without suspicion, "Thank you, Al. I knew you'd do whatever
you could for Clyde." And she rested her hand trustingly on his arm.

What was past was past, not to be wept over, not to be regretted.

"Like to walk out in the back for the air?" Stern asked. "The breeze is
coming from that direction."

"That will do very well," said Curtis, obviously not caring a bit.

       *       *       *       *       *

Stern helped Curtis from his chair and supported him under the arm. They
went out the back door, the Martian slithering after them. It was cooler
in the garden. Stern felt a renewed surge of self-confidence.

"The stars--" Curtis stopped to look upward.

The night was almost cloudless and there was no moon. The house hid any
view of the crowds and the guards holding them back. They were alone in
the dark.

Curtis started forward again, with the Martian scraping along behind. It
would never let Curtis out of its sight as long as it lived; that much
was clear to Stern.

He guided Curtis to a seat close to the ravine, a favorite spot. Always
the Martian was a step--or a slither--behind, and when Curtis sat down,
Schaughtowl sat between his beloved master and the precipitous drop.

Stern picked up a rock from the rock garden and tossed it into the
ravine. The Martian did not take his eyes off Curtis. Stern picked up a
larger rock, a sharp, pointed one. He was behind the Martian and Curtis
was looking away unseeingly into the night.

It was simple, really, and well executed. The beast's skull bashed in
easily, being merely thin bones for a thin atmosphere and light
gravitation. A push sent it over the edge of the ravine.

Curtis sat unnoticing, and the traffic jam out front created more than
enough confusion to drown out any noise from the creature's fall.

Stern's palm stung. He realized that, before the Martian had pitched
over the ravine, a suction pad had for a moment caught at his hand. It
had done the beast no good, though.

Curiously, the Martian had not guarded itself, only Curtis. Sitting with
its back to Stern had really invited attack. The mind-reading ability
was just something that Stern had nervously imagined.

The police would not be able to tell his rock from any other. The heavy
body, its ungainly movement and thin bones would explain everything.
Besides, there was no motive for killing the Martian and what penalty
could there be? It couldn't be called murder.

Stern looked at the palm of his right hand, the one that had held the
rock. It stung a little, but in the darkness he couldn't see it. A
stinger of some kind, like a bee, probably. The hell with it--couldn't
be fatal or Curtis would have warned them about it.

The Martian had been walking by the ravine and had clumsily fallen in.
He would report it after he had got Curtis back into the house.

Curtis was easy to arouse and didn't seem to miss Schaughtowl. Stern
maneuvered him to the living room, where he sank into a chair and fell
into his mood of abstraction.

Beryl must be in the kitchen cleaning up, Stern supposed. Perhaps he had
better put some kind of germicide on his palm, just to ward off
infection.

       *       *       *       *       *

He looked at Curtis relaxed in the chair. Clyde suddenly appeared oddly
boyish to him, hardly different than he had been in college days. For a
moment Stern felt again the adolescent admiration and fellowship he had
felt so strongly then. Don't be stupid, he told himself angrily. This
man had the money and the woman that had almost belonged to him.

       *       *       *       *       *

Moving slowly, Stern deliciously savored the aroma of his triumph. On
the table was the bottle. Clyde would be easy, unsuspecting, kindly.

It wouldn't be safe to marry Beryl right away, but there could never be
any suspicion.

No need to hurry. For a moment he wanted to watch Curtis. He wondered
what kind of pictures Clyde was seeing on the blank wall. Martian
landscapes? The strange Ladonai? Too bad he hadn't stayed on Mars. Stern
couldn't help having a friendly feeling for his old college chum, pity,
too, for what must happen to him soon.

This was no way to kill anyone!

He was growing old and soft!

Nevertheless, Curtis _did_ have a noble and striking face. Funny he had
never noticed it before. It seemed to glow with an uncanny peace.

Unnoticed, the numbness crept from Stern's palm along his right arm, and
a prickly sensation appeared in his right leg.

It was funny to read a person's thoughts like this. Love flowed from
Curtis like the warm glow from a burning candle. A sort of halo had
formed from the light above his head.

Symbolic.

From Curtis came wave after wave of love. He could feel it pulsating
toward him, and he felt his own heart turn over, answer it. Yes, Curtis
was noble.

Stern sank cross-legged on the floor beside Curtis and gazed at him. The
prickly sensation had ascended from his leg up through his chest and to
his neck. But it didn't matter. Now, for a last time, he could feel the
spell of that perfect friendship--before the end.

What end? Why should there be any end to this eternal moment?

Curtis noticed him now. Those half-closed eyes were strangely
penetrating. They looked him through.

"Well, Al," he said, "so you killed Schaughtowl?"

Stern looked at the kindly, godlike face and loved it.

Killed whom?

"Poor Al," Curtis said. He leaned over and laid his hand on the back of
Stern's neck, fondling it much as one would a dog. "Poor old Al."

Stern's heart leaped in joy. This was ecstasy. It must be expressed. It
demanded expression. If he had possessed a tail, he would have wagged
it. Perhaps there was a word for that bliss. There was, and with immense
satisfaction he spoke it.

"Gull Lup," he said.

                                                       --LUCIUS DANIEL




Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from _Galaxy Science Fiction_ April 1952.
    Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed. Minor spelling and
    typographical errors have been corrected without note.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Martians Never Die, by Lucius Daniel

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MARTIANS NEVER DIE ***

***** This file should be named 29735.txt or 29735.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/9/7/3/29735/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
