The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Flying Cuspidors, by V. R. Francis

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Flying Cuspidors

Author: V. R. Francis

Release Date: August 21, 2009 [EBook #29749]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE FLYING CUSPIDORS ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









    _A trumpet-tooter in love can be a wonderful sight, if Local 802
    will forgive our saying so; when extraterrestrials get involved
    too--oh brother! V. R. Francis, who lives in California and has
    previously appeared in men's magazines, became 21 and sold to
    FANTASTIC UNIVERSE all in the same week._


       the
    flying
 cuspidors

 _by ... V. R. Francis_


 This was love, and what could be done about it?
 It's been happening to guys for a long time, now.


Hotlips Grogan may not be as handsome and good-looking like me or as
brainy and intellectual, but in this fiscal year of 2056 he is the
gonest trumpet-tooter this side of Alpha Centauri. You would know what I
mean right off if you ever hear him give out with "Stars Fell on Venus,"
or "Martian Love Song," or "Shine On, Harvest Luna." Believe me, it is
out of this world. He is not only hot, he is radioactive. On a clear day
he is playing notes you cannot hear without you are wearing special
equipment.

That is for a fact.

Mostly he is a good man--cool, solid, and in the warp. But one night he
is playing strictly in three or four wrong keys.

I am the ivory man for this elite bunch of musicians, and I am scooping
up my three-dee music from the battered electronic eighty-eight when he
comes over looking plenty worried.

"Eddie," he says, "I got a problem."

"You got a problem, all right," I tell him. "You are not getting a job
selling Venusian fish, the way you play today."

He frowns. "It is pretty bad, I suppose."

"Bad is not the word," I say, but I spare his feelings and do not say
the word it is. "What gives?"

He looks around him, careful to see if anybody in the place is close
enough to hear. But it is only afternoon rehearsal on the gambling ship
_Saturn_, and the waiters are busy mopping up the floor and leaning on
their long-handled sterilizers, and the boys in the band are picking up
their music to go down to Earth to get some shut-eye or maybe an atomic
beer or two before we open that night.

Hotlips Grogan leans over and whispers in my ear. "It is the thrush," he
says.

"The thrush?" I say, loud, before he clamps one of his big hands over my
kisser. "The thrush," I say, softer; "you mean the canary?"

He waves his arms like a bird. "Thrush, canary--I mean Stella
Starlight."

For a minute I stand with my mouth open and think of this. Then I rubber
for the ninety-seventh time at the female warbler, who is standing
talking to Frankie, the band leader. She is a thrush new to the band and
plenty cute--a blonde, with everything where it is supposed to be, and
maybe a little extra helping in a couple spots. I give her my usual
approving once-over, just in case I miss something the last ninety-six
approving once-overs I give her.

"What about her?" I say.

"It is her fault I play like I do," Hotlips Grogan tells me sadly. "Come
on. Leave us go guzzle a beer and I will tell you about it."

Just then Frankie comes over, looking nasty like as usual, and he says
to Grogan, "You are not playing too well today, Hotlips. Maybe you hurt
your lip on a beer bottle, huh?"

As usual also, his tone is pretty short on sweetness and light, and I do
not see why Grogan, who looks something like a gorilla's mother-in-law,
takes such guff from a beanpole like Frankie.

But Grogan only says, "I think something is wrong with my trumpet. I
have it fixed before tonight."

Frankie smirks. "Do that," he says, looking like a grinning weasel. "We
want you to play for dancing, not for calling in Martian moose."

Frankie walks away, and Hotlips shrugs.

"Leave us get our beer," he says simply, and we go to the ferry.

We pile into the space-ferry with the other musicians and anyone else
who is going down to dirty old terra firma, and when everybody who is
going aboard is aboard, the doors close, and the ferry drifts into
space. Hotlips and I find seats, and we look back at the gambling ship.
It is a thrill you do not get used to, no matter how many times you see
it.

The sailor boys who build the _Saturn_--they give it the handle of
_Satellite II_ then--would not know their baby now, Frankie does such a
good job of revamping it. Of course, it is not used as a gambling ship
then--at least not altogether, if you know what I mean. Way back in 1998
when they get it in the sky, they are more interested in it being useful
than pretty; anybody that got nasty and unsanitary ideas just forgot
them when they saw that iron casket floating in a sky that could be
filled with hydrogen bombs or old laundry without so much as a four-bar
intro as warning.

Frankie buys _Satellite II_ at a war surplus sale when moon flights
become as easy as commuters' trips, and he smoothes out its shape so it
looks like an egg and then puts a fin around it for ships to land on.
After that, it does not take much imagination to call it the _Saturn_.
Then he gets his Western Hemisphere license and opens for business.

My daydreaming stops, for suddenly Hotlips is grabbing my arm and
pointing out the window.

"What for are you grabbing my arm and waving your fist at the window,
Hotlips?" I inquire politely of him.

"Eddie," he whispers, all nervous and excited from something, "I see
one."

I give him a blank stare. "You see one what?"

"One flying cuspidor," he says, his face serious. "I see it hanging out
there by the _Saturn_ and then suddenly it is gone. Whoosh."

"Hallucination," I tell him. But I look out hard and try to see one too.
I don't, so I figure maybe I am right, after all.

I do not know about this "men from space" gimmick the science-fiction
people try to peddle, but lots of good substantial citizens see flying
cuspidors and I think to myself that maybe there is something to it. So
I keep looking back at the _Saturn_, but nothing unusual is going on
that I can see. My logic and super-salesmanship evidently convinces
Hotlips, for he does not say anything more about it.

Anyway, in a few minutes we joggle to a stop at Earthport, pile out,
wave our identification papers at the doorman with the lieutenant's
bars, and then take off for the _Atomic Cafe_ a block away.

Entering this gem of a drinking establishment, we make our way through
the smoke and noise to a quiet little corner table and give Mamie the
high-sign for two beers. A few minutes later she comes bouncing over
with the order and a cheery word about how invigorating it is to see us
high-class gentlemen instead of the bums that usually hang around a
joint like this trying to make time with a nice girl like her.

"That is all very nice," I say to her politely, "and we are overjoyed
beyond words to see you too, Mamie, but Hotlips and I have got strange
and mysterious things to discuss, so I would appreciate it if you would
see us later instead of now." With this, I give her arm a playful pat,
and she blushes and takes the hint.

When we are alone, I ask Hotlips, now what is the trouble which he has.

"Like I tell you before," Hotlips says, "I have a problem. So here it
is." He takes a deep breath and lets fly all at once. "I am in love of
the thrush, Stella Starlight."

I am drinking my beer when he says this, and suddenly I get a snootful
and start coughing, and he whams me on the back with his big paw so I
stop, more in self-defense than in his curing me. Somehow, the idea of a
big bruiser like Hotlips Grogan in love of a sweet fluffy thing like
Stella Starlight seems funny.

"So?" I say.

"So that is why I play so bad tonight," he says. Seeing I do not quite
catch on to the full intent of his remarks, he continues. "I am a happy
man, Eddie. I got my trumpet, a paid-for suit of clothes, a one-room
apartment with green wallpaper. Could a man ask for much more?"

"Not unless he is greedy," I agree.

Hotlips Grogan is staring at his beer as though he sees a worm in it and
looking sadder than ever. "It is a strange and funny thing," he says,
dreamy-like. "There she is singing, and there I am giving with the
trumpet, and all of a great big sudden--whammo!--it hits me, and I feel
a funny feeling in my stomach, like maybe it is full of supersuds or
something, and my mouth is dry just like cotton candy."

"Indigestion," I suggest.

He shakes his big head. "No," he says, "it is worse than indigestion."
He points to his stomach and sighs. "It is love."

"Fine," I say, happy it is not worse. "All you got to do is tell her,
get married and have lots and lots of kids."

Hotlips Grogan's big eyebrows play hopscotch around his button nose, so
I can tell he does not think I solve all his troubles with my
suggestion.

"You are a good man, Eddie," he tells me, "but you are too intellectual.
This is an affair of the heart." He sighs again. "I am never in love of
a girl before," he goes on, more worried, "and I do not know how to act.
Besides, the thrush is with us only a day, and Frankie already is making
with the eyes."

"So what should I do, give you lessons?" The idea is so laughable I
laugh at it. "Anyway, Frankie always makes with the eyes at thrushes."

"Yes," Hotlips Grogan admits, "but never before have I been in love of
any of the thrushes Frankie has made with the eyes at. Frankly, Eddie, I
am worried like all get out about this."

"Sometimes I do not even understand the way you play even before the
thrush comes, Hotlips," I admit. "Like for instance yesterday when we
play 'A Spaceship Built for Two.' This is a song, as you know, that does
not have in it many high notes, but even when you play the low notes
they sound somewhat like they maybe are trying to be high notes. It is a
matter which is perplexing to one of my curious nature."

Hotlips looks sheepish for a minute and then he says, "It is a physical
disability with me, Eddie. When I am young and practicing with my
trumpet one day, I have an accident and get my tongue caught in the
mouthpiece, and it is necessary for the doctor to operate on my tongue
and cut into it like maybe it is chopped liver."

"I am sorry to hear this, Hotlips," I say.

"I do not tell anyone this before, Eddie," Hotlips confesses. "But
afterward when I play the trumpet, I play two notes at one time, which
at first is pretty embarrassing."

"This is great, Hotlips," I proclaim as a big idea hits me; "you can
play your own harmony. With talent like that, and my brain--"

But Hotlips is shaking his head. "No, Eddie," he says. "The other note
is way off in the stratosphere someplace and no one can hear it, even
when the melody note is low. And the higher the note is you can hear,
the higher the other note is you cannot hear. Besides, now I cannot even
play what I am supposed to play, what with the thrush around."

I sit there with my beer in my hand and think about it for a while,
while Hotlips looks at me like a lost sheepdog. I scratch my head but I
do not even come up with dandruff.

Finally, I say, "Well, thrush or not, if you play no better than you do
this afternoon, Frankie will make you walk back home without a
spacesuit."

"That is for positive," Hotlips agrees sadly. "So what can I do?"

I am forced to admit that I do not know just what Hotlips can do.
"However," I say, "I have an idea." And I call Mamie over and tell her
the problem. "So you are a woman and maybe you know what my musician
friend can do," I suggest.

Mamie sighs. "I am at a loss for words concerning what your friend can
do, but I know just how he feels, for it is like that with me, too. I am
in love of a handsome young musician who comes in here, but he does not
take notice of me, except to order some beer for him and his friend."

I click my teeth sympathetically at this news.

"And I am too shy and dignified a girl to tell him," Mamie continues
sadly. "So you see I have the same problem as your friend and cannot
help you."

"See," I whisper to Hotlips, "it is perfectly normal."

"Yes," he hisses back. "But I am still miserable, and the only company I
desire is that of Stella Starlight."

"Maybe it really is your trumpet," I suggest, not very hopeful, though.

Hotlips shakes his head. "Look," he says and takes the trumpet from his
case and puts it to his lips, "and listen to this."

Inwardly, I quiver like all get out, because I figure that is just what
the management will tell us to do, once Hotlips lets go. Hotlips puffs
out his cheeks and a soft note slides from the end of the trumpet--low,
clear, and beautiful, without a waver in a spaceload. Only a few people
close by can hear the note and they do not pay us any attention, except
to think that maybe we are a little nuttier than is normal for
musicians.

From his first note, Hotlips shifts to a higher note which is just as
pretty. Then he goes on to another one and then to another, improvising
a melody I do not hear before and getting higher all the time. After a
while I can hardly hear it, it is so high, but I can feel the glass in
my hand vibrating like it wants to get out on the floor and dance. I
hold on to it with both hands, so my beer will not slosh over the side.
Then there is no sound at all from the trumpet, but Hotlips' cheeks are
puffed out and he is still blowing for all he is worth--which is plenty,
if he can play like this when Stella Starlight is around.

I tap Hotlips on the shoulder. "Hotlips, that is all very well for any
bats in the room which maybe can hear what you play, but--" He does not
pay me any attention.

Suddenly there is a large crinkle-crash of glass from the bar and a
hoarse cry from the bartender as he sees his king-size mirror come down
in little pieces. At the same time, glasses pop into fragments all over
the room and spill beer over the people holding them. Even my own glass
becomes nothing but ground glass and the beer sloshes over the table. At
the moment, however, I do not worry about that.

There are other things to worry about which are more important--like
Hotlips' and my health, for instance, which is not likely to be so good
in the near future.

Like I say, Hotlips does not play loud and it is noisy in the place, so
there are not too many who hear him. But they look around, all mad and
covered with beer, and see him there with the trumpet in his hand and a
funny look on his big face, and they put two and two together. I can see
they figure the answer is four. And what makes things worse, they are
between us and the front door, so we cannot sneak past like maybe we are
just tourists.

"Hotlips," I say to him, my voice not calm like is usual, "I think it is
a grand and glorious idea that we desert here and take ourselves
elsewhere."

Hotlips agrees. "But where?" he wants to know.

I am forced to admit to myself that he comes up with a good question.

"Over here," Mamie said suddenly, and we look across the room to see
her poking her nose through a side door.

We do not wait for a formal invite but zoom across the floor and through
the door into another, emptier room. Mamie slams the door and locks it
just as two or three bodies thump into it like they mean business.

"The manager is out there and is not completely overjoyed with your
actions of a short while ago," Mamie informs us, explaining, "I
recognize the thump the character makes."

"Evidently," I surmise, "he is in no mood to talk to concerning damages
and how we can get out of paying them, so we will talk to him later
instead of now."

"See what I mean, though, Eddie," Hotlips says. "I play fine when Stella
Starlight is not in the place. Like I say, it is love and what can I do
about it."

"It is a problem," I say. "Even if you _do_ play, you will no doubt be
fired and cannot pay for the damages to the bar room and to the
customers' clothing." Already there are holes in my plastic clothing
where the beer splashes. "If you can only give out on the _Saturn_ like
you play here," I sigh, "we can break all records and show Frankie--"

Suddenly Mamie is tugging at my arm.

"Mamie," I inquire politely of her, "why are you tugging at my arm?"

"That is it," she informs me and leans forward and whispers in my ear.

"But--" I say.

"Hurry," she says, pushing us out another door. "You have only got this
afternoon to do it."

"But--" I say again, and Hotlips and I are in the alley looking at the
door which Mamie closes in our face.

"What does Mamie say?" Hotlips wants to know eagerly. "Can she fix it up
with me and Stella Starlight?"

I scratch my head. "That I do not know, Hotlips, but she does give me an
idea which is so good I am surprised at myself I do not think of it
alone."

Hotlips gives me a blank stare. "Which is?"

"Come on," I say mysteriously. "You and me have got things to do."

It is hard to say who is more nervous that night, Hotlips or a certain
piano player with my name. Frankie is smirking like always, and Stella
Starlight is sitting and looking beautiful while she waits for her cue.
Hotlips is fumbling with his trumpet like maybe he never sees one
before. And I--even I am not exactly calm like always.

The band begins to warm up, but we do not knock ourselves out because
there are still no customers to speak of. Frankie's license makes it
plain that he has to stay over the western hemisphere so he has to wait
until it gets dark enough there for the people to want to go
night-clubbing, even though it is not really night on the _Saturn_, or
morning or anything else.

We play along like always, and Hotlips has his trumpet pressed into his
face, and nothing but beautiful sounds come from the band. I do not know
if Frankie is altogether happy about this, for he does not like Hotlips
and would like this chance to bounce him. But what surprises me most is
that the thrush, Stella Starlight, keeps looking back at Hotlips like
she notices him for the first time and is plenty worried by what she
sees.

We have a short break after a while and I am telling Hotlips that the
idea goes over real great, when Stella Starlight waltzes over. Hotlips'
big eyes bug out and I can see him shaking and covered with goosebumps.

"You do not play like that before, Hotlips," she coos. "What did you
do?"

Hotlips blushes and stammers, "Eddie and I fix--" But I give him a kick
in his big shins before he gives the whole thing away.

"Hotlips does some practicing this afternoon," I tell her, "to get his
lip in shape for tonight."

She looks at me like she is looking through me, and then she turns back
to Hotlips and says, soft and murmuring: "Please do not play too high,
Hotlips. I am delicate and am disturbed by high sounds."

She waltzes away, and I scratch my head and try to figure out what this
pitch is for. Hotlips is not trying to figure out anything; he just sits
there looking like he has just got his trumpet out of hock for the last
time.

"Hotlips," I say to him.

"Go away, please, Eddie," he tells me. "I am in heaven."

"You will be in the poorhouse or maybe even in jail if you tell somebody
how we fix your playing," I warn him.

"I still feel funny feelings though, Eddie," he tells me, frowning,
"like I cannot hit high notes now if I try."

"Then do not try," I advise. "One problem at a time is too much."

There is a commotion at the entrance on the other side of the dance
floor, where some people all dressed up come in. A woman is holding her
head and moaning and threatening to faint all over the place.

Frankie hurries over to us, running fidgety hands through his hair. "For
goodness sake, play something," he almost begs.

"What gives?" I inquire.

"Flying cuspidors," Frankie says in a frantic tone. "They are all around
the place, like they are maybe mad at something, and a few minutes ago
they buzz the ferry and get the passengers all nervous and upset. If
they do that again, business will be bad; maybe even now it will be bad.
Play something!"

He hops out in front with his baton and gives us a quick one-two, and we
all swing into "Space On My Hands," real loud so as to get people's
minds off things which Frankie wants to get people's minds off of.

Stella Starlight gets up to sing, but she looks more like she would
rather do something else. She stares at Hotlips and at the trumpet on
his lips and begins to quiver like she is about to do a dance.

I remember she says she does not like high notes, and this song has some
pretty well up in the stratosphere, especially for the trumpet section,
which is Hotlips.

She is frowning like maybe she is thinking real hard about something and
is surprised her thoughts do no good. Her face becomes waxy and there is
a frightened look on it.

She quivers some more, as the notes go up and up and up. Then she lets
out a shriek, like maybe she is going to pieces.

And then she does. Actually.

Right before our popping eyeballs she goes to pieces.

As each one in the band sees what is going on, he stops playing, until
finally Hotlips is the only one. But the trumpet is in Hotlips' hand,
and the music is coming from the recording machine we place under his
chair. The notes are clear and smooth, and you can almost feel the air
shaking with them.

But nobody notices the music or where it comes from. They are too busy
watching the thrush, Stella Starlight.

She stands there, her face as white as clay, shaking like a carrot going
through a mixmaster. And then tiny cracks appear on her face, on her
arms, even in her dress, and then a large one appears in her forehead
and goes down through her body. She splits in the middle like a cracked
walnut, and there in the center, floating three feet from the floor is a
small flying cuspidor.

Nobody in the room says anything. They just stand there, bug-eyed and
frightened like anything. Somewhere, across the room, a woman faints. I
do not feel too well myself, and I am afraid to look to see how Hotlips
takes this.

There is no sound, but I hear a voice in my mind and know that the
others hear it too. The voice sounds like it is filled with wire and
metal and is not exactly human. It says:

"_You win, Hotlips Grogan. I, as advance agent in disguise, tell you
this. We will go away and leave you and your people alone. We place a
mental block in your mind, but you outsmart us, and now you know our
weakness. We cannot stand high sounds which you can play so easy on your
trumpet. We find ourselves a home someplace else._"

With that, the cuspidor shoots across the room and plows right through
the wall.

"That's the engine room!" Frankie wails.

There is a sudden explosion from the other side of the wall, and
everybody decides all at once they would like to be someplace else, and
they all pick the same spot. The space ferry is pretty crowded, but we
jam aboard it and drift away from the _Saturn_--musicians, waiters and
paying customers all sitting in each other's laps.

The _Saturn_ is wobbling around, with flames shooting out at all angles,
and Frankie is holding his head and moaning. In the distance, you can
just about make out little specks of cuspidors heading for the wild
black yonder.

So all is well that ends well, and this is it.

Frankie uses his insurance money to open a rest home on Mars for ailing
musicians.

Hotlips is all broken up, in a manner of speaking, over Stella
Starlight's turning out to be not human, but he consoles himself with a
good job playing trumpet in a burlesque house where the girls wear
costumes made of glass and other brittle stuff.

       *       *       *       *       *

As for me, Mamie gets me a job playing piano at the place where she
works, and everything is okay except for one thing. When Mamie is around
I cannot seem to concentrate on my playing. I feel a funny feeling in my
stomach, like maybe it is full of supersuds or something, and my mouth
is dry like cotton candy.

I think maybe it is indigestion.




Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from _Fantastic Universe_ August 1958.
    Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed. Minor spelling and
    typographical errors have been corrected without note.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Flying Cuspidors, by V. R. Francis

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE FLYING CUSPIDORS ***

***** This file should be named 29749.txt or 29749.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/9/7/4/29749/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
