The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Hohokam Dig, by Theodore Pratt

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Hohokam Dig

Author: Theodore Pratt

Release Date: August 24, 2009 [EBook #29793]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HOHOKAM DIG ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









    _From_ where _had these attacking Indians come? Out of a long
    forgotten and dim past? Had their medicine man seen the one supreme
    vision?_


     the
 hohokam
     dig

 _by ... Theodore Pratt_


 At first they thought the attack was a
 joke. And then they realized the truth!


At first the two scientists thought the Indian attack on them was a joke
perpetrated by some of their friends. After all, modern Indians did not
attack white men any more.

Except that these did.

George Arthbut and Sidney Hunt were both out of New York, on the staff
of the Natural History Museum. George was an ethnologist who specialized
in what could be reconstructed about the prehistoric Indians of North
America, with emphasis on those of the Southwest. He was a tall, lean,
gracious bald man in his early sixties.

Sidney was an archeologist who was fascinated by the ruins of the same
kind of ancient Indians. Medium-sized, with black hair that belied his
sixty-five years, he and George made an excellent team, being the
leaders in their field.

They had come west on a particular bit of business this spring, trying
to solve the largest question that remained about the old cliff dwellers
and the prehistoric desert Indians, both of whom had deserted their
villages and gone elsewhere for reasons that remained a mystery.

One theory was that drought had driven them both away. Another theory
ran to the effect that enemies wiped them out or made off with them as
captives. Still another supposition, at least for the Hohokam desert
people, the builders of Casa Grande whose impressive ruins still stood
near Coolidge, had to do with their land giving out so they could no
longer grow crops, forcing them to go elsewhere to find better soil.

No one really knew. It was all pure guesswork.

       *       *       *       *       *

The two scientists meant to spend the entire summer trying to solve this
riddle for all time, concentrating on it to the exclusion of everything
else. They drove west in a station wagon stuffed with equipment and
tracking a U-Haul-It packed with more.

George drove, on a road that was only two sand tracks across the wild
empty desert between Casa Grande Monument and Tonto National Monument
where cliff dwellers had lived. It was here, not far ahead, in new ruins
that were being excavated, that they hoped to solve the secret of the
exodus of the prehistoric Indians. The place was known as the Hohokam
Dig.

They topped a rise of ground and came to the site of the dig. Here the
sand tracks ended right in the middle of long trenches dug out to reveal
thick adobe walls. In the partially bared ruins the outline of a small
village could be seen; the detailed excavation would be done this summer
by workmen who would arrive from Phoenix and Tucson.

George stopped their caravan and the two men got out, stretching their
legs. They looked about, both more interested in the dig, now they were
back at it, than setting up camp. They walked around, examining various
parts of it, and the excitement of the promise of things to be
discovered in the earth came to them. "This summer we'll learn the
answer," Sidney predicted.

With skeptical hope George replied, "Maybe."

It was early afternoon when they set up camp, getting out their tent
from the U-Haul-It. They took out most of their gear, even setting up a
portable TV set run on batteries brought along. They worked efficiently
and rapidly, having done this many times before and having their
equipment well organized from long experience. By the middle of the
afternoon all was ready and they rested, sitting on folding chairs at a
small table just outside the opening of their tent.

Looking around at the dig Sidney remarked, "Wouldn't it be easy if we
could talk to some of the people who once lived here?"

"There's a few questions I'd like to ask them," said George. "I
certainly wish we had some to talk with."

He had no more than uttered this casual wish than there sounded, from
all sides of where they sat, screeching whoops. The naked brown men who
suddenly appeared seemed to materialize from right out of the
excavations. As they yelled they raised their weapons. The air was
filled, for an instant, with what looked like long arrows. Most of them
whistled harmlessly past the two scientists, but one hit the side of the
station wagon, making a resounding thump and leaving a deep dent, while
two buried themselves in the wood of the U-Haul-It and remained there,
quivering.

George and Sidney, after the shock of their first surprise at this
attack, leaped to their feet.

"The car!" cried Sidney. "Let's get out of here!"

They both started to move. Then George stopped and grabbed Sidney's arm.
"Wait!"

"Wait?" Sidney demanded. "They'll kill us!"

"Look," advised George, indicating the red men who surrounded them; they
now made no further move of attack.

George gazed about. "Oh," he said, "you think somebody's playing a joke
on us?"

"Could be," said George. He ran one hand over his bald head.

"Some dear friends," Sidney went on, resenting the scare that had been
thrown into them, "hired some Indians to pretend to attack us?"

"Maybe Pimas," said George. He peered at the Indians, who now were
jabbering among themselves and making lamenting sounds as they glanced
about at the ruins of the ancient village. There were eighteen of them.
They were clad in nothing more than a curious cloth of some kind run
between their legs and up and over a cord about their waists, to form a
short apron, front and back.

"Or Zunis," said Sidney.

"Maybe Maricopas," said George.

"Except," Sidney observed, "none of them look like those kind of
Indians. And those arrows they shot." He stared at the two sticking in
the U-Haul-It. "Those aren't arrows, George--they're atlatl lances!"

"Yes," said George.

Sidney breathed, "They aren't holding bows--they've got atlatls!"

"No modern Indian of any kind," said George, "uses an atlatl."

"Most of them wouldn't even know what it was," Sidney agreed. "They
haven't been used for hundreds of years; the only place you see them is
in museums."

An atlatl was the weapon which had replaced the stone axe in the stone
age. It was a throwing stick consisting of two parts. One was the lance,
a feathered shaft up to four feet long, tipped with a stone point. The
two-foot flat stick that went with this had a slot in one end and two
rawhide finger loops. The lance end was fitted in the slot to be thrown.
The stick was an extension of the human arm to give the lance greater
force. Some atlatls had small charm stones attached to them to give
them extra weight and magic.

Charm stones could be seen fastened to a few of the atlatls being held
by the Indians now standing like bronze statues regarding them.

George whispered, "What do you make of it?"

"It isn't any joke," replied Sidney. He gazed tensely at the Indians.
"That's all I'm sure of."

"Have you noticed their breechclouts?"

Sidney stared again. "They aren't modern clouts. George, they're right
out of Hohokam culture!"

"They aren't made of cloth, either. That's plaited yucca fibre."

"Just like we've dug up many times. Only here ..." George faltered.
"It's being worn by--by I don't know what."

"Look at their ornaments."

Necklaces, made of pierced colored stones, hung about many of the brown
necks. Shell bracelets were to be seen, and here and there a carved
piece of turquoise appeared.

"Look at the Indian over there," George urged.

Sidney looked to the side where George indicated, and croaked, "It's a
girl!"

It was a girl indeed. She stood straight and magnificent in body
completely bare except for the brief apron at her loins. Between her
beautiful full copper breasts there hung a gleaming piece of turquoise
carved in the shape of a coyote.

At her side stood a tall young Indian with a handsome face set with
great pride. On her other side was a wizened little old fellow with a
wrinkled face and ribs corrugated like a saguaro.

Sidney turned back and demanded, "What do you make of this? Are we
seeing things?" Hopefully, he suggested, "A mirage or sort of a mutual
hallucination?"

In a considered, gauging tone George replied, "They're real."

"Real?" cried Sidney. "What do you mean, real?"

"Real in a way. I mean, Sidney, these--I sound crazy to myself saying
it--but I think these are--well, Sid, maybe they're actual prehistoric
Indians."

"Huh?"

"Well, let's put it this way: We asked for them and we got them."

Sidney stared, shocked at George's statement. "You're crazy, all right,"
he said. "Hohokams in the middle of the Twentieth Century?"

"I didn't say they're Hohokams, though they probably are, of the village
here."

"You said they're prehistoric," Sidney accused. He quavered, "Just how
could they be?"

"Sid, you remember in our Indian studies, again and again, we meet the
medicine man who has visions. Even modern ones have done things that are
pretty impossible to explain. I believe they have spiritual powers
beyond the capability of the white man. The prehistoric medicine men may
have developed this power even more. I think the old man there is their
medicine man."

"So?" Sidney invited.

"I'm just supposing now, mind you," George went on. He rubbed his bald
pate again as though afraid of what thoughts were taking place under it.
"Maybe way back--a good many hundreds of years ago--this medicine man
decided to have a vision of the future. And it worked. And here he is
now with some of his people."

"Wait a minute," Sidney objected. "So he had this vision and transported
these people to this moment in time. But if it was hundreds of years ago
they're already dead, been dead for a long time, so how could they--"

"Don't you see, Sid? They can be dead, but their appearance in the
future--for them--couldn't occur until now because it's happened with us
and we weren't living and didn't come along here at the right time until
this minute."

Sidney swallowed. "Maybe," he muttered, "maybe."

"Another thing," George said. "If we can talk with them we can learn
everything we've tried to know in all our work and solve in a minute
what we're ready to spend the whole summer, even years, digging for."

Sidney brightened. "That's what we wanted to do."

George studied the Indians again. "I think they're just as surprised as
we are. When they discovered themselves here and saw us--and you must
remember we're the first white men they've ever seen--their immediate
instinct was to attack. Now that we don't fight back they're waiting for
us to make a move."

"What do we do?"

"Take it easy," advised George. "Don't look scared and don't look
belligerent. Look friendly and hope some of the modern Indian dialects
we know can make connection with them."

       *       *       *       *       *

The two scientists began, at a gradual pace, to make their way toward
the old man, the young man, and the girl. As they approached, the girl
drew back slightly. The young man reached over his shoulder and from the
furred quiver slung on his back drew an atlatl lance and fitted it to
his throwing stick, holding it ready. The other warriors, all about,
followed suit.

The medicine man alone stepped forward. He held up a short colored stick
to which bright feathers were attached and shook it at the two white
men. They stopped.

"That's his aspergill," observed Sidney. "I'd like to have that one."

The medicine man spoke. At first the scientists were puzzled, then
George told Sidney, "That's Pima, or pretty close to it, just pronounced
differently. It probably shows we were right in thinking the Pimas
descended from these people. He wants to know who we are."

George gave their names. The medicine man replied, "The man who has
white skin instead of red speaks our language in a strange way. I am
Huk." He turned to the young man at his side and said, "This is Good
Fox, our young chief." He indicated the girl. "That is Moon Water, his
wife."

George explained what he and the other white man with him were doing
here. Huk, along with all the other Indians, including Good Fox and Moon
Water, listened intently; they seemed greatly excited and disturbed.

When George was finished Good Fox turned to Huk and said, "You have
succeeded, wise one, in bringing us forward, far in the future to the
time of these men with white skins."

"This is the truth," said the wrinkled Huk; he did not boast but rather
seemed awed.

Moon Water spoke in a frightened tone. She looked about at the partially
excavated ruins and asked, "But what has happened to our village?" She
faltered, "Is this the way it will look in the future?"

"It is the way," Good Fox informed her sorrowfully.

"I weep for our people," she said. "I do not want to see it." She hung
her pretty face over her bare body, then, in a moment, raised it
resolutely.

Good Fox shook the long scraggly black hair away from his eyes and told
the white men, "We did not mean to harm you. We did not know what else
to do upon finding you here and our village buried."

Ignoring that in his excited interest, Sidney asked, "What year are
you?"

"Year?" asked Good Fox. "What is this word?"

Both Sidney and George tried to get over to him what year meant in
regard to a date in history, but Good Fox, Huk, and Moon Water, and none
of the others could understand.

"We do not know what you mean," Huk said. "We know only that we live
here in this village--not as you see it now--but one well built and
alive with our people. As the medicine man I am known to have extra
power and magic in visions. Often I have wondered what life would be
like in the far future. With this group I conjured up a vision of it,
carrying them and myself to what is now here before us."

George and Sidney glanced at each other. George's lips twitched and
those of Sidney trembled. George said softly to the Indians, "Let us be
friends." He explained to them what they were doing here. "We are trying
to find out what you were--are--like. Especially what made you desert
people leave your villages."

They looked blank. Huk said, "But we have not left--except in this
vision."

In an aside to George, Sidney said, "That means we've caught them before
they went south or wherever they went." He turned back to Huk. "Have
the cliff people yet deserted their dwellings?"

Huk nodded solemnly. "They have gone. Some of them have joined us here,
and more have gone to other villages."

"We have read that into the remains of your people, especially at Casa
Grande," Sidney told him. With rising excitement in his voice he asked,
"Can you tell us why they left?"

Huk nodded. "This I can do."

Now the glance of Sidney and George at each other was quick, their eyes
lighting.

"I'll take it down on the typewriter," Sidney said. "Think of it! Now
we'll know."

He led Huk to the table set in front of the tent, where he brought out a
portable typewriter and opened and set it up. He sat on one chair, and
Huk, gingerly holding his aspergill before him as though to protect
himself, sat on the other.

Good Fox, Moon Water and the other Indians crowded about, curious to see
the machine that came alive under Sidney's fingers as Huk began to
relate his story. Soon their interest wandered in favor of other things
about the two men with white skin. They wanted to know about the machine
with four legs.

George opened up the hood of the station wagon and showed them the
engine. He sat in the car and started the motor. At the noise the
Indians jumped back, alarmed, and reaching for their atlatls. Moon Water
approached the rear end of the car. Her pretty nose wrinkled at the
fumes coming from it and she choked, drawing back in disgust. "It is
trying to kill me," she said.

Clearly, she did not approve of an automobile.

George cut off its engine.

Over Good Fox's shoulder hung a small clay water jug hung in a plaited
yucca net. George asked for a drink from it and when he tasted it and
found it fresh it was wondrous to him that its water was hundreds of
years old. He brought out a thermos, showing the Indians the modern
version of carrying water. They tasted of its contents and exclaimed at
its coolness. Good Fox held the thermos, admiring it.

"Would you like to have it?" asked George.

"You would give it to me?" the handsome young Indian asked.

"It's yours."

"Then I give you mine." He gave George his clay water jug and could not
know how much more valuable it was than the thermos.

George then took them to the portable television set and turned it on.
When faces, music, and words appeared the Indians jerked back, then
jabbered and gathered closer to watch. A girl singer, clad in a gown
that came up to her neck, caused Moon Water to inquire, "Why does she
hide herself? Is she ashamed?"

The standards of modesty, George reflected as he glanced at the lovely
nude form of the prehistoric Indian girl, change with the ages.

Of the people and noises on the TV screen Good Fox wanted to know quite
solemnly, "Are these crazy people? Is it the way you treat your people
who go crazy?"

George laughed. "You might say it's something like that."

A shout came from Sidney at the card table near the tent where he was
taking down Huk's story. "George! He's just told me why the cliff people
left! And why the desert people will have to leave in time. It's a
reason we never thought of! It's because--"

Just then a big multi-engined plane came over, drowning out his words.
The Indians stared skyward, now in great alarm. They looked about for a
place to run and hide, but there was none. They held their hands over
their ears and glanced fearfully at the TV which now spluttered, its
picture and sound thrown off by the plane. Awesomely, they waited until
the plane went over.

"We fly now in machines with wings," George explained.

"To make such a noise in the air," Moon Water said, "is wicked,
destroying all peace."

"I'll agree with you there," said George.

"You have this," Good Fox observed, indicating the TV, which was now
back to normal, "and you send the other through the sky to make it
crazier than before." He shook his head, not comprehending.

George shut off the TV. He took up a camera of the kind that
automatically finishes a picture in a minute's time. Grouping Good Fox,
Moon Water and the other warriors, he took their picture, waited, then
pulled it out and showed it to them.

They cried out, one man shouting in fear, "It is great magic!"

George took a number of photographs, including several of Huk as he sat
talking with Sidney. No matter what happened he would have this record
as Sidney would have that he was taking down on the typewriter.

Next he showed them a pair of binoculars, teaching them how to look
through them. They exclaimed and Good Fox said, "With this we could see
our enemies before they see us."

"You have enemies?" George asked.

"The Apache," Good Fox said fiercely.

George handed him the binoculars. "It is yours to use against the
Apache."

Solemnly the young chief answered, "The man with white skin is thanked.
The red man gives in return his atlatl and lances." He held out his
throwing stick and unslung his quiver of lances. George accepted them
with thanks; they would be museum pieces.

Finally George showed them a rifle. He looked about for game and after
some searching saw a rabbit sitting on a mound in the excavations. As
he took aim Good Fox asked, "You would hunt it with your stick?"

George nodded.

"This cannot be done from here," stated one warrior.

George squeezed the trigger. Instantaneously with the explosion of the
shell the rabbit jumped high and then came down, limp and dead. The
Indians yelled with fright and ran off in all directions. Huk jumped up
from the table. Then all stopped and cautiously returned. One went to
the rabbit and picked it up, bringing it back. All, including Huk who
left the table, stared with fright at it and at the rifle.

Moon Water expressed their opinion of it. "The thunder of the killing
stick is evil."

"Moon Water speaks the truth," said Huk.

"It would make hunting easy," said Good Fox, "but we do not want it even
if given to us."

He drew back from the rifle, and the others edged away from it.

George put it down.

Sidney held up a sheaf of papers. "I've got it all, George," he said
exultantly in English, "right here! I asked Huk if they can stay with us
in our time, at least for a while. We can study them more, maybe even
take them back to show the world."

"What did he say?"

"He didn't have a chance to reply when you shot the rifle."

George put it formally to the Indians, addressing Huk, Good Fox, Moon
Water and the rest. "You have seen something of the modern world. We
would like you to stay in it if it is your wish. I don't know how long
you could stay in Huk's vision, but if you can remain here permanently
and not go back to your time and--well, not being alive there any
more--we hope you will consider this."

Huk replied, "It is possible that we could stay in your time, at least
as long as my vision lasts, which might be for as long as I lived." He
glanced at Good Fox.

The young chief in turn looked at Moon Water. Her gaze went to the
station wagon, to the TV, then up at the sky where the plane had
appeared, at the rifle, the camera, the thermos, and all else of the
white man. She seemed to weigh their values and disadvantages, looking
dubious and doubtful.

Good Fox announced, "We will hold a council about it. As is our custom,
all have words to say about such a thing."

Abruptly he led his people away, into the excavations and over a slight
rise of ground, behind which they disappeared.

Sidney murmured, "I don't like that so much."

"They must do as they want." George led the way to the card table and
they sat there. On it rested Huk's aspergill.

"He gave it to me," Sidney explained.

George placed Good Fox's netted clay water jug and his atlatl and furred
quiver of lances on the table, together with the pictures he had taken
of the ancient Indians. They waited.

Sidney, glancing at the low hill behind which the Indians had gone,
said, "What they're doing is choosing between living in modern
civilization and remaining dead. What do you think they'll do?"

"I don't know," said George. "They didn't think so much of us."

"But they couldn't choose death and complete oblivion!"

"We'll see."

They waited some more.

"At least," said Sidney, indicating the articles on the table, "we'll
have these for evidence." He held up the sheaf of papers containing
Huk's story. "And this, giving the real reason the cliff dwellers left.
I haven't told you what it was, George. It's so simple that--"

He didn't complete his sentence, for just then Huk, Good Fox, Moon
Water, and the other warriors made their choice. It was announced
dramatically.

The water jug, the aspergill, and the atlatl and quiver of lances
disappeared from the table. In their places, suddenly, there were the
thermos and the binoculars.

Sidney stared stupidly at them.

George said quietly, "They've gone back."

"But they can't do this!" George protested.

"They have."

Sidney's hand shook as he picked up the sheaf of papers holding Huk's
story. Indicating it and the photographs, he said, "Well, they haven't
taken these away."

"Haven't they?" asked George. He picked up some of the pictures. "Look."

Sidney looked and saw that the pictures were now blank. His glance went
quickly to the typewritten sheets of paper in his hands. He cried out
and then shuffled them frantically.

They, too, were blank.

Sidney jumped up. "I don't care!" he exclaimed. "He told me and I've got
it here!" He pointed to his head. "I can remember it, anyway."

"Can you?" asked George.

"Why, certainly I can," Sidney asserted confidently. "The reason the
cliff dwellers left, George, was that they ..." Sidney stopped.

"What's the matter, Sid?"

"Well, I--it--I guess it just slipped my mind for a second." His brow
puckered. He looked acutely upset and mystified. "Huk told me," he
faltered. "Just a minute ago I was thinking of it when I started to tell
you. Now ... I can't remember."

"That's gone, too."

"I'll get it!" Sidney declared. "I've just forgotten it for a minute.
I'll remember!"

"No," said George, "you won't."

Sidney looked around. "There must be something left." He thought. "The
atlatl lances they shot at us!" He looked at the U-Haul-It. The lances
no longer stuck in its side. Nor were those that had fallen to the
ground to be seen.

Sidney sat down again, heavily. "We had it all," he moaned. "Everything
we'd been working for. And now ..."

"Now we'll have to dig for it again," said George. "Do it the hard way.
We'll start tomorrow when the workmen come."

Sidney looked up. "There's one thing!" he cried. "The dent in the car
made by the lance! It's still there, George! However everything else
worked, that was forgotten. It's still there!"

George glanced at the dent in the side panel of the station wagon. "It's
still there," he agreed. "But only to tell us this wasn't a dream. No
one else would believe it wasn't caused by a rock."

George groaned. He stared at the rise of ground behind which the Indians
had disappeared. "Huk," he pleaded. "Good Fox. Moon Water. The others.
Come back, come back ..."

No one appeared over the rise of ground as the cool desert night began
to close in.




Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from _Fantastic Universe_ November 1956.
    Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed. Minor spelling and
    typographical errors have been corrected without note.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Hohokam Dig, by Theodore Pratt

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HOHOKAM DIG ***

***** This file should be named 29793.txt or 29793.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/9/7/9/29793/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
