The Project Gutenberg EBook of Tree, Spare that Woodman, by Dave Dryfoos

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Tree, Spare that Woodman

Author: Dave Dryfoos

Illustrator: Fries

Release Date: August 24, 2009 [EBook #29794]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TREE, SPARE THAT WOODMAN ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









[Illustration: Illustrated by FRIES]


 Tree,
 Spare That Woodman

 By DAVE DRYFOOS


 _The single thing to fear was
 fear--ghastly, walking fear!_


Stiff with shock, Naomi Heckscher stood just inside the door to Cappy's
one-room cabin, where she'd happened to be when her husband discovered
the old man's body.

Her nearest neighbor--old Cappy--dead. After all his wire-pulling to get
into the First Group, and his slaving to make a farm on this alien
planet, dead in bed!

Naomi's mind circled frantically, contrasting her happy anticipations
with this shocking actuality. She'd come to call on a friend, she
reminded herself, a beloved friend--round, white-haired, rosy-cheeked;
lonely because he'd recently become a widower. To her little boy, Cappy
was a combination Grandpa and Santa Claus; to herself, a sort of newly
met Old Beau.

Her mouth had been set for a sip of his home brew, her eyes had pictured
the delight he'd take in and give to her little boy.

She'd walked over with son and husband, expecting nothing more shocking
than an ostentatiously stolen kiss. She'd found a corpse. And to have
let Cappy die alone, in this strange world ...

She and Ted could at least have been with him, if they'd known.

But they'd been laughing and singing in their own cabin only a mile
away, celebrating Richard's fifth birthday. She'd been annoyed when
Cappy failed to show up with the present he'd promised Richard.
Annoyed--while the old man pulled a blanket over his head, turned his
round face to the wall, and died.

Watching compassionately, Naomi was suddenly struck by the
matter-of-fact way Ted examined the body. Ted wasn't surprised.

"Why did you tell Richard to stay outside, just now?" she demanded. "How
did you know what we'd find here? And why didn't you tell me, so I could
keep Richard at home?"

She saw Ted start, scalded by the splash of her self-directed anger, saw
him try to convert his wince into a shrug.

"You insisted on coming," he reminded her gently. "I couldn't have kept
you home without--without saying too much, worrying you--with the
Earth-ship still a year away. Besides, I didn't know for sure, till we
saw the tree-things around the cabin."

The tree-things. The trees-that-were-not. Gnarled blue trunks,
half-hidden by yellow leaf-needles stretching twenty feet into the sky.
Something like the hoary mountain hemlocks she and Ted had been forever
photographing on their Sierra honeymoon, seven life-long years ago.

Three of those tree-things had swayed over Cappy's spring for a far
longer time than Man had occupied this dreadful planet. Until just
now ...

The three of them had topped the rise that hid Cappy's farm from their
own. Richard was running ahead like a happily inquisitive puppy.
Suddenly he'd stopped, pointing with a finger she distinctly recalled as
needing thorough soapy scrubbing.

"Look, Mommie!" he'd said. "Cappy's trees have moved. They're around the
cabin, now."

He'd been interested, not surprised. In the past year, Mazda had become
Richard's home; only Earth could surprise him.

But, Ted, come to think of it, had seemed withdrawn, his face a careful
blank. And she?

"Very pretty," she'd said, and stuffed the tag-end of fear back into the
jammed, untidy mental pigeon-hole she used for all unpleasant thoughts.
"Don't run too far ahead, dear."

But now she had to know what Ted knew.

"Tell me!" she said.

"These tree-things--"

"There've been _other_ deaths! How many?"

"Sixteen. But I didn't want to tell you. Orders were to leave women and
children home when we had that last Meeting, remember."

"What did they say at the Meeting? Out with it, Ted!"

"That--that the tree-things think!"

"But that's ridiculous!"

"Well, unfortunately, no. Look, I'm not trying to tell you that
terrestrial trees think, too, nor even that they have a nervous system.
They don't. But--well, on Earth, if you've ever touched a lighted match
to the leaf of a sensitive plant like the mimosa, say--and I
have--you've been struck by the speed with which _other_ leaves close up
and droop. I mean, sure, we know that the leaves droop because certain
cells exude water and nearby leaves feel the heat of the match. But the
others don't, yet they droop, too. Nobody knows how it works ..."

"But _that's_ just defensive!"

"Sure. But _that's_ just on Earth!"

"All right, dear. I won't argue any more. But I still don't understand.
Go on about the Meeting."

"Well, they said these tree-things both create and respond to the
patterned electrical impulses of the mind. It's something like the way a
doctor creates fantasies by applying a mild electric current to the
right places on a patient's brain. In the year we've been here, the
trees--or some of them--have learned to read from and transmit to our
minds. The range, they say, is around fifty feet. But you have to be
receptive--"

"Receptive?"

"Fearful. That's the condition. So I didn't want to tell you because you
_must not_ let yourself become afraid, Naomi. We're clearing trees from
the land, in certain areas. And it's their planet, after all. Fear is
their weapon and fear can kill!"

"You still--all you men--should have let us women know! What do you
think we are? Besides, I don't really believe you. How can fear kill?"

"Haven't you ever heard of a savage who gets in bad with his
witch-doctor and is killed by magic? The savage is convinced, having
seen or heard of other cases, that he _can_ be killed. The witch-doctor
sees to it he's told he _will_ be killed. And sometimes the savage
actually dies--"

"From poison, I've always thought."

"The poison of fear. The physical changes that accompany fear, magnified
beyond belief by belief itself."

"But how in the world could all this have affected Cappy? He wasn't a
savage. And he was elderly, Ted. A bad heart, maybe. A stroke.
Anything."

"He passed his pre-flight physical only a year ago. And--well, he lived
all alone. He was careful not to let you see it, but I know he worried
about these three trees on his place. And I know he got back from the
Meeting in a worried state of mind. Then, obviously, the trees
moved--grouped themselves around his cabin within easy range. But don't
be afraid of them, Naomi. So long as you're not, they can't hurt you.
They're not bothering us now."

"No. But where's Richard?"

Naomi's eyes swept past Ted, encompassing the cabin. No Richard! He'd
been left outside ...

Glass tinkled and crashed as she flung back the cabin door. "Richard!
Richard!"

Her child was not in sight. Nor within earshot, it seemed.

"Richard Heckscher! Where are you?" Sanity returned with the
conventional primness. And it brought her answer.

"Here I am, Mommie! Look-at!"

He was in a tree! He was fifteen feet off the ground, high in the
branches of a tree-thing, swaying--

For an instant, dread flowed through Naomi as if in her bloodstream and
something was cutting off her breath. Then, as the hands over mouth and
throat withdrew, she saw they were Ted's. She let him drag her into the
cabin and close the broken door.

"Better not scare Richard," he said quietly, shoving her gently into a
chair. "He might fall."

Dumbly she caught her breath, waiting for the bawling out she'd earned.

But Ted said, "Richard keeps us safe. So long as we fear for him, and
not ourselves--"

That was easy to do. Outside, she heard a piping call: "Look at me now,
Mommie!"

"Showing off!" she gasped. In a flashing vision, Richard was half boy,
half vulture, flapping to the ground with a broken wing.

"Here," said Ted, picking up a notebook that had been on the table.
"Here's Cappy's present. A homemade picture book. Bait."

"Let _me_ use it!" she said. "Richard may have seen I was scared just
now."

Outside again, under the tree, she called, "Here's Cappy's present,
Richard. He's gone away and left it for you."

Would he notice how her voice had gone up half an octave, become flat
and shrill?

"I'm coming down," Richard said. "Let me down, tree."

He seemed to be struggling. The branches were cagelike. He was caught!

Naomi's struggle was with her voice. "How did you _ever_ get up there?"
she called.

"The tree let me up, Mommie," Richard explained solemnly, "but he won't
let me down!" He whimpered a little.

He must _not_ become frightened! "You tell that tree you've got to come
right down this instant!" she ordered.

She leaned against the cabin for support. Ted came out and slipped his
arm around her.

"Break off a few leaves, Richard," he suggested. "That'll show your tree
who's boss!"

Standing close against her husband, Naomi tried to stop shaking. But she
lacked firm support, for Ted shook, too.

His advice to Richard was sound, though. What had been a trap became,
through grudging movement of the branches, a ladder. Richard climbed
down, scolding at the tree like an angry squirrel.

       *       *       *       *       *

Naomi thought she'd succeeded in shutting her mind. But when her little
boy slid down the final bit of trunk and came for his present, Naomi
broke. Like a startled animal, she thrust the book into his hands,
picked him up and ran. Her mind was a jelly, red and quaking.

She stopped momentarily after running fifty yards. "Burn the trees!" she
screamed over her shoulder. "Burn the cabin! Burn it all!" She ran on,
Ted's answering shouts beyond her comprehension.

Fatigue halted her. At the top of the rise between Cappy's farm and
their own, pain and dizziness began flowing over her in waves. She set
Richard down on the mauve soil and collapsed beside him.

When she sat up, Richard squatted just out of reach, watching curiously.
She made an effort at casualness: "Let's see what Daddy's doing back
there."

"He's doing just what you said to, Mommie!" Richard answered
indignantly.

Her men were standing together, Naomi realized. She laughed. After a
moment, Richard joined her. Then he looked for his book, found it a few
paces away, and brought it to her.

"Read to me, Mommie."

"At home," she said.

Activity at Cappy's interested her now. Wisps of smoke were licking
around the trees. A tongue of flame lapped at one while she watched.
Branches writhed. The trees were too slow-moving to escape ...

But where was Ted? What had she exposed him to, with her hysterical
orders? She held her breath till he moved within sight, standing quietly
by a pile of salvaged tools. Behind him the cabin began to smoke.

Ted wasn't afraid, then. He understood what he faced. And Richard wasn't
afraid, either, because he didn't understand.

But she? Surreptitiously Naomi pinched her hip till it felt black and
blue. That was for being such a fool. She must _not_ be afraid!

"Daddy seems to be staying there," she said. "Let's wait for him at
home, Richard."

"Are you going to make Daddy burn _our_ tree?"

She jumped as if stung. Then, consciously womanlike, she sought relief
in talk.

"What do _you_ think we should do, dear?"

"Oh, I _like_ the tree, Mommie. It's cool under there. And the tree
plays with me."

"How, Richard?"

"If I'm pilot, he's navigator. Or ship, maybe. But he's so dumb, Mommie!
I always have to tell him everything. Doesn't know what a fairy is, or
Goldilocks, or anything!"

He clutched his book affectionately, rubbing his face on it. "Hurry up,
Mommie. It'll be bedtime before you ever read to me!"

She touched his head briefly. "You can look at the book while I fix your
supper."

       *       *       *       *       *

But to explain Cappy's pictures--crudely crayoned cartoons, really--she
had to fill in the story they illustrated. She told it while Richard
ate: how the intrepid Spaceman gallantly used his ray gun against the
villainous Martians to aid the green-haired Princess. Richard spooned up
the thrills with his mush, gazing fascinated at Cappy's colorful and
fantastic pictures, propped before him on the table. Had Ted been home,
the scene might almost have been blissful.

It might have been ... if their own tree hadn't reminded her of
Cappy's. Still, she'd almost managed to stuff her fear back into that
mental pigeon-hole before their own tree. It was unbelievable, but she'd
been glancing out the window every few minutes, so she saw it start.
Their own tree began to walk.

Down the hill it came--right there!--framed in the window behind
Richard's head, moving slowly but inexorably on a root system that
writhed along the surface. Like some ancient sculpture of Serpents
Supporting the Tree of Life. Except that it brought death ...

"Are you sick, Mommie?"

No, not sick. Just something the matter with her throat, preventing a
quick answer, leaving no way to keep Richard from turning to look out
the window.

"I think our tree is coming to play with me, Mommie."

No, no! Not Richard!

"Remember how you used to say that about Cappy? When he was really
coming to see your daddy?"

"But Daddy isn't home!"

"He'll get here, dear. Now eat your supper."

A lot to ask of an excited little boy. And the tree _was_ his friend, it
seemed. Cappy's tree had even followed the child's orders. Richard might
intercede--

No! Expose him to such danger? How could she think of it?

"Had enough to eat, dear? Wash your hands and face at the pump, and you
can stay out and play till Daddy gets home. I--I want----I may have to
see your friend, the tree, by myself ..."

"But you haven't finished my story!"

"I will when Daddy gets home. And if I'm not here, you tell Daddy to do
it."

"Where are you going, Mommie?"

"I might see Cappy, dear. Now go and wash, please!"

"Sure, Mommie. Don't cry."

Accept his kiss, even if it _is_ from a mouth rimmed with supper. And
don't rub it off till he's gone out, you damned fool. You frightened
fool. You shaking, sweating, terror-stricken fool.

Who's he going to kiss when you're not here?

The tree has stopped. Our little tree is having its supper. How nice.
Sucking sustenance direct from soil with aid of sun and air in true
plant fashion--but exhausting our mineral resources.

(How wise of Ted to make you go to those lectures! You wouldn't want to
die in ignorance, would you?)

The lecture--come on, let's go back to the lecture! Let's free our soil
from every tree or we'll not hold the joint in fee. No, not joint. A
vulgarism, teacher would say. Methinks the times are out of joint.
Aroint thee, tree!

Now a pinch. Pinch yourself hard in the same old place so it'll hurt
real bad. Then straighten your face and go stick your head out the
window. Your son is talking--your son, your sun.

Can your son be eclipsed by a tree? A matter of special spatial
relationships, and the space is shrinking, friend. The tree is only a
few hundred feet from the house. It has finished its little supper and
is now running around. Like Richard. _With_ Richard! Congenial, what?

Smile, stupid. Your son speaks. Answer him.

"What, dear?"

"I see Daddy! He just came over the hill. He's running! Can I go meet
him, Mommie?"

"No, dear. It's too far."

Too far. Far too far.

"Did you say something to me, Richard?"

"No. I was talking to the tree. I'm the Spaceman and he's the Martian.
But he doesn't want to be the Martian!"

Richard plays. Let us play. Let us play.

You're close enough to get into the game, surely. A hundred and fifty
feet, maybe. Effective range, fifty feet. Rate of motion? Projected
time-interval? Depends on which system you observe it from. Richard has
a system.

"He doesn't want to play, Mommie. He wants to see you!"

"You tell that tree your Mommie _never_ sees strangers when Daddy isn't
home!"

"I'll _make_ him wait!"

Stoutly your pot-bellied little protector prevents his protective mother
from going to pot.

"If he won't play, I'll use my ray gun on him!"

Obviously, the tree won't play. Watch your son lift empty hands, arm
himself with a weapon yet to be invented, and open fire on the advancing
foe.

"Aa-aa-aa!"

So _that's_ how a ray gun sounds!

"You're dead, tree! You're dead! Now you _can't_ play with me any more.
You're dead!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Seeing it happen, then, watching the tree accept the little boy's
fantasy as fact, Naomi wondered why she'd never thought of that herself.

So the tree was a treacherous medicine-man, was it? A true-believing
witch-doctor? And who could be more susceptible to the poisoning of fear
than a witch-doctor who has made fear work--and believes it's being used
against him?

It was all over. She and the tree bit the dust together. But the tree
was dead, and Naomi merely fainting, and Ted would soon be home ...

                                                        --DAVE DRYFOOS




Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from _Galaxy Science Fiction_ October 1952.
    Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed. Minor spelling and
    typographical errors have been corrected without note.





End of Project Gutenberg's Tree, Spare that Woodman, by Dave Dryfoos

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TREE, SPARE THAT WOODMAN ***

***** This file should be named 29794.txt or 29794.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/9/7/9/29794/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
