The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Most Sentimental Man, by Evelyn E. Smith

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Most Sentimental Man

Author: Evelyn E. Smith

Release Date: August 25, 2009 [EBook #29791]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MOST SENTIMENTAL MAN ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









    _Johnson knew he was annoying the younger man, who so obviously
    lived by the regulations in the_ Colonial Officer's Manual _and
    lacked the imagination to understand why he was doing this....
    Evelyn E. Smith is famous for her bitter-sweet stories of the worlds
    of Tomorrow._


         the
        most
 sentimental
         man

 _by EVELYN E. SMITH_


 Once these irritating farewells were over with, he
 could begin to live as he wished and as he'd dreamed.


Johnson went to see the others off at Idlewild. He knew they'd expect
him to and, since it would be the last conventional gesture he'd have to
make, he might as well conform to their notions of what was right and
proper.

For the past few centuries the climate had been getting hotter; now,
even though it was not yet June, the day was uncomfortably warm. The
sun's rays glinting off the bright metal flanks of the ship dazzled his
eyes, and perspiration made his shirt stick to his shoulder blades
beneath the jacket that the formality of the occasion had required. He
wished Clifford would hurry up and get the leave-taking over with.

But, even though Clifford was undoubtedly even more anxious than he to
finish with all this ceremony and take off, he wasn't the kind of man to
let inclination influence his actions. "Sure you won't change your mind
and come with us?"

Johnson shook his head.

The young man looked at him--hatred for the older man's complication of
what should have been a simple departure showing through the pellicule
of politeness. He was young for, since this trip had only slight
historical importance and none of any other kind, the authorities had
felt a junior officer entirely sufficient. It was clear, however, that
Clifford attributed his commandership to his merits, and he was very
conscious of his great responsibility.

"We have plenty of room on the ship," he persisted. "There weren't many
left to go. We could take you easily enough, you know."

Johnson made a negative sign again. The rays of the sun beating full
upon his head made apparent the grey that usually blended into the
still-thick blond hair. Yet, though past youth, he was far from being an
old man. "I've made my decision," he said, remembering that anger now
was pointless.

"If it's--if you're just too proud to change your mind," the young
commander said, less certainly, "I'm sure everyone will understand
if ... if ..."

Johnson smiled. "No, it's just that I want to stay--that's all."

But the commander's clear blue eyes were still baffled, uneasy, as
though he felt he had not done the utmost that duty--not duty to the
service but to humanity--required. That was the trouble with people,
Johnson thought: when they were most well-meaning they became most
troublesome.

Clifford lowered his voice to an appropriately funeral hush, as a fresh
thought obviously struck him. "I know, of course, that your loved ones
are buried here and perhaps you feel it's your duty to stay with
them...?"

At this Johnson almost forgot that anger no longer had any validity. By
"loved ones" Clifford undoubtedly had meant Elinor and Paul. It was true
that Johnson had had a certain affection for his wife and son when they
were alive; now that they were dead they represented an episode in his
life that had not, perhaps, been unpleasant, but was certainly over and
done with now.

Did Clifford think _that_ was his reason for remaining? Why, he must
believe Johnson to be the most sentimental man on Earth. "And, come to
think of it," Johnson said to himself, amused, "I am--or soon will
be--just that."

The commander was still unconsciously pursuing the same train of
thought. "It does seem incredible," he said in a burst of boyish candor
that did not become him, for he was not that young, "that you'd want to
stay alone on a whole planet. I mean to say--entirely alone.... There'll
never be another ship, you know--at least not in your lifetime."

Johnson knew what the other man was thinking. If there'd been a woman
with Johnson now, Clifford might have been able to understand a little
better how the other could stick by his decision.

Johnson wriggled, as sweat oozed stickily down his back. "For God's
sake," he said silently, "take your silly ship and get the hell off my
planet." Aloud he said, "It's a good planet, a little worn-out but still
in pretty good shape. Pity you can't trade in an old world like an old
car, isn't it?"

"If it weren't so damned far from the center of things," the young man
replied, defensively assuming the burden of all civilization, "we
wouldn't abandon it. After all, we hate leaving the world on which we
originated. But it's a long haul to Alpha Centauri--you know that--and a
tremendously expensive one. Keeping up this place solely out of
sentiment would be sheer waste--the people would never stand for the tax
burden."

"A costly museum, yes," Johnson agreed.

How much longer were these dismal farewells going to continue? How much
longer would the young man still feel the need to justify himself? "If
only there were others fool enough--if only there were others with
you.... But, even if anybody else'd be willing to cut himself off
entirely from the rest of the civilized universe, the Earth won't
support enough of a population to keep it running. Not according to our
present living standards anyway.... Most of its resources are gone, you
know--hardly any coal or oil left, and that's not worth digging for when
there are better and cheaper fuels in the system."

He was virtually quoting from the _Colonial Officer's Manual_. Were
there any people left able to think for themselves, Johnson wondered.
Had there ever been? Had he thought for himself in making his decision,
or was he merely clinging to a childish dream that all men had had and
lost?

"With man gone, Earth will replenish herself," he said aloud. First the
vegetation would begin to grow thick. Already it had released itself
from the restraint of cultivation; soon it would be spreading out over
the continent, overrunning the cities with delicately persistent green
tendrils. Some the harsh winters would kill, but others would live on
and would multiply. Vines would twist themselves about the tall
buildings and tenderly, passionately squeeze them to death ...
eventually send them tumbling down. And then the trees would rear
themselves in their places.

The swamps that man had filled in would begin to reappear one by one, as
the land sank back to a pristine state. The sea would go on changing
her boundaries, with no dikes to stop her. Volcanoes would heave up the
land into different configurations. The heat would increase until it
grew unbearable ... only there would be no one--no human, anyway--to
bear it.

Year after year the leaves would wither and fall and decay. Rock would
cover them. And some day ... billions of years thence ... there would be
coal and oil--and nobody to want them.

"Very likely Earth will replenish herself," the commander agreed, "but
not in your time or your children's time.... That is, not in _my_
children's time," he added hastily.

The handful of men lined up in a row before the airlock shuffled their
feet and allowed their muttering to become a few decibels louder.
Clifford looked at his wrist chronometer. Obviously he was no less
anxious than the crew to be off, but, for the sake of his conscience, he
must make a last try.

"Damn your conscience," Johnson thought. "I hope that for this you feel
guilty as hell, that you wake up nights in a cold sweat remembering that
you left one man alone on the planet you and your kind discarded. Not
that I don't want to stay, mind you, but that I want you to suffer the
way you're making me suffer now--having to listen to your platitudes."

The commander suddenly stopped paraphrasing the _Manual_. "Camping out's
fun for a week or two, you know, but it's different when it's for a
lifetime."

Johnson's fingers curled in his palms ... he was even angrier now that
the commander had struck so close to home. Camping out ... was that all
he was doing--fulfilling childhood desires, nothing more?

Fortunately Clifford didn't realize that he had scored, and scuttled
back to the shelter of the _Manual_. "Perhaps you don't know enough
about the new system in Alpha Centauri," he said, a trifle wildly. "It
has two suns surrounded by three planets, Thalia, Aglaia, and
Euphrosyne. Each of these planets is slightly smaller than Earth, so
that the decrease in gravity is just great enough to be pleasant,
without being so marked as to be inconvenient. The atmosphere is almost
exactly like that of Earth's, except that it contains several beneficial
elements which are absent here--and the climate is more temperate. Owing
to the fact that the planets are partially shielded from the suns by
cloud layers, the temperature--except immediately at the poles and the
equators, where it is slightly more extreme--is always equable,
resembling that of Southern California...."

"Sounds charming," said Johnson. "I too have read the Colonial Office
handouts.... I wonder what the people who wrote them'll do now that
there's no longer any necessity for attracting colonists--everybody's
already up in Alpha Centauri. Oh, well; there'll be other systems to
conquer and colonize."

"The word _conquer_ is hardly correct," the commander said stiffly,
"since not one of the three planets had any indigenous life forms that
was intelligent."

"Or life forms that you recognized as intelligent," Johnson suggested
gently. Although why should there be such a premium placed on
intelligence, he wondered. Was intelligence the sole criterion on which
the right to life and to freedom should be based?

The commander frowned and looked at his chronometer again. "Well," he
finally said, "since you feel that way and you're sure you've quite made
up your mind, my men _are_ anxious to go."

"Of course they are," Johnson said, managing to convey just the right
amount of reproach.

Clifford flushed and started to walk away.

"I'll stand out of the way of your jets!" Johnson called after him. "It
would be so anticlimactic to have me burned to a crisp after all this.
Bon voyage!"

There was no reply.

Johnson watched the silver vessel shoot up into the sky and thought,
"Now is the time for me to feel a pang, or even a twinge, but I don't at
all. I feel relieved, in fact, but that's probably the result of getting
rid of that fool Clifford."

He crossed the field briskly, pulling off his jacket and discarding his
tie as he went. His ground car remained where he had parked it--in an
area clearly marked _No Parking_.

They'd left him an old car that wasn't worth shipping to the stars. How
long it would last was anybody's guess. The government hadn't been
deliberately illiberal in leaving him such a shabby vehicle; if there
had been any way to ensure a continuing supply of fuel, they would
probably have left him a reasonably good one. But, since only a little
could be left, allowing him a good car would have been simply an example
of conspicuous waste, and the government had always preferred its waste
to be inconspicuous.

He drove slowly through the broad boulevards of Long Island, savoring
the loneliness. New York as a residential area had been a ghost town for
years, since the greater part of its citizens had been among the first
to emigrate to the stars. However, since it was the capital of the world
and most of the interstellar ships--particularly the last few--had
taken off from its spaceports, it had been kept up as an official
embarkation center. Thus, paradoxically, it was the last city to be
completely evacuated, and so, although the massive but jerry-built
apartment houses that lined the streets were already crumbling, the
roads had been kept in fairly good shape and were hardly cracked at all.

Still, here and there the green was pushing its way up in unlikely
places. A few more of New York's tropical summers, and Long Island would
soon become a wilderness.

The streets were empty, except for the cats sunning themselves on
long-abandoned doorsteps or padding about on obscure errands of their
own. Perhaps their numbers had not increased since humanity had left the
city to them, but there certainly seemed to be more--striped and solid,
black and grey and white and tawny--accepting their citizenship with
equanimity. They paid no attention to Johnson--they had long since
dissociated themselves from a humanity that had not concerned itself
greatly over their welfare. On the other hand, neither he nor the
surface car appeared to startle them; the old ones had seen such before,
and to kittens the very fact of existence is the ultimate surprise.

The Queensborough Bridge was deadly silent. It was completely empty
except for a calico cat moving purposefully toward Manhattan. The
structure needed a coat of paint, Johnson thought vaguely, but of course
it would never get one. Still, even uncared for, the bridges should
outlast him--there would be no heavy traffic to weaken them. Just in
case of unforeseeable catastrophe, however--he didn't want to be trapped
on an island, even Manhattan Island--he had remembered to provide
himself with a rowboat; a motorboat would have been preferable, but then
the fuel difficulty would arise again....

How empty the East River looked without any craft on it! It was rather a
charming little waterway in its own right, though nothing to compare
with the stately Hudson. The water scintillated in the sunshine and the
air was clear and fresh, for no factories had spewed fumes and smoke
into it for many years. There were few gulls, for nothing was left for
the scavenger; those remaining were forced to make an honest living by
catching fish.

In Manhattan, where the buildings had been more soundly constructed, the
signs of abandonment were less evident ... empty streets, an occasional
cracked window. Not even an unusual amount of dirt because, in the
past, the normal activities of an industrial and ruggedly individual
city had provided more grime than years of neglect could ever hope to
equal. No, it would take Manhattan longer to go back than Long Island.
Perhaps that too would not happen during his lifetime.

Yet, after all, when he reached Fifth Avenue he found that Central Park
had burst its boundaries. Fifty-ninth Street was already half jungle,
and the lush growth spilled down the avenues and spread raggedly out
into the side streets, pushing its way up through the cracks it had made
in the surface of the roads. Although the Plaza fountain had not flowed
for centuries, water had collected in the leaf-choked basin from the
last rain, and a group of grey squirrels were gathered around it,
shrilly disputing possession with some starlings.

Except for the occasional cry of a cat in the distance, these voices
were all that he heard ... the only sound. Not even the sudden blast of
a jet regaining power ... he would never hear that again; never hear the
stridor of a human voice piercing with anger; the cacophony of a hundred
television sets, each playing a different program; the hoot of a horn;
off-key singing; the thin, uncertain notes of an amateur musician ...
these would never be heard on Earth again.

He sent the car gliding slowly ... no more traffic rules ... down Fifth
Avenue. The buildings here also were well-built; they were many
centuries old and would probably last as many more. The shop windows
were empty, except for tangles of dust ... an occasional broken,
discarded mannequin.... In some instances the glass had already cracked
or fallen out. Since there were no children to throw stones, however,
others might last indefinitely, carefully glassing in nothingness. Doors
stood open and he could see rows of empty counters and barren shelves
fuzzed high with the dust of the years since a customer had approached
them.

Cats sedately walked up and down the avenue or sat genteelly with tails
tucked in on the steps of the cathedral--as if the place had been theirs
all along.

Dusk was falling. Tonight, for the first time in centuries, the street
lamps would not go on. Undoubtedly when it grew dark he would see
ghosts, but they would be the ghosts of the past and he had made his
peace with the past long since; it was the present and the future with
which he had not come to terms. And now there would be no present, no
past, no future--but all merged into one and he was the only one.

At Forty-second Street pigeons fluttered thickly around the public
library, fat as ever, their numbers greater, their appetites grosser.
The ancient library, he knew, had changed little inside: stacks and
shelves would still be packed thick with reading matter. Books are
bulky, so only the rare editions had been taken beyond the stars; the
rest had been microfilmed and their originals left to Johnson and decay.
It was his library now, and he had all the time in the world to read all
the books in the world--for there were more than he could possibly read
in the years that, even at the most generous estimate, were left to him.

He had been wondering where to make his permanent residence for, with
the whole world his, he would be a fool to confine himself to some
modest dwelling. Now he fancied it might be a good idea to move right
into the library. Very few places in Manhattan could boast a garden of
their own.

He stopped the car to stare thoughtfully at the little park behind the
grimy monument to Neoclassicism. Like Central Park, Bryant had already
slipped its boundaries and encroached upon Sixth Avenue--Avenue of the
World, the street signs said now, and before that it had been Avenue of
the Nations and Avenue of the Americas, but to the public it had always
been Sixth Avenue and to Johnson, the last man on Earth, it was Sixth
Avenue.

He'd live in the library, while he stayed in New York, that was--he'd
thought that in a few weeks, when it got really hot, he might strike
north. He had always meant to spend a summer in Canada. His surface car
would probably never last the trip, but the Museum of Ancient Vehicles
had been glad to bestow half a dozen of the bicycles from their exhibits
upon him. After all, he was, in effect, a museum piece himself and so as
worth preserving as the bicycles; moreover, bicycles are difficult to
pack for an interstellar trip. With reasonable care, these might last
him his lifetime....

But he had to have a permanent residence somewhere, and the library was
an elegant and commodious dwelling, centrally located. New York would
have to be his headquarters, for all the possessions he had carefully
amassed and collected and begged and--since money would do him no good
any more--bought, were here. And there were by far too many of them to
be transported to any really distant location. He loved to own things.

He was by no means an advocate of Rousseau's complete return to nature;
whatever civilization had left that he could use without compromise, he
would--and thankfully. There would be no electricity, of course, but he
had provided himself with flashlights and bulbs and batteries--not too
many of the last, of course, because they'd grow stale. However, he'd
also laid in plenty of candles and a vast supply of matches.... Tins of
food and concentrates and synthetics, packages of seed should he grow
tired of all these and want to try growing his own--fruit, he knew,
would be growing wild soon enough.... Vitamins and medicines--of course,
were he to get really ill or get hurt in some way, it might be the end
... but that was something he wouldn't think of--something that couldn't
possibly happen to him....

For his relaxation he had an antique hand-wound phonograph, together
with thousands of old-fashioned records. And then, of course, he had the
whole planet, the whole world to amuse him.

He even had provided himself with a heat-ray gun and a substantial
supply of ammunition, although he couldn't imagine himself ever killing
an animal for food. It was squeamishness that stood in his way rather
than any ethical considerations, although he did indeed believe that
every creature had the right to live. Nonetheless, there was the
possibility that the craving for fresh meat might change his mind for
him. Besides, although hostile animals had long been gone from this part
of the world--the only animals would be birds and squirrels and, farther
up the Hudson, rabbits and chipmunks and deer ... perhaps an occasional
bear in the mountains--who knew what harmless life form might become a
threat now that its development would be left unchecked?

A cat sitting atop one of the stately stone lions outside the library
met his eye with such a steady gaze of understanding, though not of
sympathy, that he found himself needing to repeat the by-now almost
magic phrase to himself: "Not in my lifetime anyway." Would some
intelligent life form develop to supplant man? Or would the planet
revert to a primeval state of mindless innocence? He would never know
and he didn't really care ... no point in speculating over unanswerable
questions.

He settled back luxuriously on the worn cushions of his car. Even so
little as twenty years before, it would have been impossible for
him--for anyone--to stop his vehicle in the middle of Forty-second
Street and Fifth Avenue purely to meditate. But it was his domain now.
He could go in the wrong direction on one-way streets, stop wherever he
pleased, drive as fast or as slowly as he would (and could, of course).
If he wanted to do anything as vulgar as spit in the street, he could
(but they were his streets now, not to be sullied) ... cross the roads
without waiting for the lights to change (it would be a long, long wait
if he did) ... go to sleep when he wanted, eat as many meals as he
wanted whenever he chose.... He could go naked in hot weather and
there'd be no one to raise an eyebrow, deface public buildings (except
that they were private buildings now, his buildings), idle without the
guilty feeling that there was always something better he could and
should be doing ... even if there were not. There would be no more
guilty feelings; without people and their knowledge there was no more
guilt.

A flash of movement in the bushes behind the library caught his eye.
Surely that couldn't be a fawn in Bryant Park? So soon?... He'd thought
it would be another ten years at least before the wild animals came
sniffing timidly along the Hudson, venturing a little further each time
they saw no sign of their age-old enemy.

But probably the deer was only his imagination. He would investigate
further after he had moved into the library.

Perhaps a higher building than the library.... But then he would have to
climb too many flights of stairs. The elevators wouldn't be working ...
silly of him to forget that. There were a lot of steps outside the
library too--it would be a chore to get his bicycles up those steps.

Then he smiled to himself. Robinson Crusoe would have been glad to have
had bicycles and steps and such relatively harmless animals as bears to
worry about. No, Robinson Crusoe never had it so good as he, Johnson,
would have, and what more could he want?

For, whoever before in history had had his dreams--and what was wrong
with dreams, after all?--so completely gratified? What child,
envisioning a desert island all his own could imagine that his island
would be the whole world? Together Johnson and the Earth would grow
young again.

No, the stars were for others. Johnson was not the first man in history
who had wanted the Earth, but he had been the first man--and probably
the last--who had actually been given it. And he was well content with
his bargain.

There was plenty of room for the bears too.




Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from _Fantastic Universe_ August 1957.
    Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed. Minor spelling and
    typographical errors have been corrected without note.





End of Project Gutenberg's The Most Sentimental Man, by Evelyn E. Smith

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MOST SENTIMENTAL MAN ***

***** This file should be named 29791.txt or 29791.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/9/7/9/29791/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
