The Project Gutenberg EBook of Second Sight, by Basil Eugene Wells

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Second Sight

Author: Basil Eugene Wells

Release Date: August 28, 2009 [EBook #29832]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SECOND SIGHT ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









    _Basil Wells, who lives in Pennsylvania, writes that he has been
    doing research concerning the keelboat age prior to and following
    the War of 1812 on the "locally famous section of
    portage-keelboat-rafting stream from Waterford down to Pittsburgh,"
    turning from this to this grimmer future._


 second
  sight

 _by BASIL WELLS_


 Then his hand caught an arm and he
 exerted his full strength. The entire
 arm tore away from its shoulder....


His fingers moved over the modest packet of bills the invisible
rockhound had handed to him. He smiled through the eternal night that
was his own personal hell. Duggan's Hades.

"Thanks, Pete," he said gratefully. "Here, have a box of Conmos."

His sensitized fingers found the cigars, handed over a box, and he heard
the nervous scuff of the other's shoes.

"This eight thousand means I can see again--for a while at least. Take
'em! It's little enough."

"Look, Duggan. I get eight hundred for selling you the ticket on the
breakthrough time. Keep the cigars. You need the dough."

Feet pounded, thumping into swift inaudibility along the 10th Level's
yielding walkway. His fingers caressed the crisp notes that his lucky
guess on the 80th Level's tunnel juncture had won for him, plus the ten
dollars, that this meager business could ill afford, it had cost to join
the rockhounds' pool....

But now he was free. His own man. He was released from the calculated
economies of his wife. Janith knew to within a few dollars what his
newsstand on the 10th Level should make. He had never been able to save
the necessary thousand dollar deposit, and ten dollars an hour, that a
rented super mech cost. And she would never listen to his pleas that he
must see again--if only for an hour....

"Waste ten or twenty dollars for nothing," she would storm. "We have all
your hospital bills to pay. I need new clothes. Your stock in the stands
is too small."

What she left unspoken was the fact that she must secretly have hated
his engineering career in the deep levels under Appalachia, and that she
was dedicated to preventing his possible return....

After three years of blindness, under his wife's firm dominance, Duggan
felt only hate for her. With this sudden fortune he could be
independent. He could divorce her. He could rent a super mech--even
return to work in the ever-deepening levels of Appalachia City!

First of all he must see again.

He closed up the news-and-cigar stand. With his cane's sensitive radar
button pulsating beneath his fingers he hurried along the walkway toward
the nearest super mech showroom. It was less than three blocks....

       *       *       *       *       *

"Be sure that all the contacts are against the skull and neck," the
salesman was saying, his voice muffled by the mentrol hood covering
Duggan's head and shoulders.

"Of course." Duggan's impatience made his voice shrill. "I've used
mentrols before when inspecting cave-ins and such."

"Very well, sir." The man's voice was relieved. Probably he hated his
job as much as Duggan hated his cigars and news.

Duggan tripped the switches and heard the building hum of power. An odd
sort of vibration that his mind told him was purely emotional, seemed to
be permeating his whole body.

Abruptly the transition was complete. He was no longer lying on the
padded bench beneath the mentrol hood. He was standing erect, conscious
of the retaining clamps that held him upright.

He gulped a deep draught of air into the artificial lungs that did not
need oxygen and his mechanical pulse quickened.

His eyes slitted open, drinking in by degrees the mirrored mentrol booth
and the pallid, fat, little man sitting beside his hooded body. He
stepped out of the clamps, his sharpened senses aware of softness, and
hardness, and scent, and color that human weakness so often blurs.

This super mech that was linked directly with his brain by twin mentrols
was tall, chunky and gray of eye and hair. In a general way it was a
duplicate of his own body, but there was no facial resemblance.

"How do you like it, sir?" The fat smile was empty, almost apologetic.
"We have younger, more handsome models...."

"Well enough." Duggan started donning the clothing that he had removed.
"I'll want the mech for five, possibly ten, hours."

"I'll make out the slip for ten hours, sir. We'll refund any balance due
you. But after ten hours ..."

"I know. You must report the mech missing. But with my body here you
can't lose."

The salesman smiled enigmatically. "We _have_," he said.

Duggan shrugged. He was impatient to be outside, feasting his starved
vision on the stores and parks of the various upper levels. He might
even take a lift to the Outside. It had been fifteen years ago, while
their youngest son was a baby, that they had taken a weekend motor trip
to the great scar that had been Manhattan. He remembered the vastness
and the rawness of the uncontrolled atmosphere. It had been beautiful
but also a bit terrifying. It was a ten years delayed honeymoon....

And now Merle was in the rocket corps and Janith and he were like
strangers.

Duggan zippered shut his gray-checked jacket and left the booth. He
walked slowly, savoring every picture of the crowded passenger strips
beyond the walkway, and of the fairy spans of moving walkways crossing
the travel strips. The soft glow of the level's ceiling, fifty feet
above, illuminated the double rows of apartment and store fronts.

It was good to see again.

Every twelfth section of the level was a park. The greenery was fresher
and brighter than he remembered; the tree boles and the branches were
marvels of grace and strength. He strolled along the paths, impatient to
be moving on, but aching with the emerald beauty around him....

He took the lifts to the upper levels. He rode the swiftest walkways and
travel strips, his eyes drinking in the long-hidden sights. From an
observation dome he looked out over the wooded mountain slopes of
Outside, and saw the telltale ridging of rock and earth that marked the
scores of hidden vehicular tubes linking Appalachia with its sister
cities of Ondack and Smoky.

His five hours stretched into seven, and then, eight. Slowly a
determination to keep these eyes, at whatever cost, was building within
him. Always before he had agreed when Janith decided. He had been so
dependent on her those first terrible weeks. But now, with this money
from the breakthrough pool, he could rent a super mech--live as a man
should live!

       *       *       *       *       *

Duggan left the employment booth on the 20th Level, a badge on his
jacket and a half-grin on his full super mech's lips.

On the records he was now Al Duggan, a second cousin from Montana. He
knew that nothing in the world could bring Al further east than Ozarka.
Just to be safe, however, he decided to drop Al a line to explain.

As far as his wife was concerned Merle Duggan was gone. Dead and buried.
She could get a divorce if she wanted and marry that podgy, pink-skulled
boss of hers at the advertising agency....

"Five hundred a month," Duggan told himself. "Two-fifty for the rental,
fifty for insurance--maybe fifty or so for spare parts--that leaves
about a hundred and fifty for me."

He was starting at the bottom as a rock hog, a mucker, a clean-up man in
the newly opened 80th Level. And his wages were the minimum union scale.

He took the lift down to the 79th Level, flashed his new badge at the
guards, and took the gritty freight lift to the lowest level of the
sprawling metropolis....

"You Gaines Short?" he asked the lanky man bent over the littered desk
in the rough plastic bubble that served as an office.

Sharp black eyes studied him--noted the bright new olive badge, and the
creased, obviously new, coveralls.

"You're the new rock hog?"

"Yes, sir. Al Duggan."

"Any experience?"

"Montana--mining. Had some engineering. Worked in Ozarka on tunnels."

The lank man nodded, expressionless.

"You'll hog for a while. Later we'll see.... Any relation to the Duggan
we lost a couple of years back?"

"We're cousins."

"Tough he couldn't see his way clear to try again." Short's lips
thinned. "He may snap out of it yet.... We could use a few more like
him."

"I--I'll talk with him," promised Duggan.

He fought back the words that wanted to pour out. Whether it was a
strange sense of loyalty to his wife, or a stubborn sort of pride, he
could not bring himself to speak ill of her.

"A super mech is not so bad, Duggan." Short flexed a skinny arm. "I've
worn this one since a rock slide crushed my back."

"Yes, sir," Duggan agreed.

Short scribbled on a form, handed it to Duggan.

"Take this down to Ted Rusche, he's the short, dark fellow bossing the
rock hogs. He'll see you're issued your tools."

Duggan nodded and turned away.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the super mech hostel, on the 79th Level, Duggan shared a compartment
of six sleeping and mentrol plates. All of the others were rockhounds,
and three of them worked in his own clean-up gang. His immediate pusher,
Ted Rusche, was a legless, dark and hairy man, much like his working
super mech. Waide and Myham, the first tall and once-handsome, and the
latter, bony and scarred, were both paralytics.

Duggan's share of the attendants' salary amounted to another fifty
dollars monthly. He was not growing too wealthy!

"And how do you like it after three weeks, Al?" Rusche demanded from
where he balanced on the cushioned sleeping plate.

Duggan stretched cramped limbs and turned his sightless face toward
Rusche's voice.

"Seems good to be working again, Ted," he said.

"This's your last day with us, Al. Orders from Short. He's transferring
you. Office work I guess, or maybe he's making you a foreman."

Rusche's voice was curious.

"He musta found out something about you, Al. S'funny but you look awful
familiar to me too. And you know more about tunnels than you let on. How
about leveling with a guy?"

"Not now." Duggan was thinking of the other listening men. "After we've
cleaned-up and eaten. See you in the park outside the hostel."

"Right."

Duggan's thoughts were muddled. Fingerprints probably; at every super
mech hostel all guests were printed and taped, and possibly through his
similar name. Short must have been suspicious from the first. And if he
had come to the hostel to see Duggan's mentrol-hooded face, while Duggan
worked, his identification must have been sure.

Short knew that he was Merle Duggan, and before too long Janith, and all
his friends--if he had any left now--would know he had been in hiding
here.

He hurried to eat and get ready for another period under the mentrol's
hooded probes.

Less than half an hour later he strode out of the hostel, his super mech
gleaming and clean and his jacket and shorts newly pressed. He met
Rusche in the park and they headed for the lift to the upper level.

En route to the 10th Level he explained.

"I thought you looked like somebody I should know." Rusche scrubbed at
his pseudo beard's coarseness. "Accident left you sort of psychoed, huh?
So you was scared of the levels? Had to try coming back with a false
name?"

Duggan gulped. It made a believable sort of yarn. He hadn't taken time
to concoct a story.... Why not?

"Something like that. I guess I was badly shook, Ted."

"So now you go back to being engineer at a thousand or so, and I'm still
a rock hog." Rusche shrugged. "Less headaches anyhow."

They stepped off the lift at the 10th Level and took the high speed
strip toward the business section. Duggan had it in his mind to see
Janith and tell her she had failed--that he was his own man again. She
would be at the office. He would tell her off, and leave. And then he'd
show Rusche some of the high spots of the low-number levels of
Appalachia.

The darkness came about them swiftly. To Duggan it was like a return to
the nightmare of sightlessness. Under their feet the racing strip
faltered and stalled. They were thrown off their feet and sprawled on
the fiber-ribbed squares of the checkerboarded way's surface.

"What is it?" demanded Rusche.

He fought back the panic. This was not true blindness.

"Criminals. They set off a few dozen 'midnight' bombs and try to rob
banks or stores. We get these attacks quite often."

"Last long?"

"Emergency ventilation will clear it out in a couple of minutes. And the
Squads will have them in half an hour. They never get very far."

They sat close together, to wait. From the walkways and stalled strips
shrieks and frightened cries sounded. The sounds seemed to increase from
behind them.

"This's my first time above the Twentieth Level," Rusche confided.
"Thirty-five years and I never saw the Outside. I don't think I like it
up this high."

"It will be over in a little while, Ted. Probably just a group of
teen-agers looking for thrills." He laughed drily. "They'll end up with
blanked memories and new faces like those who tried before them."

"Listen," muttered Rusche.

In the lightlessness, and above the wailing of the terrified people
about them, they could hear the scuff of running feet. They were coming
closer at a swift pace. In a moment the runners would collide with them!

       *       *       *       *       *

Duggan's years of blindness had given him the ability to judge and gauge
distance from sound. At the proper instant he pounced, his hands
clamping around a body, and a second body crashed into the leader. They
went down in a tangle.

He heard Rusche shouting and fists battering and the tinkle of metal or
crystal on metal. He was fighting desperately, his super mech's strength
overtaxed. The unseen man's hands tore at his neck and shoulder, ripping
away the synthetic flesh and baring the complex framework beneath.

Then his hand caught an arm and he exerted the full strength of his mech
power, until now carefully subdued. The entire arm tore away from its
shoulder. And yet the wounded man continued to attack.

It was only then that he realized this must be a super mech. The
criminals must have stolen one or two super mechs and were using them in
this robbery.

He was ruthless, then. He wrenched away the other arm. He battered at
the unseen torso. The feet of the desperate mech smashed at his knees
and thighs, staggering him. Then he bore the armless torso of the mech
backward and fell upon it.

The mech went limp, its mentrols blanked by the distant criminal who
controlled it.

Duggan came to his feet, listening for the sound of battle between
Rusche and his captive. It came from his right, faintly. About ten feet
distant, he judged it. And now the emergency vents were clearing the
darkness from the travel strips. Twilight faded and vision replaced it.

Rusche was sitting astride a prone body, and even as Duggan reached his
side the struggling criminal's arms and legs went limp. Rusche grunted
and started to stand.

"A super mech!" he said. He rubbed thoughtfully at his disarranged nose
and cheeks, smoothing them again into their normal contours. "What about
yours?"

"The same."

"Here's their loot, anyhow," Rusche said, holding up a small gray
plastine bag.

"Drop it, Ted. We better fade out of here before the Squads arrive, too.
They might think we're--"

"Not on your life, Al. We should get a reward. Pics on the newswires and
tapes."

Duggan shrugged and smoothed at his own neck and face. Four
red-uniformed men, their heads hidden by ovoid gas helmets, came hissing
toward them along the travel strip. They rode single-wheeled cycles and
their rapid-fire expoders were trained on them.

"Careful now, Ted. Let me do the talking. They like to use paralysis
needles and question later."

"But--"

"I've lived up here."

The unicycles braked to a halt.

"Step over here, slow," ordered one of the Squadmen.

Duggan obeyed, careful to keep his arms rigid. Of course paralysis
needles would cause this mech body no damage, but why make trouble? They
_had_ more destructive weapons.

"Ran into us," he said mildly. "We figured something wrong--honest men
would be standing where they were. We stopped them."

The four members of the Squad were inspecting the damage.

"I guess you did," one of them said, admiringly. "You must be super
mechs too?"

"That's right. I'm Duggan, Al--Merle Duggan, and this is my friend, Ted
Rusche. We work on the 80th Level--rockhounds."

"Duggan?" The man's voice was suddenly strained. "Maybe you're not so
clear as you pretend. A woman got in the way by accident, supposedly, of
their getaway from the bank. Her name was Duggan too."

Duggan started forward, remembered the ugly expoder muzzles and backed
away.

"Was her name Janith?" he demanded.

"Radio report didn't say. Contact them, Joe," he told one of the other
faceless men.

"Couldn't be you hired these two to kill her and pretend the robbery?"
he inquired.

"Of course not."

One of the Squad mumbled something. Duggan's interrogator dropped his
weapon's muzzle.

"Woman twisted her ankle trying to get out of the way, and fell.
Received a cut on her temple and is being taken to the hospital.
Accidental all right."

"But her name."

"Janith."

Duggan felt a strange mingling of anger and of tenderness. The anger was
directed toward the criminals.

"Could I go to her now? Rusche can fill you in on details."

"It's not--oh, all right. Regulations aren't too strict on these levels.
She your sister?"

"Wife." He turned to Rusche.

"See you at the lift in about an hour," he said and headed for the
advertising agency where Janith was employed.

       *       *       *       *       *

"We haven't been informed as to her whereabouts yet, Mr. Duggan," the
receptionist at Duffey's offices said coldly.

Duggan glared down into the carefully pretty face, the solar-lamp tan
and the knife-smoothed wrinkles.

"Now see here, Blanche," he said, and spluttered impotently.

"See here yourself, Merle Duggan," the woman spat back sharply. "After
all! You come running back just because she's hurt. Why didn't you come
back like this a year ago?"

"I was with her a year ago."

"That wasn't you. You didn't have guts enough to rent a super mech and
go back to your old job." The woman laughed. "Janith tried to insult and
needle you into being a man again. And you just crawled."

"That's a lie," Duggan cried. "I begged her to let me go back. She
wouldn't listen."

"That's what you say now. You don't want to remember. I know. I was here
all the time. Many a time Janith has come to the office, crying, and
told me how hopeless it seemed."

"You're--you're inventing all this, Blanche," he accused.

"I wish I were. Remember, Merle. Think. Be honest with yourself."
Blanche put her nervous, blue-veined hand on his arm. A detached part of
his brain noted how bony and brittle her hand was.

"She's loved you all these years, Merle." The tiny hand dug into his
jacket sleeve. "To make you well again she risked losing your love--and
she lost."

Blanche must be all of fifty, perhaps fifty-five, the analytical portion
of his mind noted. Old-maidish in many ways, despite her five
ex-husbands; yet so sentimental--

"It's all part of her scheme. Pretend to be the patient, long-suffering
wife and then secretly forbid me to go back to the deep levels again!
You don't know!"

The woman's tired eyes sparkled green. Her little fist cracked against
his chest. She turned half away from him.

"But I do know. I sat up with you many nights, while Janith got a few
hours of rest. You were like a baby, slobbering and whimpering in your
sleep. The days were worse. You were drunk and shouting and weeping. To
you blindness was the end."

Merle gulped. He could remember nothing of the sort. Only the accident
and awakening in the hospital to darkness.... But there was a strange
blankness, a hiatus in his memories, that ended with his hated job in
the cigar stand. He could not recall his first day there or--

Could Blanche be telling the truth?

"You--spiteful old hag!" he shouted at her, and rushed out of the
offices.

His feet pounded at the yielding softness of the walkway. The hospital
was less than two blocks distant--no need to take a travel strip--and he
needed the automatic motion of walking to steady his thoughts.

The forgotten months. Four months, or was it five months, ago, he was in
the cigar-and-news stand. That was the day when an old acquaintance from
the lower levels sold him the chance on the 80th Level's breakthrough.

That night he had begged Janith to let him rent a super mech. And she
had scoffed at his wastefulness. Yet, now that he remembered it again,
there had been a wistful note of hope in her voice.

Could she have been trying to fan his faint desire for sight into
something more powerful and consuming--so he would become again the
engineering Duggan he had been?

He had surrendered then, as he did many times afterward. Sullenly, yes,
but he had surrendered. Perhaps she knew he was not ready for sight.
When he refused to obey her, when he insisted on hiring a super
mech--then, perhaps, she would know the cure was complete.

But that was only theory. He remembered her clearly expressed hatred for
the mucking, lower-level life of a rockhound. Always his hatred for her
grew as she spoke of his work....

She had never expressed herself in that way before the accident. She had
gone with him on many exploratory trips into the caverns that the lower
levels of Appalachia cut across. And she had enjoyed the experience--he
was sure of that.

Remember! Think back. Back before the cigars and papers. Back to the
days and months after the accident. It hurt to think. His temples, here
on the mentrol-hooded sleeping plate, were pounding irregularly....

Huddling in a bed, knees drawn up and head tucked in, trying to gain
somehow the safety that an infant once knew. Janith's voice, soft and
understanding, and the acid of panic that set his lips to mumbling
meaningless jargon....

Why had Janith not sent him to the medical centers for mental clearing
and re-education as was done with all cases of psychoed abnormals? The
answer was with him. She loved him as he was, Merle Duggan--not as a new
personality in her husband's body.

Artificial amnesia automatically dissolves all marriage partnerships.
She had not wanted that. Instead she had three years of hell....

Striking out at emptiness, his fists contacting soft flesh, and the
pained cry, swiftly suppressed, of Janith. His voice, cursing and
high-pitched, as he fought the straps that now were restraining his
sightless body. The bite of a needle and gradual dissolution of
feeling....

Memory was coming reluctantly back to Duggan. This was not the
self-imagined visionings of an abused helpless man. These memories were
true. He had fought against all mental therapy and turned from those who
loved him.

Now the hospital entrance was before him. He paused for a moment and
then went inside. The automatic hush of the door shutting out the muted
street sounds was all too familiar.

"Mrs. Janith Duggan," he told the crisply white woman at the desk.

"Room 212, second floor."

"Thank you."

       *       *       *       *       *

He used the steps in preference to the lift. He needed more time to
think--would he ever find enough time?

Undoubtedly, now, Janith's love for him was dead. His desertion of her
must have finished the dissolution of their marriage. It had been
cowardly--he should have faced her and declared what he was going to do
and what she could do.

These past weeks, working with the rock hogs, had been invaluable. They
had restored something of his self-esteem.

The second floor. Pastel bare walls and soft voices. The odors. 208 and
opposite, 209. A wheelchair, propelled by a timidly smiling white-haired
woman. He nodded automatically.

210. What could he say to her? That he was sorry she was hurt and that
he was such a fool? And then back to the super mech hostel and the five
other cripples who shared the room?

212. The door ajar. A private room. He was glad of that. The headache
was more violent now--there was a bitter taste in his mouth as his super
mech entered the room.

She was alone, looking tiny and helpless on the high bed. To him, after
three years, she was more beautiful than he remembered, even though the
pure whiteness of her once-graying hair startled him.

"Janith," he said uncertainly.

She turned her head, curiosity in her expression, and then understanding
came. There was no mistaking the warmth and welcome that came into her
eyes. She held out her arms.

"Duggy," she commanded, "come here."

And he knew then, without ever being told, that his revolt and flight
had all been part of the therapy, and Janith had known all the time
where he had been....




Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from _Fantastic Universe_ September 1957.
    Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed. Minor spelling and
    typographical errors have been corrected without note.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Second Sight, by Basil Eugene Wells

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SECOND SIGHT ***

***** This file should be named 29832.txt or 29832.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/9/8/3/29832/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
