The Project Gutenberg EBook of Life Sentence, by James McConnell

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Life Sentence

Author: James McConnell

Illustrator: Dick Francis

Release Date: September 2, 2009 [EBook #29889]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LIFE SENTENCE ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









[Illustration]


 Life
   Sentence

 By JAMES McCONNELL

 Illustrated by DICK FRANCIS


 _"Happy New Year!" she cried. But how often
 should one hear it said in a single lifetime?_


Outside, bells were ringing. "Happy New Year!"

The mad sound of people crazed for the moment, shouting, echoed the
bells.

"Happy New Year!"

A sound of music, waxing, waning, now joined in wild symphony by the
voices, now left alone to counterpoint the noise of human
celebration....

For a while, Oliver Symmes heard the raucous music of the crowd. It
became a part of him, seemed to come from somewhere inside him, gave him
life. And then, as always, it passed on, leaving him empty.

Shadows....

The door to his room opened and a young-looking woman, dressed in a
pleasant green uniform, came in and turned up the light. On her sleeve
she wore the badge of geriatrician, with the motto, "To Care for the
Aged."

"Happy New Year, Mr. Symmes," she said, and went over to stand by the
window. In the mild light, the sheen of her hair attracted attention
away from the slight imperfections of her face.

She watched the crowd outside, wishing she could be a part of it. There
seemed so little life inside the prison where the only function of
living was the awaiting of death. "To Care for the Aged." That meant to
like and love them as well as to take physical care of them. Only,
somehow, it seemed so hard to _really_ love them.

She sighed and turned away from the window to look at one of the reasons
she could not be with the rest of the world that night.

       *       *       *       *       *

He sat bunched up in his chair like a vegetable. She could have closed
one of her hands around both his arms together. Or his legs. Bones and
skin and a few little muscles left, and that was all. Skin tight,
drumlike, against the skull. Cheeks shrunk, lips slightly parted by the
contraction of the skin. Even the wrinkles he should have had were
erased by the shrinkage of the epidermis. Even in a strong light, the
faint wrinkle lines were barely visible.

After a moment of looking at him, she put a smile back on her face and
repeated her greeting.

"I said, 'Happy New Year,' Mr. Symmes."

He raised his eyes to her for a moment, then slowly lowered them,
uncomprehendingly.

"He looks just a little bit like a caricature," she said to herself,
feeling a little more tenderness toward him. "A cute little stick man
made of leaves and twigs and old bark and ..."

       *       *       *       *       *

_Shadows._ For so long there had been shadows. And for a time the
fleeting passage of dreams and past memories had been a solace. But now
the shadows were withered and old, debilitated and desiccated. They had
been sucked dry of interest long ago.

But still they flitted through his mind on crippled wings, flapping
about briefly in the now-narrowed shell of his consciousness, then
fading back among the cobwebs. Every once in a while, one of them would
return to exercise its wings.

"Did she say, 'Happy New Year?'" he wondered. "New Year's?"

And, at the thought of it, there came shadows out of the past....

       *       *       *       *       *

Young Oliver Symmes laughed. The girl laughed, too. She was good to hold
in one's arms, soft like a furry animal, yielding and plush of mouth.

"I love you, Ollie," she said; the warmness of her body close against
his.

He laughed again and wrapped her in his arms. He owned her now, owned
her smile, her love for him, her mind and her wonderful body. She
belonged to him, and the thrill of ownership was strong and exciting.

"I'll always love you, Ollie. I'll love only you." She ran her fingers
in and out of his hair, caressing each strand as it went through her
fingers. "I love the strength of your arms, the firmness of your body."

Again he laughed, surrendering all his consciousness to the warm magic
of her spell.

"I love the shading of your hair and eyes, the smooth angularity of your
tallness, the red ecstasy of your mind." Her fingers slipped down the
back of his neck, playing little games with his flesh and hair. "I'll
always love you, Ollie."

He kissed her savagely.

During the daytime, there was his work at the anthropological
laboratories, the joy of poking among the cultures of the past. And at
night there was the joy of living with her, of sharing the tantalizing
stimulations of the culture of the present, the infinite varieties of
love mingling with passions.

For months there was this happiness of the closeness of her. And then
she was gone from him, for the moment. He still owned her, but they were
physically apart and there was the hunger of loneliness in him. The
months his work kept them apart seemed like centuries, until, finally,
he could return.

       *       *       *       *       *

He was walking through a happy, shouting crowd, walking back to her. It
was the eve of the new year, a time for beginnings, a time for looking
from the pleasures of the past to those waiting in the future. There was
a happy outcry inside him that matched the mood of the crowd.

"Happy New Year!"

Women stopped him on the street, asking for his affection. But he passed
them by, for she was waiting for him and he was hungry for the
possessive love of his slave.

He went eagerly into the building where they lived.

       *       *       *       *       *

The crowd was gone. A door was opening. The voice of his love, sudden,
full of naked surprise, bleated at him. And another voice, that of a man
standing behind her, croaked with hasty excuses and fear.

A change of hungers--it seemed no more complex than that.

He put his hand to his side and took out a piece of shaped metal,
pointing it at the man. A blast of light and the man was dead. He put
the weapon aside.

Young Oliver Symmes walked toward the girl. She backed away from him,
pleading with words, eyes, body. He noticed for the first time the many
small imperfections of her face and figure.

Cornered, she raised her arms to embrace him. He raised his arms to
answer the embrace, but his hands stopped and felt their way around the
whiteness of her neck. He pressed his hands together, thumbs tight
against each other.

Minutes later, he dropped her to the floor and stood looking at her. He
had owned her and then destroyed her when his ownership was in dispute.

He bent to kiss the lax lips.

       *       *       *       *       *

Shadows. As a man grows older, the weight and size of his brain
decrease, leaving cavities in his mind. The years that pass are a
digger, a giant excavator, scooping the mass of past experience up in
the maw of dissipation. The slow, sure evacuation of the passing decades
leaves wing-room in a man's head for stirring memories.

The withered man looked up again. The woman in the green uniform was
smiling at him through parted, almost twisted lips.

"I suppose that this time of year is the worst for you, isn't it?" she
asked sympathetically. The first requirement of a good geriatrician was
sympathy and understanding. She determined to try harder to understand.

The old man made no answer, only staring at her face. But his eyes were
blank--seeing, yet blind to all around him. She frowned for a moment as
she looked at him. The unnatural hairlessness of his body puzzled her,
making it difficult for her to understand him while the thought was in
her mind--that and the trouble she had getting through to him.

She stared at him as if to pierce the blankness of his gaze. Behind his
eyes lay the emptiness of age, the open wound of stifled years.

"I'll move you over to the window, Mr. Symmes," she told him in soothing
tones, her smile reappearing. "Then you can look out and see all the
people. Won't that be fun?"

Picking up a box from the table, she adjusted a dial. The chair in which
he was sitting rose slightly from the floor and positioned itself in
front of the window. The woman walked to the wall beside him and
corrected the visual index of the glass to match the weakness of the old
man's eyes.

"See, down there? Just look at them pushing about."

A rabble of faces swam on the glass in front of him, faces of unfamiliar
people, all of them unknown and unknowable to him.

Inside him the whisper of the wings mounted in pitch with a whining,
leathery sound. The images of dead faces came flying up, careening
across his mind, mingling and merging with the faces of the living. The
glass became an anomalous torrent of faces.

Dead faces....

       *       *       *       *       *

Four walls around him, bare to the point of boredom. Through the barred
window, the throbbing throat of the crowd talked to him. His young body
took it in, his young mind accepted it, catalogued it and pushed it out
of consciousness. And for each individual voice there was an individual
face, staring up at his cell from the comparative safety of outside.
Young Oliver Symmes could not see the faces from where he sat, waiting,
but he could sense them.

There came a feel of hands on his shoulder; his reverie was interrupted.
Arms under his raised him to his feet. A face smiled, almost kindly, in
understanding.

"They're waiting for you, Mr. Symmes. It's time to go."

More words. Walking from this place to that, mostly with a crowd of
people at his shoulders, pressing him in. Then a door ahead of him,
ornate in carving, a replica of the doors to the Roman Palace of Justice
many centuries before. Again his mind catalogued the impressions.

Then, like the faces of the people outside his cell, the pictures of the
bas-relief faded away, melted and merged into a pelagic blackness.

The doors opened and, with part of the crowd still at his side, he went
through. The people inside were standing; stick men, it seemed to him,
with painted balloons for faces. The sound of the rapping of a gavel
caught his ear. The people sat, and the trial began.

"This court will admit to evidence only those events and artifacts which
are proved true and relevant to the alleged crime."

An obsequious clearing of throats. A coughing now and then.

"... And did you see the defendant, Oliver Symmes, enter the apartment
of the deceased on the night of the Thirty-first of December, two
thousand and ..."

"I did. He was wearing a sort of orange tunic ..."

Someone whispered in his ear. Oliver Symmes heard and shook his head.

"... You are personally acquainted with the defendant?"

"I am. We worked for United Anthropological Laboratories before he ..."

"Objection."

"Sustained."

The blackness of the judge's robe puzzled him. A vestige, an
anachronism, handed down from centuries before. White was the color of
truth, not black.

"You swear that you found the defendant standing over the body of the
deceased woman on the night of ..."

"Not standing, sir. He was bending over, kissing ..."

"Your witness."

       *       *       *       *       *

Days of it, back and forth, testimony and more testimony. Evidence and
more evidence and the lack of it. Smiling lawyers, grimacing lawyers,
soothing lawyers and cackling lawyers. And witnesses.

"You will please take the stand, Mr. Symmes."

He walked to the chair and sat down. The courtroom leaned forward, the
stick men bowed toward him slightly, as in eager applause of the coming
most dramatic moment of a spectacle.

"You will please tell the court in your own words ..."

He mouthed the words. The whole story, the New Year's crowd, his hunger
for her, his arrival, the other man and his babbling, the woman and how
she looked, his feelings, his transfigured passions, and the deaths. He
told the story again and again until they seemed satisfied.

"You understand, Mr. Symmes, that you have committed a most heinous
crime. You have killed two people in a passion that, while it used to be
forgiven by the circumstances, is no longer tolerated by this
government. You have killed, Mr. Symmes!"

The face before him was intense. He looked at it, not understanding the
reason for the frozen look of malice and hatred.

"She was mine. When she betrayed me, I killed her. Is that wrong?"

The stick men snorted and poked each other in the ribs with derisive
elbows.

There were more words and more questions. He looked at the face of the
judge and wondered, for a moment, if perhaps the color of the robe was
to match the apparent disposition of the man.

And then came the silence, a time of sitting and waiting. He sensed the
wondering stares of the stick men, wide-eyed in apprehension, suspended
from the drabness of their own lives for the moment by the stark
visitation of tragedy in his. They gabbled among themselves and wagered
on the verdict.

The man next to him leaned over and tapped him on the arm. Everyone
stood up and then, curiously, sat down again almost at once. He felt the
tension present in the courtroom, but was strangely relaxed himself. It
was peculiar that they were all so excited.

"Your Honor, having duly considered the seriousness of the crime and the
evidence presented ..."

The balloon faces on the stick men stretched in anticipation.

"... taking full cognizance of the admitted passion on the part of the
defendant and the circumstances ..."

The balloons were strained, contorted out of all proportion in their
eagerness.

"... we find the defendant guilty of murder, making no recommendation
for consideration by the Court."

The balloons exploded!

       *       *       *       *       *

Deafening and more than deafening, the uproar of the voices was beyond
belief. He threw his hands up over his ears to shut out the noise.

The gavel crashed again and again, striking the polished oak in deadly
cadence, stifling the voices. Over the stillness, one man spoke. He
recognized the black voice of the judge and took his hands from his ears
and put them in his lap. He was told to stand and he obeyed.

"Oliver Symmes, there has been no taking of human lives in this nation
for many years, until your shockingly primitive crime. We had taken
pride in this record. Now you have broken it. We must not only punish
you adequately and appropriately, but we must also make of your
punishment a warning to anyone who would follow your irrational example.

"Naturally, we no longer have either the apparatus to execute anyone or
an executioner. We do not believe that a stupidly unreasoning act should
incite us to equally unreasoning reprisal, for we would then be as
guilty of irrationality as you.

"We must establish our own precedent, since there is no recent one and
the ancient punishments are not acceptable to us. Therefore, because we
are humane and reasoning persons, the Court orders that the defendant,
Oliver Symmes, be placed in the National Hospital for observation, study
and experimentation so that this crime may never again be repeated. He
is to be kept there under perpetual care until no possible human skill
or resource can further sustain life in his body."

Someone jumped erect beside him, quivering with horror and indignation.
It was his lawyer.

"Your Honor, we throw ourselves upon the mercy of the Court. No matter
what the crime of the defendant, this is a greater one. For this is a
crime not just against my client, but against all men. This sentence
robs all men of their most precious freedom--the right to die at their
appointed times. Nothing is more damaging to the basic dignity of the
human race than this most hideous ..."

"... This Court recognizes only the four freedoms. The freedom of death
is not one of these. The sentence stands. The Court is adjourned."

There were tears in the eyes of his lawyer, although young Oliver Symmes
did not quite comprehend, as yet, their meaning. Hands, rougher than
before, grasped his arms with strange firmness and led him off into ...

       *       *       *       *       *

Shadows. They come in cycles, each prompted to activity by the one
preceding it. They flutter in unbelievable clusters, wheel in
untranslatable formations through the cerebric wasteland that is the
aged mind of Oliver Symmes. They have no meaning to him, save for a
furtive spark of recognition that intrudes upon him once in a while.

The woman in the green uniform, standing to one side of the window,
smiled at him again. It was much simpler to care for him, she thought,
if only one conceived of him as being a sort of sweet little worn-out
teddy bear. Yes, that was what he was, a little teddy bear that had
gotten most of its stuffing lost and had shriveled and shrunk. And one
can easily love and pamper a teddy bear.

"Can you see the crowd all right, Mr. Symmes? This is a good place to
watch from, isn't it?"

Her words fell upon his ears, setting up vibrations and oscillations in
the basilar membranes. Nerve cells triggered impulses that sped along
neural pathways to the withered cortex, where they lost themselves in
the welter of atrophy and disintegration. They emerged into his
consciousness as part of a gestaltic confusion.

"Isn't it exciting, watching from here?" she asked, showing enthusiasm
at the sight of the crowd below. "You should be enjoying this immensely,
you know. Not all the people here have windows to look out of like
this." There, now, that should make him feel a little better.

His eyes, in their wandering, came to rest upon her uniform, so cool and
comforting in its greenness. A flicker of light gleamed from the
metallic insignia on her sleeve: "To Care for the Aged." Somewhere
inside him an association clicked, a brief fire of response to a past
event kindled into a short-lived flame, lighting the way through cobwebs
for another _shadow_....

       *       *       *       *       *

How many years he had been waiting for the opportunity, he did not know.
It seemed like decades, although it might have been only a handful of
months. And all the time he had waited, he could feel himself growing
older, could sense the syneresis, the slow solidifying of the life
elements within him. He sat quietly and grew old, thinking the chance
would never come.

But it did come, when he had least expected it.

It was a treat--his birthday. Because of it, they had given him actual
food for the first time in years: a cake, conspicuous in its barrenness
of candles; a glass of real vegetable juices; a dab of potato; an
indescribable green that might have been anything at all; and a little
steak. A succulent, savory-looking piece of genuine meat.

The richness of the food would probably make him sick, so unaccustomed
to solid food was his digestive tract by now, but it would be worth the
pain.

And it was then that he saw the knife.

It lay there on the tray, its honed edge glittering in the light of the
sun. A sharp knife, capable of cutting steak--or flesh of any kind.

"Well, how do you like your birthday present, Mr. Symmes?"

He looked up quickly at the woman standing beside the tray. The yellow
pallor of her middle-aged skin matched the color of her uniform. She
wore the insignia of a geriatrics supervisor.

He let a little smile flicker across his face. "Why, it's ... it's
wonderful. I never expected it at all. It's been so long, you know. So
very long."

How could he get rid of her? If he tried anything with her watching, she
would stop him. And then he'd never get another chance.

"I'm glad you like it, Mr. Symmes. Synthetic foods do get tiresome
after a while, don't they?"

The idea came with suddenness and he responded to it quickly.

"But where are my pink pills? I always take them at lunch."

"You won't need them if you're eating real food."

He whipped his voice into petulance. "Yes, I will! I don't care if it is
real food--I want my pills!"

"I'll get them for you later. Go ahead and eat first."

"I can't eat until I take my pink pills! You ought to know that! I won't
touch a thing until I get them! You've ruined my birthday party."

The whims of the aging are without logic, so she went to get the pills,
leaving Oliver Symmes and the gleaming, sharp knife together,
unattended.

       *       *       *       *       *

Where should he start? The heart? No, that would be too quick, too easy
to repair. Then where?

He remembered his studies of the middle Japanese culture and the methods
of suicide practiced at that time. The intestines! So many of them to
cut and slash at, so much damage that might be done before death set in!
Maybe even the lungs! But he must hurry.

Picking up the knife, he pointed it at his appendix. For a moment he
hesitated, and his eyes observed again the little feast laid out before
him. He thought briefly about pausing for just a while to taste the
little steak, to nibble briefly at the delectable-looking cake. He hated
to leave it untouched. It had been such a long time....

The sudden memory of time, and how much of it he had spent hoping for
this moment, snapped his attention back to the knife. Steeling his grip
on it, he pressed it in hard.

His eyes bulged with the excruciating pain as he wrenched the knife from
right to left, twisting it wildly as he went, blindly slashing at his
vital organs with the hope that once and for all he could stop the long
and eternal waiting.

His mouth filled with the taste of blood. He spat it out through
clenched teeth. It gushed down his chin, staining the cleanness of his
robe. His lips parted to scream.

And then his eyes closed.

       *       *       *       *       *

And opened again! He was staring at the ceiling, but the men and women
standing around him got in his way.

Their lips were moving, their faces unperturbed.

"That was a nasty thing for him to do."

"They all do it, once or twice, until they learn."

"Third time for him, isn't it?"

"Yes, I believe so. First time he tried hanging himself. Second time he
was beating his head against the wall when we came and stopped him.
Bloody mess that one was."

"Nothing to compare with this, of course."

"Well, naturally."

Oliver Symmes felt sick with fear of frustration.

"Nice technique you showed, Doctor. He'd been dead at least an hour when
we started, hadn't he?"

"Almost two," someone else said. "An amazing job."

"Thank you. But it wasn't too difficult. Just a little patching here and
there."

He felt his legs being shifted for him.

"Be careful there, Nurse. Handle him gently. _Fragilitas Ossium_, you
know. Old bones break very easily."

"Sorry, Doctor."

"Not that we couldn't fix them up immediately if they did."

"Naturally, Doctor."

"I wish they'd try something different for a change."

"The woman in the next room lost an eye last year, trying to reach the
prefrontals. Good as new now, of course."

He wanted to vomit at the uselessness of it all.

"By the way, what's he in for? Do you know?"

"No, I'd have to look it up."

"Probably newness."

"Or taxes."

"Or maybe even slander."

"Is that on the prescribed antisocial list now?"

"Oh, yes. It was passed just before the destructive criticism law."

"Think he'll try this messy business again?"

"They all do."

"They do, don't they? Don't they ever learn it's no use?"

"Eventually. Some are just harder to convince than others."

The pain was gone. He closed his eyes and slipped off into darkness
again and into ...

       *       *       *       *       *

Shadows. In slow and ponderous fashion they float across the sea of his
mind, like wandering bits of sargasso weed on the brackish water of a
dying ocean. Each one dreamed a thousand times too many, each separate
strand of memory-weed now nothing but a stereotyped shred of what might
have once been a part of life and of living.

With the quietness of deserted ships they drift in procession past his
sphere of consciousness. Wait! There's one that seems familiar. He stops
the mental parade for a moment, not hearing the voice of his companion,
the woman in the green uniform.

"It's getting late, Mr. Symmes." She turned from the window and glanced
at the wizenedness, the fragile remainder of the man, the almost empty
shell. It was a pity he wasn't able to play games with her like some of
the others. That made it so much easier. "Don't you think it's about
time you went to bed? Early to bed and early to rise, you know."

That memory of a needle, pointed and gleaming. What was it?

Oh, yes. Stick it in his arm, push the plunger, pull it out; and wait
for him to die. First one disease and then another, to each he happily
succumbed, in the interests of science, only to be resuscitated. Each
time a willing volunteer, an eager guinea pig, he had hoped for the ease
of death, praying that for once they'd wait too long, the germs would
prove too virulent, that something would go wrong.

"There, now, you just lie back and get comfortable," she said, walking
over to the table. "But it has been fun, hasn't it? Watching the crowds,
I mean." She felt he must be much happier now, and the knowledge of it
gave her a sense of success. She was living up to her pledge, "To Care
for the Aged."

Diabetes, tuberculosis, cancer of the stomach, tumor of the brain. He'd
had them all, and many others. They had swarmed to him through the
gouged skin-openings made by the gleaming needle. And each had brought
the freedom of blackness, of death, sometimes for an hour, sometimes for
a whole week. But always life returned again, and the waiting, waiting,
waiting.

"I enjoy New Year's myself," the woman said, her hands caressing a dial.
Slowly, with gentle undulation, his chair rose from the floor and
cradled the aged tiredness that was Oliver Symmes to his bed. With
almost tender devotion, his body was mechanically shifted from the
portable chair to the freshly made bed.

       *       *       *       *       *

One of his arms was caught for just a moment under the slight weight of
his body. There was a short, snapping sound, but Oliver Symmes took no
notice. His face remained impassive. Even pain had lost its meaning.

"It's a pity we couldn't have been outside with the rest of them,
celebrating," she said, as she arranged the covers around him, not
noticing the arm herself.

This was the part of her job she enjoyed most--tucking the nice little
man into bed. He did look sweet there, under the covers, didn't he?

"Just imagine, Mr. Symmes, another year's gone by, and what have we
accomplished?"

Her prattle seeped in and he became aware of it and what she was saying.
New Year?

"What--what year--is this?" He spoke with great difficulty, from the
long disuse of vocal cords. It was hardly more than a whisper, but she
heard and was startled.

"Why, Mr. Symmes, it's been so long since you've talked." She paused,
but realized that she had not answered his question.

"It's '73, of course. Last year was '72, so tonight's the start of '73."

'73? Had it been fifty years since he came here? Had it been just that
long?

"What--" She leaned closer to him as he struggled for the word.
"What--century?"

Her astonishment was gone. He was teasing her, like the woman on the
next level. These old ones were great for that!

"Now, Mr. Symmes, everybody knows what century it is." She smiled at him
glowingly, thinking she had caught him at a prank. It was nice, she
thought, to have gotten through to him tonight, on the eve of the new
year. That meant that she was living up to her motto the way she ought
to be.

She'd have to tell the supervisor about it.

Oliver Symmes turned to face the ceiling, his mind full of dusty
whispers. What century was it? She hadn't answered. It might have been a
hundred and fifty years ago he came here, instead of just fifty. Or
possibly two hundred and fifty, or ...

"Now, you be good, and sleep tight, and I'll see you in the morning."
Her hand passed over a glowing stud and the room light dimmed to a quiet
glow. Lying there in the bed, he did look like a teddy bear, a dear
little teddy bear. She was so happy.

"Good night, Mr. Symmes."

She closed the door.

       *       *       *       *       *

Outside, bells were ringing.

"Happy New Year."

The ceiling stared back at him.

The mad sound of people crazed for the moment, shouting, echoed the
bells.

"Happy New Year!"

He turned his head to one side.

"Happy New Year!"

And again ... and again ... and again.

                                                     --JAMES McCONNELL




Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from _Galaxy Science Fiction_ January 1953.
    Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed. Minor spelling and
    typographical errors have been corrected without note.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Life Sentence, by James McConnell

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LIFE SENTENCE ***

***** This file should be named 29889.txt or 29889.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/9/8/8/29889/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
