The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Second Voice, by Mann Rubin

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Second Voice

Author: Mann Rubin

Release Date: September 5, 2009 [EBook #29910]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SECOND VOICE ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









    _We proudly enter a new name in the science-fiction sweepstakes.
    This is Mr. Rubin's initial appearance in the field. His literary
    efforts to date add up quite handsomely, we think. QUOTE. I have
    sold to the TV show, TALES OF TOMORROW and two literary quarterlies
    have published my fiction. Last year I won the Stephen Vincent Ben√©t
    Award for my one-act plays produced at Stanford University. UNQUOTE.
    The reading pleasure is yours._


    the
 second
  voice

 _by ... Mann Rubin_


 Spud, world-famous dummy, talks
 to Mars with surprising results.


Crawford completed the rehearsal in less than an hour. He listened to
the orchestra run through its selections, okayed the song the guest
vocalist had chosen, then finished up with a long dialogue between Spud
and himself. When it was over he checked timing with the program
director, made a few script changes and conferred briefly with a Special
Service Officer about the number of troops the auditorium could hold.
Everything was running smoothly. It was going to be a neat,
action-packed show.

Backstage he looked at his watch. He had almost two hours before the
regular show began and he was restless. Two hours at Harlow Field could
seem like two years. Guards and restrictions all over the place.

Harlow Field was the largest experimental base in the world, a veritable
garden of atoms, the proving grounds for every secret weapon ever
imagined. The security and the tight regulations gave Crawford the
jitters on each of his visits.

He smoked a cigarette and tried making small talk with some of the
soldiers on backstage detail. He posed for a picture and gave an
interview to a reporter from an army newspaper, then excused himself and
went to his dressing room with Spud propped in the crook of his arm.

He was used to it now; the applause, the audiences, the pictures, the
autographs, the fuss. Everywhere the response was the same. They had
either seen him in the movies or on television or in the nightclubs,
where he first broke in his act. Now they wanted to establish an
identity with him, to touch the merchandise, to stand close so that they
could write home about the visiting celebrity. Crawford was a realist.
It was all part of being a name.

It had taken him just five years to make the big time. Five years of
road shows, coast-to-coast tours, one-night stands and a dummy named
Spud to make him the hottest ventriloquist in the business. His act was
tight, well-paced and popular. He had a weekly radio show, a television
program and a seven-year contract with a major Hollywood studio. He was
riding high.

Still he hadn't forgotten the soldiers. Two months each year he took
time off to travel the USO circuit. His agent tore his hair, reminding
him of the financial losses, but the USO had given him his first break
so he had always answered their call. He liked enthusiastic audiences
and the cheering of laugh-hungry men made him happy. Entertainment was
his business and he enjoyed exhibiting his talent. The wider the
audience the better he liked it.

His dressing room was located back of the auditorium. He closed the door
behind him, put Spud on a chair and began getting out of his rehearsal
clothes. He lit a cigarette and looked at himself in the mirror. He was
tired and needed a shave. In the last week the pace had been fast. The
USO tour still had a few days to run, but he was looking forward to its
end. A vacation, the luxury of relaxation would all be his then.

He opened a drawer of the dressing table and pulled out a bottle of
Scotch. There were two hours to be killed before the show. He drank a
shot and thought about it. A shower, a shave, a good dinner and a walk
around the base would consume the time. After the show he would drive
back to town and check in at a hotel for a good night's sleep.

He was putting the bottle back in the drawer when a knock sounded on the
door. He said "Come in," thinking it was one of the cast and didn't turn
around. He heard the door open, glanced into the mirror and glimpsed
Colonel Meadows, the Commanding Officer of Harlow Field, and a man in
civilian clothes he didn't recognize. He turned around, reached for a
bathrobe.

"Don't mind us, Robbie," said the Colonel. "Just dropped by to say
hello." He was a small, plump man and his face was always red and
perspiring. Crawford knew him slightly from the other two times he had
played Harlow Field, but this was the first time the Colonel had ever
paid him a backstage visit.

"Got a fan here who wants to meet you," continued the Colonel. "Shake
hands with Dr. Paul Shalt, one of our base scientists. He and I just
caught your rehearsal. Fine, very fine."

The doctor's name struck a chord and Crawford dug deep until it focused.
Dr. Paul Shalt was a physicist working with the army. He specialized in
the development of radar, was the chief developer of the electrical
detonator used in atomic bombs.

"I enjoyed your performance very much," said Dr. Shalt. "Your voice is
extraordinary." He had a smooth, angular face, black hair and black,
penetrating eyes. "Amazing range."

"Thanks," said Crawford.

"And the clearness of tone is phenomenal," said Dr. Shalt. "Has it
always been like that?"

Crawford nodded. "When I was a kid it embarrassed me, my voice," he
said, smiling. "A trick voice, everybody called it. But it's a definite
asset to a practitioner of the art of ventriloquism."

"You should have seen Dr. Shalt while you were on stage," said Colonel
Meadows, beaming at him. "He was running all over the auditorium testing
your voice with one of his gadgets."

       *       *       *       *       *

Crawford grinned. "I didn't realize I moved my audience so."

Dr. Shalt laughed. "What Colonel Meadows says is true. I'm _very_
interested in your vocal range. While you rehearsed I tested the quality
and sound of your tone." He stopped, looked around the room until he
discovered Spud where Crawford had put him on the chair. He walked over
to the dummy and touched the wooden head with his hand.

"Actually it's a _second voice_, that sound and vibration you use for
Spud. It's perfect, perfect for what I need, that second voice."

Dr. Shalt put the dummy back in the position he had found him in,
reached into his pocket and brought out a small glass-enclosed
instrument which he held in front of him.

"Do you know what this is?" he asked, approaching the dressing table.

"Never saw it before," Crawford said, examining the gadget. A small
arrow flickered nervously within a glass cage.

"It's called a Voice Oscillator," explained Dr. Shalt. "It's sensitive
to the slightest tonal inflection. We use it to measure the pitch and
volume of a human voice."

"What's all this got to do with me?" Crawford asked.

"This--we want to use the voice of Spud for an experiment. A very
important experiment. With your permission, we'd like to do it
immediately."

"I'm afraid that's impossible," said Crawford. "I have a show in
about--"

"Our equipment is all set up," interrupted the doctor. "The entire test
will take forty-five minutes. We'll have you back in no time."

Crawford frowned. He was tired and he'd looked forward to relaxing a
while before the show. "Couldn't we make it some other time," he said.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Colonel spoke then. "Robbie, do you remember reading four years ago
that our radar system was able to beam signals to the moon and have them
returned?"

"Sure," said Crawford. "It got a big play in all the newspapers."

"Well, our scientists are now ready to conduct a similar experiment,"
said Colonel Meadows. "This time to Mars."

"To Mars!" repeated Crawford, wondering what it had to do with him.

"Only this time we plan to send a _voice_, a human voice that can travel
through interstellar space," said Dr. Shalt.

"But that's impossible!" Crawford exclaimed.

"With the average voice, yes," said Dr. Shalt. "Cosmic disturbances
would drown out a normal voice amplified a thousand times beyond its
regular frequency. But a voice in a higher octave--like your second
voice ... Well, we believe there's a certain resonant intonation which
can be curved and regulated in any direction, in the voice you use for
your dummy."

Crawford nodded.

"Spud's voice contains that quality," continued Dr. Shalt. "I believe it
can reach Mars and bounce back. I'm asking you to be the first man ever
to throw his voice to another planet."

There was quiet for a moment when he finished. Crawford's cigarette had
gone out and he relit it. The smoke steadied him. Outside, in the
auditorium the orchestra had begun to rehearse again.

"Where's the station set-up?" asked Crawford finally.

"It's right here on the field, Robbie," Colonel Meadows said quickly.
"We've had it under wraps for the last eight months. It'll be a
tremendous thing if it works."

Crawford dragged on his cigarette a last time and stamped it out. He
walked over to Spud, lifted the dummy into position in the crook of his
arm.

"What do you say, Crawford?" asked Dr. Shalt. There was a note of
urgency in his voice.

"I don't know," said Crawford slowly. "My crazy voice is my bread and
butter. Can't you use somebody else? Somebody whose voice isn't his
life?"

"We've wasted weeks testing every man on this field," said Dr. Shalt
solemnly. "The average voice becomes static as soon as it gets past
Earth's atmosphere. But your voice can break through. I've studied every
vibration, every quiver of it. It bends and flexes with each cosmic
pressure. You _must_ let us try."

Crawford looked at Colonel Meadows.

"Robbie, I promise you there's no danger involved," the Colonel said.
"There's been a great deal of time and effort put into this project and
we'd like to see it work. This week Mars and Earth are the closest
they'll be for the next three years, so it must be done _now_. It's your
duty to help in this important project."

Crawford nodded. The matter of patriotism and duty had not occurred to
him. "Of course, Colonel, I'll be glad to help."

He looked down at the dummy. "What do you say, Spud? Want to be the
first voice to reach Mars?"

"Sounds crazy," came the high, squeaking reply. "But it ought to put us
in the history books." Spud's glass eyes shifted to the other two men in
the room and one lid winked. "Calling Mars! This is Spud O'Malley, old
quiver voice himself, coming in for a landing."

"Good! You'll do it," said Dr. Shalt excitedly. "And if we succeed the
publicity will be worldwide."

"Sure," said Crawford. "An actor likes publicity. But are you sure my
voice won't be strained?"

"I'm sure," Dr. Shalt said. "You'll be talking into a microphone in the
same tone you use for a broadcast. Nothing more."

"How long will it take?" asked Crawford.

Dr. Shalt checked his watch. "Fifteen minutes for the voice to reach
Mars and fifteen minutes for its return." He took out a black notebook
from his jacket pocket and began to outline the plan while Colonel
Meadows put through a call to the laboratory.

Spud's voice was to be relayed directly to a giant amplifying unit which
would project it into space. Those regulating the voice in the control
room would hear nothing but vibrations because of the high frequency it
would immediately attain while passing through. Only on its return from
Mars would Spud's voice become audible on Earth. It sounded fantastic
but Dr. Shalt spoke of it as if it were a certainty and Crawford knew he
was recognized as a great scientist.

A few minutes later Colonel Meadows hung up the phone. He said
excitedly, "Everything's set. All the equipment is ready and there's a
command car waiting outside."

Crawford caught a quick glimpse of himself in the mirror. No shower, no
shave, no quiet dinner, no walk; all that would have to come later. He'd
been hooked. "I'm ready any time you are," he said. He folded Spud in
his arms and followed the two men to the door.

They did not speak much in the car. The laboratory was on the Northern
rim of the field, a ten-minute drive from the auditorium. Approaching
the building, Crawford noticed the high radar towers and the steel
fences surrounding its frame. They rode past three different guard posts
and numerous military policemen before the car halted at the main
entrance.

Immediately they were ushered into a small broadcasting studio which was
soundproofed and closed off by a heavy metal door. This was Dr. Shalt's
home grounds and he took charge.

A microphone had been set up and Dr. Shalt had Crawford test Spud's
voice while a technician in the control booth measured it acoustically.
After an exact tone had been determined for the amplification unit, Dr.
Shalt briefed him on some details, patted him on the back and
disappeared into the control booth followed by Colonel Meadows.

Crawford lit another cigarette and smoked nervously while he awaited the
go-ahead signal. There was a dry tightness in his throat and he
concentrated on relaxing his tension.

High on the studio wall a large clock hacked away at the seconds, and
behind the glass fa√ßade of the control booth he could see Dr. Shalt and
his assistant manipulating dials on an intricate panel. It was almost
three minutes before he heard another sound beside the creak of his own
impatient footsteps. Then Dr. Shalt's voice came on the feed-back, the
speaker system connecting the studio with the booth.

"Crawford, talk into the mike when we flash you the sign. Keep talking
for a minute. And remember--it's just another broadcast. Good luck."

Crawford nodded, deposited the cigarette in an ashtray. He moved into
position and slid his fingers along the inner wires of Spud's back until
they fitted into place. Spud's head came alive.

Dr. Shalt brought his right hand down in a long, sweeping motion. A
bright red bulb above the control booth winked into life. Robbie
Crawford went into his act.

Inside the booth Dr. Shalt, Colonel Meadows and a technician watched
Crawford performing in pantomime and listened to the strange vibrations
emanating from the speaker. They could distinguish no understandable
sound for the amplifier had lifted the voice beyond human hearing as it
released it to the stratosphere. They sat quietly, content to wait for
the voice to return from its long, lonely journey.

Crawford spoke until he saw Dr. Shalt signal for a conclusion. A moment
later the red bulb blinked out and the broadcast was ended. Crawford
felt cold and his hands were perspiring freely. He saw the beaming face
of Colonel Meadows motioning him to come inside the booth. He wiped his
face, and coughed to relieve the tension in his throat.

The Colonel was the first to greet him as he entered the booth, and his
handshake was enthusiastic and firm. Dr. Shalt remained bent over one of
the instrument boards rotating a dial, but looked up and nodded
excitedly.

"It will be another ten minutes," he said. "Sit down. I've sent out for
some supper."

"How did it go?" Crawford asked.

"Good! Good! By now it's half way to its destination."

An orderly came in with a tray of sandwiches and coffee and for the next
few minutes they ate and Dr. Shalt described the intricacies of the
operation. The technician stayed glued to the receiver, earphones
resting lightly across his head.

After ten minutes Dr. Shalt stood up and looked at his watch. "It's
time," he said. "Turn up the resonator." He moved closer to the
receiving set as the others gathered around him. The low hum of the
monitor signal became louder as the technician switched on a new lever.
The static emerging from the speaker thickened, obliterating all other
noises. Another two minutes went by....

Crawford watched it all, aware of the tension and anxiety on each face,
feeling the throbbing excitement himself. So they stood, tensely
expectant, awaiting the return of his voice....

Suddenly the technician whispered, "I've got it! It's coming! I hear it
returning!" He swung around, offering his earphones to Dr. Shalt, who
grabbed for them hurriedly. The scientist raised the cups to his ear and
waited. The room fell into deeper silence.

"Yes, yes, it's the voice! Turn up the resonator to full volume! We've
got it! The voice is completing the circuit!" Dr. Shalt said tensely.

The technician turned another dial as far as it would go. The sound of
the static rose to a roar. Then abruptly the static broke, died out and
a strange new sound came in. It was Spud! Spud's voice creeping back
from a trip to Mars, thirty-five million miles away!

"_Hello.... This is the voice of Spud O'Malley. I speak to you from
Harlow Field in the United States of America. My voice is being sent to
you by a newly invented Amplification Unit developed by Dr. Paul Shalt
at this experimental base. This is the first time such an operation has
ever been tried. We extend our heartiest greetings, our deepest
felicitations ..._"

It went on, the high, squeaking voice, friendly, humorous, alive;
sending back to them the words that Crawford had spoken into the
microphone a few minutes before.

Crawford studied the faces of the other men. They had worked and planned
a long time for this single moment, the realization of a long pursued
dream. Colonel Meadows was rubbing his hands together gleefully. The
voice was reaching its climax. Success was assured. History had been
made!

There was a little silence as Spud finished speaking. The technician
reached across leisurely to shut off the resonator.

Suddenly the voice started again. The technician's hand froze in
mid-air. The same high, squeaking tone, the same inflections, the same
pitch. But this time it was commanding, authoritative.

"_This is Mars. We have received your voice. We know of you, know your
language. We want you to know that we do not like intruders. We want no
contact with you. Seek us out no more. The voice was received clearly.
It fits our frequency well. We will keep it so that no more
communication from you is possible. Let this be a warning. Stay away! We
do not want you!_"

The voice stopped and there was silence again. Then Colonel Meadows
chuckled. "Very clever, Crawford! You really startled me for a moment."

"Yes," said Dr. Shalt, smiling. "So you made a little joke at the end.
Very clever."

Crawford's back was to them as he stared at the loudspeaker. His face
was contorted in a surprised grimace and the flesh was suddenly white
and lifeless. He turned to face them, his body rigid and his mouth
trembling as he whispered:

"That voice--that last voice--it wasn't mine! _That wasn't me
speaking!_"

Dr. Shalt laughed. "Superb actor. A great performance, Mr. Crawford. We
are most grateful to you."

"Robbie's a born comedian," added Colonel Meadows, his eyes sparkling
with the humor of the situation. "Never misses a chance to clown."

"Don't you understand--_it wasn't my voice_!" screamed Crawford. He
looked from one man to another, his eyes pleading for belief. "The
second part was not mine!"

They stared at him, their smiles fading.

Colonel Meadows said, "What do you mean, Robbie?"

"Didn't you hear when I spoke? I never said those last things. Didn't
you hear what I said?"

The technician answered him. "We didn't hear a thing, Mr. Crawford. The
amplification was too high. It was nothing but mumbling when it passed
through this room." He looked at Dr. Shalt for confirmation.

"I explained that to you myself," said the doctor. "You could have
recited the Gettysburg Address and we'd never have known until it
returned."

Crawford stared down at the limp form of Spud hanging across his arm. He
ran a hand across his eyes, dropped the dummy onto the desk. Turning
back to Dr. Shalt, he began to speak in a taut, controlled voice.

"Dr. Shalt, I swear to you that was not my voice at the end. I finished
with a goodbye. The voice that spoke after that moment of silence was
somebody else's voice. It's up to you to find out whose."

"Don't be absurd," said Dr. Shalt, irritably. "That was _your_ voice,
_your_ pitch. The voice of your dummy, Spud." He wasn't going to be
taken in by any warped sense of humor. Robbie Crawford was the best
ventriloquist in America. He was also noted for his practical jokes. "An
experiment of this magnitude shouldn't be treated so lightly," he added
acidly.

"You've got to believe me!" screamed Crawford. His voice was choked and
his pale face was glistening with perspiration. "It was someone else,
imitating my ventriloquist voice! I swear it was not me!"

Colonel Meadows sat down abruptly. The technician ran from the booth and
returned a moment later with a glass of water. Colonel Meadows motioned
for him to give it to Crawford.

The ventriloquist gulped down the water, then went over and sat down
beside the Colonel.

"Look," he said quietly. "I'm not joking and I'm not out of my head. It
was a shock to hear a voice so like my own, to hear it threaten us, to
know that it's traveling from another world. It's like hearing an echo
that shouldn't be."

The Colonel exchanged a puzzled look with Dr. Shalt. After a moment the
doctor reached down and picked the dummy up and brought it to Crawford.

"Crawford, listen to me." His voice was gentle, sympathetic. "Perhaps
you've been working too hard. These USO trips, the rehearsal, the
excitement of the last hour. Maybe you forgot what you said, or said
more than you recall."

"I remember everything I said," Crawford said quietly. "I stopped when
you gave me the signal. That voice came after I stopped. Can't you
check--?"

A phone in the back of the control booth rang sharply and Colonel
Meadows answered it. He spoke for a few moments, then hung up. "That was
the stage manager calling from the main auditorium. You've got ten
minutes before the show. How do you feel?"

Crawford blinked in surprise. He had almost forgotten the program. He
tried to rise, found his legs trembling.

"He's in no condition to put on a show," said Dr. Shalt. "Better
postpone it."

"No, no, I'm okay," protested Crawford, walking around the small floor,
exercising his hands. "It's my show. They're waiting for me. Let's get
going."

In the car, during the ride to the auditorium, he did not speak. He sat
with Spud resting snugly against his chest, drumming his fingers on an
arm rest while Colonel Meadows and Dr. Shalt talked, tried to convince
him of the invalidity in his reasoning. There was a simple explanation
for the voice; either he had forgotten part of his speech or maybe some
amateur radio ham had somehow managed to pick up their signal and was
playing a joke. He was too intelligent a man to be frightened by such
coincidence. They spoke to him reassuringly all during the ride. At the
stage door he thanked them, then went inside the auditorium to give his
performance.

The ovation that greeted him was tremendous. The orchestra played his
theme and an army announcer introduced him as the Number One
ventriloquist in the world. He walked out slowly from the wing, waving
and grinning at the audience with Spud sitting erect on his arm.

The soldiers roared and whistled as Spud's head spun, drooped and tilted
in the opening routine that he was famous for. Crawford stopped in the
middle of the stage, rested his foot on a chair that had been provided,
sat Spud on his knee. The applause dwindled gradually and the other
members of the cast moved into their positions. The army announcer
walked forward to engage Crawford in conversation--to feed him questions
that would be answered in Spud's high, squeaky voice.

"Hi, Robbie, Spud," said the announcer. "What took you so long getting
here?"

It was Spud's answer. All eyes focused on the dummy's face as it bent
forward and its mouth opened slowly. A wooden hand moved up and
scratched a wooden head. But only a gurgle came out of the open mouth!

The announcer looked at Crawford, motioned him to speed up. "Speak up,
Spud. Can't hear a word you're saying. No time to be bashful."

Again the dummy's mouth opened, the head bobbed and the eyes blinked.
The gurgle became a half-strangled gasp. It whined unsteadily a few
moments then broke off completely. The cast in the wings began to stir
nervously. Crawford was obviously straining. A vein throbbed in the
center of his forehead and his lips were tight over his teeth.

"Stage fright," he said in an aside to the audience. Turning his head
aside, he coughed and cleared his throat and pretended to whisper with
Spud. "Speak up, Pal. This is what we rehearsed for."

The mouth of the dummy flapped up and down without cadence. The soldiers
snickered, squirmed restlessly. A sound started, a low, plaintive wail
that broke into a dirge and finally into a wild shriek from Crawford's
lips. He screamed and kicked over the chair his foot was balanced on.
The dummy toppled to the floor.

"I can't! I can't! My voice is gone!" He was screaming and clutching at
his throat, trying to loosen his collar. The curtains closed behind him
as soldiers leaped to their feet all over the auditorium.

He screamed, "I've lost my second voice! They took it from me! The
Martians stole my voice!"

The announcer grabbed his arms then and tried to lead him from the
stage. Crawford shoved him away.

"They took it," cried Crawford. "No matter what they tell you, the
Martians took Spud's voice. It fitted their frequency. They'll use it to
reach Earth! I can't get it back!"

Colonel Meadows and several MPs who were stationed in the wings came out
and dragged him from the platform.

The G.I. audience remained silent a moment longer, then broke into loud,
nervous rumbling. Seconds later Colonel Meadows returned to the
microphone and held up his hand until the confusion died down. He
explained briefly about Dr. Shalt's experiment and how Crawford had been
asked to participate. He told how a human voice had been sent to Mars
for the first time and how Crawford had suffered a temporary shock on
hearing his voice return from this journey.

He assured the audience that Crawford would receive the best medical
care and would probably be back performing at the field in a few short
weeks. He asked the soldiers to remain in their seats and let the show
continue out of respect for a great performer.

The orchestra began the refrain of a popular song and the guest vocalist
appeared wearing a white strapless evening gown. She blew warm, friendly
kisses to the soldiers. The response she received was a healthy one.

And the show went on....




Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from _Fantastic Universe_ March 1954.
    Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed. Minor spelling and
    typographical errors have been corrected without note.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Second Voice, by Mann Rubin

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SECOND VOICE ***

***** This file should be named 29910-8.txt or 29910-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/9/9/1/29910/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
