The Project Gutenberg EBook of Irresistible Weapon, by Horace Brown Fyfe

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Irresistible Weapon

Author: Horace Brown Fyfe

Illustrator: Ed Emshwiller

Release Date: September 15, 2009 [EBook #29994]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK IRRESISTIBLE WEAPON ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









[Illustration]


 _There's no such thing as a weapon too horrible
 to use; weapons will continue to become bigger,
 and deadlier. Like other things that can't be
 stopped...._


IRRESISTIBLE WEAPON

By H. B. Fyfe

Illustrated by ED EMSH


In the special observation dome of the colossal command ship just beyond
Pluto, every nervous clearing of a throat rasped through the silence.
Telescopes were available but most of the scientists and high officials
preferred the view on the huge telescreen.

This showed, from a distance of several million miles, one of the small
moons of the frigid planet, so insignificant that it had not been
discovered until man had pushed the boundaries of space exploration past
the asteroids. The satellite was about to become spectacularly
significant, however, as the first target of man's newest, most
destructive weapon.

"I need not remind you, gentlemen," white-haired Co-ordinator Evora of
Mars had said, "that if we have actually succeeded in this race against
our former Centaurian colonies, it may well prevent the imminent
conflict entirely. In a few moments we shall know whether our scientists
have developed a truly irresistible weapon."

Of all the officials, soldiers, and scientists present, Arnold Gibson
was perhaps the least excited. For one thing, he had labored hard to
make the new horror succeed and felt reasonably confident that it would.
The project had been given the attention of every first-class scientific
mind in the Solar System; for the great fear was that the new states on
the Centaurian planets might win the race of discovery and ...

_And bring a little order into this old-fashioned, inefficient fumbling
toward progress_, Gibson thought contemptuously. _Look at them--fools
for all their degrees and titles! They've stumbled on something with
possibilities beyond their confused powers of application._

A gasp rustled through the chamber, followed by an even more awed
silence than had preceded the unbelievable, ultra-rapid action on the
telescreen. Gibson permitted himself a tight smile of satisfaction.

_Now my work really begins_, he reflected.

A few quick steps brought him to Dr. Haas, director of the project, just
before the less stunned observers surrounded that gentleman, babbling
questions.

"I'll start collecting the Number Three string of recorders," he
reported.

"All right, Arnold," agreed Haas. "Tell the others to get their ships
out too. I'll be busy here."

_Not half as busy as you will be in about a day_, thought Gibson,
heading for the spaceship berths.

       *       *       *       *       *

He had arranged to be assigned the recording machines drifting in space
at the greatest distance from the command ship. The others would assume
that he needed more time to locate and retrieve the apparatus--which
would give him a head start toward Alpha Centauri.

His ship was not large, but it was powerful and versatile to cope with
any emergency that may have been encountered during the dangerous tests.
Gibson watched his instruments carefully for signs of pursuit until he
had put a few million miles between himself and the command ship. Then
he eased his craft into subspace drive and relaxed his vigilance.

He returned to normal space many "days" later in the vicinity of Alpha
Centauri. They may have attempted to follow him for all he knew, but it
hardly mattered by then. He broadcast the recognition signal he had been
given to memorize long ago, when he had volunteered his services to the
new states. Then he headed for the capital planet, Nessus. Long before
reaching it, he acquired a lowering escort of warcraft, but he was
permitted to land.

"Well, well, it's young Gibson!" the Chairman of Nessus greeted him,
after the newcomer had passed through the exhaustive screening designed
to protect the elaborate underground headquarters. "I trust you have
news for us, my boy. Watch outside the door, Colonel!"

One of the ostentatiously armed guards stepped outside and closed the
door as Gibson greeted the obese man sitting across the button-studded
expanse of desk. The scientist was under no illusion as to the vagueness
of the title "Chairman." He was facing the absolute power of the
Centaurian planets--which, in a few months' time, would be the same as
saying the ruler of all the human race in both systems. Gibson's file
must have been available on the Chairman's desk telescreen within
minutes of the reception of his recognition signal. He felt a thrill of
admiration for the efficiency of the new states and their system of
government.

He made it his business to report briefly and accurately, trusting that
the plain facts of his feat would attract suitable recognition. They
did. Chairman Diamond's sharp blue eyes glinted out of the fat mask of
his features.

"Well done, my boy!" he grunted, with a joviality he did not bother
trying to make sound overly sincere. "So _they_ have it! You must see
our men immediately, and point out where they have gone wrong. You may
leave it to me to decide _who_ has gone wrong!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Arnold Gibson shivered involuntarily before reminding himself that _he_
had seen the correct answer proved before his eyes. He had stood there
and watched--more, he had worked with them all his adult life--and he
was the last whom the muddled fools would have suspected.

The officer outside the door, Colonel Korman, was recalled and given
orders to escort Gibson to the secret state laboratories. He glanced
briefly at the scientist when they had been let out through the
complicated system of safeguards.

"We have to go to the second moon," he said expressionlessly. "Better
sleep all you can on the way. Once you're there, the Chairman will be
impatient for results!"

Gibson was glad, after they had landed on the satellite, that he had
taken the advice. He was led from one underground lab to another, to
compare Centaurian developments with Solarian. Finally, Colonel Korman
appeared to extricate him, giving curt answers to such researchers as
still had questions.

"Whew! Glad you got me out!" Gibson thanked him. "They've been picking
my brain for two days straight!"

"I hope you can stay awake," retorted Korman with no outward sign of
sympathy. "If you think you can't, say so now. I'll have them give you
another shot. The Chairman is calling on the telescreen."

Gibson straightened.

_Jealous snob!_ he thought. _Typical military fathead, and he knows I
amount to more than any little colonel now. I was smart enough to fool
all the so-called brains of the Solar System._

"I'll stay awake," he said shortly.

Chairman Diamond's shiny features appeared on the screen soon after
Korman reported his charge ready.

"Speak freely," he ordered Gibson. "This beam is so tight and scrambled
that no prying jackass could even tell that it is communication. Have
you set us straight?"

"Yes, Your Excellency," replied Gibson. "I merely pointed out which of
several methods the Solarians got to yield results. Your--our scientists
were working on all possibilities, so it would have been only a matter
of time."

"Which you have saved us," said Chairman Diamond. His ice-blue eyes
glinted again. "I wish I could have seen the faces of Haas and
Co-ordinator Evora, and the rest. You fooled them completely!"

Gibson glowed at the rare praise.

"I dislike bragging, Your Excellency," he said, "but they _are_ fools. I
might very well have found the answer without them, once they had
collected the data. My success shows what intelligence, well-directed
after the manner of the new states of Centauri, can accomplish against
inefficiency."

The Chairman's expression, masked by the fat of his face, nevertheless
approached a smile.

"So you would say that you--one of _our_ sympathizers--were actually the
most intelligent worker _they_ had?"

_He'll have his little joke_, thought Gibson, _and I'll let him put it
over. Then, even that sour colonel will laugh with us, and the Chairman
will hint about what post I'll get as a reward. I wouldn't mind being in
charge--old Haas' opposite number at this end._

"I think I might indeed be permitted to boast of that much ability, Your
Excellency," he answered, putting on what he hoped was an expectant
smile. "Although, considering the Solarians, that is not saying much."

The little joke did not develop precisely as anticipated.

"Unfortunately," Chairman Diamond said, maintaining his smile
throughout, "wisdom should never be confused with intelligence."

       *       *       *       *       *

Gibson waited, feeling his own smile stiffen as he wondered what could
be going wrong. Surely, they could not doubt _his_ loyalty! A hasty
glance at Colonel Korman revealed no expression on the military facade
affected by that gentleman.

"For if wisdom _were_ completely synonymous with intelligence," the
obese Chairman continued, relishing his exposition, "you would be a
rival to myself, and consequently would be--disposed of--anyway!"

Such a tingle shot up Gibson's spine that he was sure he must have
jumped.

"_Anyway?_" he repeated huskily. His mouth suddenly seemed dry.

Chairman Diamond smiled out of the telescreen, so broadly that Gibson
was unpleasantly affected by the sight of his small, gleaming, white
teeth.

"Put it this way," he suggested suavely. "Your highly trained mind
observed, correlated, and memorized the most intricate data and
mathematics, meanwhile guiding your social relations with your former
colleagues so as to remain unsuspected while stealing their most
cherished secret. Such a feat demonstrates ability and intelligence."

Gibson tried to lick his lips, and could not, despite the seeming
fairness of the words. He sensed a pulsing undercurrent of cruelty and
cynicism.

"On the other hand," the mellow voice flowed on, "having received the
information, being able to use it effectively now without you, and
knowing that you betrayed _once_--I shall simply discard you like an old
message blank. _That_ is an act of wisdom.

"Had you chosen your course more wisely," he added, "your position might
be stronger."

By the time Arnold Gibson regained his voice, the Centaurian autocrat
was already giving instructions to Colonel Korman. The scientist strove
to interrupt, to attract the ruler's attention even momentarily.

Neither paid him any heed, until he shouted and tried frenziedly to
shove the soldier from in front of the telescreen. Korman backhanded him
across the throat without looking around, with such force that Gibson
staggered back and fell.

He lay, half-choking, grasping his throat with both hands until he could
breathe. The colonel continued discussing his extinction without
emotion.

"... so if Your Excellency agrees, I would prefer taking him back to
Nessus first, for the sake of the morale factor here. Some of them are
so addled now at having been caught chasing up wrong alleys that they
can hardly work."

Apparently the Chairman agreed, for the screen was blank when the
colonel reached down and hauled Gibson to his feet.

"Now, listen to me carefully!" he said, emphasizing his order with a
ringing slap across Gibson's face. "I shall walk behind you with my
blaster drawn. If you make a false move, I shall not kill you."

Gibson stared at him, holding his bleeding mouth.

"It will be much worse," Korman went on woodenly. "Imagine what it will
be like to have both feet charred to the bone. You would have to crawl
the rest of the way to the ship; _I_ certainly would not consider
carrying you!"

In a nightmarish daze, Gibson obeyed the cold directions, and walked
slowly along the underground corridors of the Centaurian research
laboratories. He prayed desperately that someone--anyone--might come
along. _Anybody_ who could possibly be used to create a diversion, or to
be pushed into Korman and his deadly blaster.

The halls remained deserted, possibly by arrangement.

_Maybe I'd better wait till we reach his ship_, Gibson thought. _I ought
to be able to figure a way before we reach Nessus. I had the brains to
fool Haas and ..._

He winced, recalling Chairman Diamond's theory of the difference between
intelligence and wisdom.

_The obscene swine!_ he screamed silently.

Colonel Korman grunted warningly, and Gibson took the indicated turn.

They entered the spaceship from an underground chamber, and Gibson
learned the reason for his executioner's assurance when the latter
chained him to one of the pneumatic acceleration seats. The chain was
fragile in appearance, but he knew he would not be free to move until
Korman so desired.

_More of their insane brand of cleverness!_ he reflected. _That's the
sort of thing they do succeed in thinking of. They're all crazy! Why did
I ever ..._

But he shrank from the question he feared to answer. To drag out into
the open his petty, selfish reasons, shorn of the tinsel glamor of
so-called "service" and "progress," would be too painful.

       *       *       *       *       *

After the first series of accelerations, he roused himself from his
beaten stupor enough to note that Korman was taking a strange course for
reaching Nessus. Then, entirely too close to the planet and its
satellites to ensure accuracy, the colonel put the ship into subspace
drive.

Korman leaned back at the conclusion of the brief activity on his
control board, and met Gibson's pop-eyed stare.

"Interesting, the things worth knowing," he commented. "How to make a
weapon, for instance, or whether your enemy has it yet."

He almost smiled at his prisoner's expression.

"Or even better: knowing exactly how far your enemy has progressed and
how fast he can continue, whether to stop him immediately or whether you
can remain a step ahead."

"B-but--if both sides are irresistible ..." Gibson stammered.

Korman examined him contemptuously.

"No irresistible weapon exists, or ever will!" he declared. "Only an
irresistible _process_--the transmission of secrets! You are living
proof that no safeguards can defend against _that_."

He savored Gibson's silent discomfort.

"I am sure you know how far and how fast the Centaurian scientists will
go, Gibson, since I guided you to every laboratory in that plant. Your
memory may require some painful jogging when we reach the Solar System;
_but remember you shall_!"

"But you--you were ordered to ..."

"You didn't think I was a Centaurian, did you?" sneered Korman. "After I
just explained to you _what_ is really irresistible?"


THE END




Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from _If Worlds of Science Fiction_ July
    1953. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed. Minor spelling and
    typographical errors have been corrected without note.





End of Project Gutenberg's Irresistible Weapon, by Horace Brown Fyfe

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK IRRESISTIBLE WEAPON ***

***** This file should be named 29994.txt or 29994.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/9/9/9/29994/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
