The Project Gutenberg EBook of Lost in Translation, by Larry M. Harris

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Lost in Translation

Author: Larry M. Harris

Illustrator: Schoenherr

Release Date: September 19, 2009 [EBook #30029]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LOST IN TRANSLATION ***




Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net








                         Transcriber's Note:

     This etext was produced from Analog Science Fact & Fiction August
     1961. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the
     U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.


                                 LOST

                                  IN

                             TRANSLATION


                            [Illustration]


                                  By

                               LARRY M.

                                HARRIS


    _In language translation, you may get a literally accurate
    word-for-word translation ... but miss the meaning entirely.
    And in space-type translation ... the effect may be the
    same!_


                      Illustrated by Schoenherr

       *       *       *       *       *




The cell had been put together more efficiently than any Korvin had
ever been in. But that was only natural, he told himself sadly; the
Tr'en were an efficient people. All the preliminary reports had agreed
on that; their efficiency, as a matter of fact, was what had made
Korvin's arrival a necessity. They were well into the atomic era, and
were on the verge of developing space travel. Before long they'd be
settling the other planets of their system, and then the nearer stars.
Faster-than-light travel couldn't be far away, for the magnificently
efficient physical scientists of the Tr'en--and that would mean, in
the ordinary course of events, an invitation to join the Comity of
Planets.

An invitation, the Comity was sure, which the Tr'en would not accept.

Korvin stretched out on the cell's single bunk, a rigid affair which
was hardly meant for comfort, and sighed. He'd had three days of
isolation, with nothing to do but explore the resources of his own
mind. He'd tried some of the ancient Rhine experiments, but that was
no good; he still didn't show any particular psi talents. He couldn't
unlock the cell door with his unaided mind; he couldn't even alter the
probability of a single dust-mote's Brownian path through the somewhat
smelly air. Nor could he disappear from his cell and appear, as if by
magic, several miles away near the slightly-damaged hulk of his ship,
to the wonder and amazement of his Tr'en captors.

He could do, as a matter of fact, precisely nothing. He wished quietly
that the Tr'en had seen fit to give him a pack of cards, or a book, or
even a folder of tourist pictures. The Wonders of Tr'en, according to
all the advance reports, were likely to be pretty boring, but they'd
have been better than nothing.

In any decently-run jail, he told himself with indignation, there
would at least have been other prisoners to talk to. But on Tr'en
Korvin was all alone.

True, every night the guards came in and gave him a concentrated
lesson in the local language, but Korvin failed to get much pleasure
out of that, being unconscious at the time. But now he was equipped to
discuss almost anything from philosophy to plumbing, but there was
nobody to discuss it with. He changed position on the bunk and stared
at the walls. The Tr'en were efficient; there weren't even any
imperfections in the smooth surface to distract him.

He wasn't tired and he wasn't hungry; his captors had left him with a
full stock of food concentrates.

But he was almightily bored, and about ready to tell anything to
anyone, just for the chance at a little conversation.

As he reached this dismal conclusion, the cell door opened. Korvin got
up off the bunk in a hurry and spun around to face his visitor.

The Tr'en was tall, and slightly green.

He looked, as all the Tr'en did, vaguely humanoid--that is, if you
don't bother to examine him closely. Life in the universe appeared to
be rigidly limited to humanoid types on oxygen planets; Korvin didn't
know why, and neither did anybody else. There were a lot of theories,
but none that accounted for all the facts satisfactorily. Korvin
really didn't care about it; it was none of his business.

The Tr'en regarded him narrowly through catlike pupils. "You are
Korvin," he said.

It was a ritual, Korvin had learned. "You are of the Tr'en," he
replied. The green being nodded.

"I am Didyak of the Tr'en," he said. Amenities over with, he relaxed
slightly--but no more than slightly--and came into the cell, closing
the door behind him. Korvin thought of jumping the Tr'en, but decided
quickly against it. He was a captive, and it was unwise to assume that
his captors had no more resources than the ones he saw: a small
translucent pistollike affair in a holster at the Tr'en's side, and a
small knife in a sheath at the belt. Those Korvin could deal with; but
there might be almost anything else hidden and ready to fire on him.

"What do you want with me?" Korvin said. The Tr'en speech--apparently
there was only one language on the planet--was stiff and slightly
awkward, but easily enough learned under drug hypnosis; it was the
most rigorously logical construction of its kind Korvin had ever come
across. It reminded him of some of the mathematical metalanguages he'd
dealt with back on Earth, in training; but it was more closely and
carefully constructed than even those marvels.

"I want nothing with you," Didyak said, leaning against the
door-frame. "You have other questions?"

Korvin sighed. "What are you doing here, then?" he asked. As
conversation, it wasn't very choice; but it was, he admitted, better
than solitude.

"I am leaning against the door," Didyak said. The Tr'en literalist
approach to the smallest problems of everyday living was a little hard
to get the hang of, Korvin told himself bitterly. He thought for a
second.

"Why did you come to me?" he said at last.

Didyak beamed at him. The sight was remarkably unpleasant, involving
as it did the disclosure of the Tr'en fifty-eight teeth, mostly
pointed. Korvin stared back impassively. "I have been ordered to come
to you," Didyak said, "by the Ruler. The Ruler wishes to talk with
you."

It wasn't quite "talk"; that was a general word in the Tr'en language,
and Didyak had used a specific meaning, roughly: "gain information
from, by peaceful and vocal means." Korvin filed it away for future
reference. "Why did the Ruler not come to me?" Korvin asked.

"The Ruler is the Ruler," Didyak said, slightly discomfited. "You are
to go to him. Such is his command."

Korvin shrugged, sighed and smoothed back his hair. "I obey the
command of the Ruler," he said--another ritual. Everybody obeyed the
command of the Ruler. If you didn't, you never had a second chance to
try.

But Korvin meant exactly what he'd said. He was going to obey the
commands of the Ruler of the Tr'en--and remove the Tr'en threat from
the rest of the galaxy forever.

That, after all, was his job.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Room of the Ruler was large, square and excessively brown. The
walls were dark-brown, the furnishings--a single great chair, several
kneeling-benches and a small table near the chair--were light-brown,
of some metallic substance, and even the drapes were tan. It was,
Korvin decided, much too much of a bad idea, even when the color
contrast of the Tr'en themselves were figured in.

The Ruler himself, a Tr'en over seven feet tall and correspondingly
broad, sat in the great chair, his four fingers tapping gently on the
table near him, staring at Korvin and his guards. The guards stood on
either side of their captive, looking as impassive as jade statues,
six and a half feet high.

Korvin wasn't attempting to escape. He wasn't pleading with the Ruler.
He wasn't defying the Ruler, either. He was just answering questions.

The Tr'en liked to have everything clear. They were a logical race.
The Ruler had started with Korvin's race, his name, his sex--if
any--and whether or not his appearance were normal for humanity.

Korvin was answering the last question. "Some men are larger than I
am," he said, "and some are smaller."

"Within what limits?"

Korvin shrugged. "Some are over eight feet tall," he said, "and others
under four feet." He used the Tr'en measurement scale, of course; it
didn't seem necessary, though, to mention that both extremes of height
were at the circus-freak level. "Then there is a group of humans," he
went on, "who are never more than a foot and a half in height, and
usually less than that--approximately nine or ten inches. We call
these _children_," he volunteered helpfully.

"Approximately?" the Ruler growled. "We ask for precision here," he
said. "We are scientific men. We are exact."

Korvin nodded hurriedly. "Our race is more ... more approximate," he
said apologetically.

"Slipshod," the Ruler muttered.

"Undoubtedly," Korvin agreed politely. "I'll try to do the best I can
for you."

"You will answer my questions," the Ruler said, "with exactitude." He
paused, frowning slightly. "You landed your ship on this planet," he
went on. "Why?"

"My job required it," Korvin said.

"A clumsy lie," the Ruler said. "The ship crashed; our examinations
prove that beyond any doubt."

"True," Korvin said.

"And it is your job to crash your ship?" the Ruler said. "Wasteful."

Korvin shrugged again. "What I say is true," he announced. "Do you
have tests for such matters?"

"We do," the Ruler told him. "We are an exact and a scientific race. A
machine for the testing of truth has been adjusted to your physiology.
It will be attached to you."

Korvin looked around and saw it coming through the door, pushed by two
technicians. It was large and squat and metallic, and it had wheels,
dials, blinking lights, tubes and wires, and a seat with armrests and
straps. It was obviously a form of lie-detector--and Korvin felt
himself marveling again at this race. Earth science had nothing to
match their enormous command of the physical universe; adapting a
hypnopædic language-course to an alien being so quickly had been
wonder enough, but adapting the perilously delicate mechanisms that
necessarily made up any lie-detector machinery was almost a miracle.
The Tr'en, under other circumstances, would have been a valuable
addition to the Comity of Nations.

Being what they were, though, they could only be a menace. And
Korvin's appreciation of the size of that menace was growing hourly.

He hoped the lie-detector had been adjusted correctly. If it showed
him telling an untruth, he wasn't likely to live long, and his
job--not to mention the strongest personal inclinations--demanded most
strongly that he stay alive.

He swallowed hard. But when the technicians forced him down into the
seat, buckled straps around him, attached wires and electrodes and
elastic bands to him at appropriate places and tightened some final
screws, he made no resistance.

"We shall test the machine," the Ruler said. "In what room are you?"

"In the Room of the Ruler," Korvin said equably.

"Are you standing or sitting?"

"I am sitting," Korvin said.

"Are you a _chulad_?" the Ruler asked. A _chulad_ was a small native
pet, Korvin knew, something like a greatly magnified deathwatch
beetle.

"I am not," he said.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Ruler looked to his technicians for a signal, and nodded on
receiving it. "You will tell an untruth now," he said. "Are you
standing or sitting?"

"I am standing," Korvin said.

The technicians gave another signal. The Ruler looked, in his frowning
manner, reasonably satisfied. "The machine," he announced, "has been
adjusted satisfactorily to your physiology. The questioning will now
continue."

Korvin swallowed again. The test hadn't really seemed extensive enough
to him. But, after all, the Tr'en knew their business, better than
anyone else could know it. They had the technique and the logic and
the training.

He hoped they were right.

The Ruler was frowning at him. Korvin did his best to look receptive.
"Why did you land your ship on this planet?" the Ruler said.

"My job required it," Korvin said.

The Ruler nodded. "Your job is to crash your ship," he said. "It is
wasteful but the machines tell me it is true. Very well, then; we
shall find out more about your job. Was the crash intentional?"

Korvin looked sober. "Yes," he said.

The Ruler blinked. "Very well," he said. "Was your job ended when the
ship crashed?" The Tr'en word, of course, wasn't _ended_, nor did it
mean exactly that. As nearly as Korvin could make out, it meant
"disposed of for all time."

"No," he said.

"What else does your job entail?" the Ruler said.

Korvin decided to throw his first spoke into the wheel. "Staying
alive."

The Ruler roared. "Do not waste time with the obvious!" he shouted.
"Do not try to trick us; we are a logical and scientific race! Answer
correctly."

"I have told the truth," Korvin said.

"But it is not--not the truth we want," the Ruler said.

Korvin shrugged. "I replied to your question," he said. "I did not
know that there was more than one kind of truth. Surely the truth is
the truth, just as the Ruler is the Ruler?"

"I--" The Ruler stopped himself in mid-roar. "You try to confuse the
Ruler," he said at last, in an approximation of his usual one. "But
the Ruler will not be confused. We have experts in matters of
logic"--the Tr'en word seemed to mean _right-saying_--"who will advise
the Ruler. They will be called."

Korvin's guards were standing around doing nothing of importance now
that their captor was strapped down in the lie-detector. The Ruler
gestured and they went out the door in a hurry.

The Ruler looked down at Korvin. "You will find that you cannot trick
us," he said. "You will find that such fiddling"--_chulad-like_ Korvin
translated--"attempts will get you nowhere."

Korvin devoutly hoped so.

       *       *       *       *       *

The experts in logic arrived shortly, and in no uncertain terms Korvin
was given to understand that logical paradox was not going to confuse
anybody on the planet. The barber who did, or didn't, shave himself,
the secretary of the club whose members were secretaries, Achilles and
the tortoise, and all the other lovely paradox-models scattered around
were so much primer material for the Tr'en. "They can be treated
mathematically," one of the experts, a small emerald-green being, told
Korvin thinly. "Of course, you would not understand the mathematics.
But that is not important. You need only understand that we cannot be
confused by such means."

"Good," Korvin said.

The experts blinked. "Good?" he said.

"Naturally," Korvin said in a friendly tone.

The expert frowned horribly, showing all of his teeth. Korvin did his
best not to react. "Your plan is a failure," the expert said, "and you
call this a good thing. You can mean only that your plan is different
from the one we are occupied with."

"True," Korvin said.

There was a short silence. The expert beamed. He examined the
indicators of the lie-detector with great care. "What is your plan?"
he said at last, in a conspiratorial whisper.

"To answer your questions, truthfully and logically," Korvin said.

The silence this time was even longer.

"The machine says that you tell the truth," the experts said at last,
in a awed tone. "Thus, you must be a traitor to your native planet.
You must want us to conquer your planet, and have come here secretly
to aid us."

Korvin was very glad that wasn't a question. It was, after all, the
only logical deduction.

But it happened to be wrong.

       *       *       *       *       *

"The name of your planet is Earth?" the Ruler asked. A few minutes had
passed; the experts were clustered around the single chair. Korvin was
still strapped to the machine; a logical race makes use of a traitor,
but a logical race does not trust him.

"Sometimes," Korvin said.

"It has other names?" the Ruler said.

"It has no name," Korvin said truthfully. The Tr'en idiom was like the
Earthly one; and certainly a planet had no name. People attached names
to it, that was all. It had none of its own.

"Yet you call it Earth?" the Ruler said.

"I do," Korvin said, "for convenience."

"Do you know its location?" the Ruler said.

"Not with exactitude," Korvin said.

There was a stir. "But you can find it again," the Ruler said.

"I can," Korvin said.

"And you will tell us about it?" the Ruler went on.

"I will," Korvin said, "so far as I am able."

"We will wish to know about weapons," the Ruler said, "and about plans
and fortifications. But we must first know of the manner of decision
on this planet. Is your planet joined with others in a government or
does it exist alone?"

Korvin nearly smiled. "Both," he said.

A short silence was broken by one of the attendant experts. "We have
theorized that an underling may be permitted to make some of his own
decisions, leaving only the more extensive ones for the master. This
seems to us inefficient and liable to error, yet it is a possible
system. Is it the system you mean?"

Very sharp, Korvin told himself grimly. "It is," he said.

"Then the government which reigns over several planets is supreme,"
the Ruler said.

"It is," Korvin said.

"Who is it that governs?" the Ruler said.

The key question had, at last, been asked. Korvin felt grateful that
the logical Tr'en had determined to begin from the beginning, instead
of going off after details of armament first; it saved a lot of time.

"The answer to that question," Korvin said, "cannot be given to you."

"Any question of fact has an answer," the Ruler snapped. "A paradox is
not involved here; a government exists, and some being is the
governor. Perhaps several beings share this task; perhaps machines do
the work. But where there is a government, there is a governor. Is
this agreed?"

"Certainly," Korvin said. "It is completely obvious and true."

"The planet from which you come is part of a system of planets which
are governed, you have said," the Ruler went on.

"True," Korvin said.

"Then there is a governor for this system," the Ruler said.

"True," Korvin said again.

The ruler sighed gently. "Explain this governor to us," he said.

Korvin shrugged. "The explanation cannot be given to you."

The Ruler turned to a group of his experts and a short muttered
conversation took place. At its end the Ruler turned his gaze back to
Korvin. "Is the deficiency in you?" he said. "Are you in some way
unable to describe this government?"

"It can be described," Korvin said.

"Then you will suffer unpleasant consequences if you describe it to
us?" the Ruler went on.

"I will not," Korvin said.

It was the signal for another conference. With some satisfaction,
Korvin noticed that the Tr'en were becoming slightly puzzled; they
were no longer moving and speaking with calm assurance.

The plan was taking hold.

The Ruler had finished his conference. "You are attempting again to
confuse us," he said.

Korvin shook his head earnestly. "I am attempting," he said, "not to
confuse you."

"Then I ask for an answer," the Ruler said.

"I request that I be allowed to ask a question," Korvin said.

The Ruler hesitated, then nodded. "Ask it," he said. "We shall answer
it if we see fit to do so."

Korvin tried to look grateful. "Well, then," he said, "what is your
government?"

The Ruler beckoned to a heavy-set green being, who stepped forward
from a knot of Tr'en, inclined his head in Korvin's direction, and
began. "Our government is the only logical form of government," he
said in a high, sweet tenor. "The Ruler orders all, and his subjects
obey. In this way uniformity is gained, and this uniformity aids in
the speed of possible action and in the weight of action. All Tr'en
act instantly in the same manner. The Ruler is adopted by the previous
Ruler; in this way we are assured of a common wisdom and a steady
judgment."

"You have heard our government defined," the Ruler said. "Now, you
will define yours for us."

Korvin shook his head. "If you insist," he said, "I'll try it. But you
won't understand it."

The Ruler frowned. "We shall understand," he said. "Begin. Who governs
you?"

"None," Korvin said.

"But you are governed?"

Korvin nodded. "Yes."

"Then there is a governor," the Ruler insisted.

"True," Korvin said. "But everyone is the governor."

"Then there is no government," the Ruler said. "There is no single
decision."

"No," Korvin said equably, "there are many decisions binding on all."

"Who makes them binding?" the Ruler asked. "Who forces you to accept
these decisions? Some of them must be unfavorable to some beings?"

"Many of them are unfavorable," Korvin said. "But we are not forced to
accept them."

"Do you act against your own interests?"

Korvin shrugged. "Not knowingly," he said. The Ruler flashed a look at
the technicians handling the lie-detector. Korvin turned to see their
expression. They needed no words; the lie-detector was telling them,
perfectly obviously, that he was speaking the truth. But the truth
wasn't making any sense. "I told you you wouldn't understand it," he
said.

"It is a defect in your explanation," the Ruler almost snarled.

"My explanation is as exact as it can be," he said.

The Ruler breathed gustily. "Let us try something else," he said.
"Everyone is the governor. Do you share a single mind? A racial mind
has been theorized, though we have met with no examples--"

"Neither have we," Korvin said. "We are all individuals, like
yourselves."

"But with no single ruler to form policy, to make decisions--"

"We have no need of one," Korvin said calmly.

"Ah," the Ruler said suddenly, as if he saw daylight ahead. "And why
not?"

"We call our form of government _democracy_," Korvin said. "It means
the rule of the people. There is no need for another ruler."

One of the experts piped up suddenly. "The beings themselves rule each
other?" he said. "This is clearly impossible; for, no one being can
have the force to compel acceptance of his commands. Without his
force, there can be no effective rule."

"That is our form of government," Korvin said.

"You are lying," the expert said.

One of the technicians chimed in: "The machine tells us--"

"Then the machine is faulty," the expert said. "It will be corrected."

Korvin wondered, as the technicians argued, how long they'd take
studying the machine, before they realized it didn't have any defects
to correct. He hoped it wasn't going to be too long; he could foresee
another stretch of boredom coming. And, besides, he was getting
homesick.

It took three days--but boredom never really had a chance to set in.
Korvin found himself the object of more attention than he had hoped
for; one by one, the experts came to his cell, each with a different
method of resolving the obvious contradictions in his statements.

Some of them went away fuming. Others simply went away, puzzled.

On the third day Korvin escaped.

It wasn't very difficult; he hadn't thought it would be. Even the most
logical of thinking beings has a subconscious as well as a conscious
mind, and one of the ways of dealing with an insoluble problem is to
make the problem disappear. There were only two ways of doing that,
and killing the problem's main focus was a little more complicated.
That couldn't be done by the subconscious mind; the conscious had to
intervene somewhere. And it couldn't.

Because that would mean recognizing, fully and consciously, that the
problem _was_ insoluble. And the Tr'en weren't capable of that sort of
thinking.

Korvin thanked his lucky stars that their genius had been restricted
to the physical and mathematical. Any insight at all into the mental
sciences would have given them the key to his existence, and his
entire plan, within seconds.

But, then, it was lack of that insight that had called for this
particular plan. That, and the political structure of the Tr'en.

The same lack of insight let the Tr'en subconscious work on his
escape without any annoying distractions in the way of deep
reflection. Someone left a door unlocked and a weapon nearby--all
quite intent, Korvin was sure. Getting to the ship was a little more
complicated, but presented no new problems; he was airborne, and then
space-borne, inside of a few hours after leaving the cell.

He set his course, relaxed, and cleared his mind. He had no psionic
talents, but the men at Earth Central did; he couldn't receive
messages, but he could send them. He sent one now.

     _Mission accomplished; the Tr'en aren't about to come
     marauding out into space too soon. They've been given food
     for thought--nice indigestible food that's going to stick in
     their craws until they finally manage to digest it. But they
     can't digest it and stay what they are; you've got to be
     democratic, to some extent, to understand the idea. What
     keeps us obeying laws we ourselves make? What keeps us
     obeying laws that make things inconvenient for us? Sheer
     self-interest, of course--but try to make a Tr'en see it!_

     _With one government and one language, they just weren't
     equipped for translation. They were too efficient physically
     to try for the mental sciences at all. No mental sciences,
     no insight into my mind or their own--and that means no
     translation._

     _But--damn it--I wish I were home already._

     _I'm bored absolutely stiff!_

THE END

       *       *       *       *       *







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Lost in Translation, by Larry M. Harris

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LOST IN TRANSLATION ***

***** This file should be named 30029-8.txt or 30029-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/0/0/2/30029/

Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
