The Project Gutenberg EBook of Planet of Dreams, by James McKimmey

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Planet of Dreams

Author: James McKimmey

Illustrator: Paul Orban

Release Date: September 20, 2009 [EBook #30045]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PLANET OF DREAMS ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









[Illustration]


 _The climate was perfect, the sky was always
 blue, and--best of all--nobody had to work.
 What more could anyone want?_


Planet of Dreams

By James McKimmey, Jr.

Illustrated by Paul Orban


It was a small world, a tiny spinning globe, placed in the universe to
weather and age by itself until the end of things. But because its air
was good and its earth was fertile, Daniel Loveral had placed a finger
upon a map and said, "This is the planet. This is the Dream Planet."

That was two years before, back on Earth. And now Loveral with his
selected flock had shot through space, to light like chuckling geese
upon the planet, to feel the effect of their dreams come true.

Loveral was sitting in his office, drumming his long fingers against his
desk while the name, Atkinson, ticked through his brain like the sound
of a sewing machine.

Would he be the only one, Loveral asked himself, or was he just the
first? In either case, it was up to Loveral, as leader and guiding hand,
to stop this thing and stop it quickly.

Loveral stood up and put on his jacket, although there was no need for
it, other than the formality it gave his figure.

He stepped out of his office into a clear bright day, where the air was
clean and fresh in his lungs, at once like frost and fire and sweet
perfume. He walked along a winding path, which was bordered by
slim-necked flowers and a short hedge whose even clipped lines were kept
neat by tireless robot hands.

Trees pointed to a blue sky, rocking and fluttering their leaves in a
soft breeze, and glinting metallic houses lay peacefully beyond in
wooded hollows and upon slight hills.

A whole small world was before his eyes, set there upon his direction,
maintained by himself with the help of a dozen complex machines which
lay locked and sealed in the Maintenance Room for only his fingers to
touch.

It was a busy life for Loveral, up at dawn to work until deep night,
keeping his flock happy and free from spirit-killing labor. But it was a
perfect plan, one which had been tested and turned in his mind for
years. If he had to work hard to keep it running smoothly, that was all
right. In fact, he had never been happier.

Now, however, there was this business about Atkinson. Loveral was
disturbed about that.

He walked on, over the quiet path which would lead to the house where
Atkinson and his wife lived. Loveral smiled, in readiness for any happy
face that might appear before him, to greet him, to show with thankful
eyes appreciation for his wonderful world. But that, too, brought
thoughts that were a bit disturbing.

Lately there had been few such faces. Most of his flock no longer seemed
to care about walking along the cultivated paths, or smiling, or
nodding, or touching a leaf here or a flower there. They preferred, it
appeared, to remain deep inside their houses, as though they might have
become tired of the soft perfection of Dream Planet. As though they
might have become weary of quiet woods and sweet bird-music or a sky
which was always blue.

Loveral shook his head as he walked, puzzling out his thoughts. It was
strange, but nothing to worry about certainly.

Just this business about Atkinson. That was his only worry.

He came slowly up a hill, the top of which held a low curving house,
with a silver roof and wide, sweeping windows. There were yellow and
blue and deep red flowers, skirting the sides of the house, and green
ivy grew thickly between the glistening windows. The lawn, dotted with
small leafy trees and round bushes, sloped down from the front of the
house, looking like a carefully arranged painting.

Loveral pressed a button beside a shining door and waited, smiling
through his pale blue kindly eyes.

       *       *       *       *       *

Mrs. Atkinson appeared after several moments and stood blinking at him.
She was a thin woman, who seemed to have gotten even thinner, Loveral
noticed. She was working her fingers at the neck of her dress. She
smiled but her lips wavered.

"My dear," Loveral greeted her in his soft voice, showing the goodness
in his eyes.

She nodded her recognition, opening her mouth without speaking.

"May I?" said Loveral finally, waving his long fingers toward the living
room.

"Oh, yes," said the woman. "Of course, Mr. Loveral." And as she spoke
Loveral had the impression she might suddenly begin crying.

Loveral followed the woman into the house, noticing all over again the
precise way everything had been arranged. The rug was soft beneath his
feet, and the light came in through the windows in such a way that it,
too, became soft. The furniture, molded to hold a human body most
comfortably, rested about the room in perfect efficiency.

"Your place is so lovely," Loveral said, out of his old habit from
Earth. But his words seemed to ring strangely in the quiet, because it
was his own arrangement, like all the other rooms on the planet. And
Mrs. Atkinson, standing thin and nervous before him, had nothing, after
all, to do with it. The cleanliness was the work of his robot machines,
the planning his own. It was like complimenting himself.

He cleared his throat and stood, smiling his most benevolent smile to
reassure Mrs. Atkinson.

"Ah, my dear. Is George about?"

Again, the woman's hand skittered to her throat.

"He's not ill, surely?" Loveral asked, although this, too, was silly,
because foods, selected and prepared for utmost nutrition, packed
and frozen to be doled out in weekly quantities, purified air,
disease-killing serums, simply written folders on exercise, and of
course Loveral's own philosophies of quiet, peaceful living--all of this
guarded well the health of Dream Planet's flock.

The woman shook her head. "No, George is fine. He's just--sleeping, I
think."

"Rest is nature's finest tonic," said Loveral, and hearing his voice
thought suddenly there was hardly anything he could say any more that
might not sound a bit out of place in this peaceful world. Rest to the
man who had nothing to do ceased to be a tonic.

"Yes, yes," said Loveral. "May we just sit down, my dear?"

Mrs. Atkinson jerked a hand toward one of the chairs and then wound her
fingers.

Loveral sat down and leaned back, smiling his most charming smile.
"Perhaps George might awaken after a bit?"

"Oh, yes," the woman said, her eyes flickering, and she sat upon the
edge of one chair, like a bird perched upon a thin wire.

Loveral waited, legs crossed, leaning his head back against the silken
softness of the chair. It was so good to relax these days. The business
of watching and of caring for his flock was trying. When you have
brought an entire community of people at great expense through space,
guaranteeing to give them a life of constant comfort and ease, so that
they might dream and think as they wander through the flowers and the
leaves, their thoughts cleansed of worry about work and responsibility,
then you have a job. Loveral was most busy, busier than his heritage of
wealth ever before had allowed, seeing to all of this.

But he also was most content--with everything except Atkinson.

Mrs. Atkinson teetered on the edge of her chair, as though she might at
any moment go flying across the room in a crazy gyration. There was
something about her eyes, Loveral noticed, while he peacefully nodded in
the chair. Fear, perhaps.

If so, he probably had been right. He tightened himself, listening.
There it was again. The sound. Just as he had heard it a day before when
he had passed near the house. He leaned forward quickly.

Mrs. Atkinson jumped.

Loveral smiled. "Didn't I hear a noise of some sort, my dear?"

"Noise?" the woman said, as though her own voice were the sound of an
echo.

"An odd noise," Loveral said, his eyes searching.

The woman's hands fluttered about her dress.

Loveral stood up. "Would you mind if I just glanced about, my dear?"

The woman didn't answer, but Loveral was already moving across the room
toward a door. He opened it and walked down a hall. The noise grew
stronger. He threw open another door.

       *       *       *       *       *

He stood watching while George Atkinson spun around, dark eyes flashing,
hair tousled. There was a two days' growth of beard darkening Atkinson's
face.

"Why, George," Loveral said, swiftly examining the litter of metal and
wood which was spread over a table behind Atkinson. There was a
home-made hammer in Atkinson's hand. "What have we here, George?"

"Something for you," Atkinson said, tightening his fingers about the
handle of the hammer.

Loveral grinned his famous Loveral grin. "That's fine. What could it
be?"

"None of your damned business."

"_George_," Loveral said, his smile still white but his eyes narrow and
quick.

The woman was behind them. Her voice screeched. "George, I told you. Why
didn't you listen, George? You should have listened to me. You--"

Loveral held up a hand, still watching Atkinson. "Now tell me, George,
what is it you're making for me?"

Atkinson raised the hammer slightly.

Loveral stood very still. "That's a nice hammer, George."

Atkinson's eyes were black beneath his thick brows.

"You made that, didn't you?" Loveral asked.

"Yes, I made that," Atkinson said. "I made that and I made something
else. Another minute and I'll have that finished, too."

"George," said Loveral, stepping quietly forward, "I don't like to say
this, of course. You've been one of our very best members. But nobody
works here, George. We can't allow that. You know the rules."

"I know the rules, all right."

"Well, then," Loveral said, extending his hand toward the hammer, "we'll
just destroy this and whatever else you might have been making. We'll
just forget it ever happened. We'll get along real fine that way,
George. We'll just be such good friends."

"We'll just go to hell," said Atkinson, snatching his hammer away.

Loveral's smile disappeared. "I'll tell you, George. I have to mean
business with this. You know the reasons. If we allow anybody to work
here, then there's going to be trouble. That isn't our plan. We're here
to grow within ourselves and expand culturally. Not to commercialize a
beautiful world like Dream Planet."

Atkinson stood unmoving, and Loveral could see the way the man's muscles
were tight, like steel springs, and the way his eyes burned deep inside
their blackness.

"We've given you everything you need," Loveral explained, trying to
adjust the smile on his lips again. "Everybody has everything they want.
But, you see, if you sit there and work and make something that someone
else doesn't have, then the whole system is destroyed. Then someone will
want what you've made. We'll have jealousy and hatred and fighting. This
is the stuff of which wars are made, George. You know that. It starts
with small things like this, but it grows. When it does, the structure
of our life here will collapse. You wouldn't want that, would you,
George?"

"Yes!" Atkinson said, his mouth white at the edges. "I'd like to see the
whole rotten thing collapsed and blown to hell!"

Loveral's teeth snapped together and his lips grew tight. He could feel
a muscle jumping along his neck.

Atkinson looked at him with furious eyes. "What do you think it's like,
living this way? You're busy working twenty-four hours a day, while we
wander around this damned prison like the breathing dead. You can feel
sweat and aches in your bones from a hard day's work. Sleep is like
medicine to you, instead of another stretch of torture. You can forget
your own brain for a while by doing something with your hands. You can
relax because you can get tired. Not us, by God. Not us!"

"I envy you, George," Loveral said through his teeth.

"Oh, like hell you do. You treat us like we were helpless infants. You
feed and clothe us and do all our work, and you're so happy you damned
near split your guts."

"I'll take that, if you don't mind," Loveral said, reaching for the
hammer, his voice suddenly icy cold.

Atkinson slammed back against the table. "No, you won't. You won't take
anything more at all. You've taken our spirit and our pride and the
strength right out of our spines. You won't take anything more!"

"George?" Loveral said, but not moving any further.

Atkinson slid the hammer back of him onto the table, and his hands were
searching among a dozen scattered pieces of metal and wood. He watched
Loveral as he worked. "Let me show you what else I've made," he said.

"I'd hate to do it," Loveral said, "but I can stop your food, your
water, everything."

Atkinson's hands moved swiftly, assembling the pieces. He nodded. "You
can, but you won't."

"I have the only keys to the storage units. I control everything,
George."

"Correction," said Atkinson, holding an assembled revolver in his hands.
"You _did_."

       *       *       *       *       *

Loveral looked at what Atkinson had in his hands. He blinked.

"You're nearly dead," Atkinson said.

Loveral looked at Atkinson, into his eyes. "If you wanted to kill me,
you could have done it some other way."

Atkinson shook his head. "Just this way. Just with something that took
me dozens of days and nights to make. With something that made me sweat
and swear to get. It was difficult--with no tools or proper
materials--but that made it all the better. Now I've got it finished,"
he said, pushing a bullet into the chamber, "and ready to use."

Loveral stood frozen, then he turned. "My dear," he said to the woman
who moved her mouth as though her voice had been pumped out of her. He
reached to touch her shoulder. She recoiled, as though his fingers held
poison. "George," he said, turning back to the black-eyed man.

"This is a great moment," Atkinson said, lifting the muzzle of the
revolver. "When I squeeze the trigger, it'll be like blowing the lock
off a prison door. I'll go yelling to the others, and we'll smash down
the whole goddamned place. We'll smash it down, so we'll have to rebuild
it. We'll pull apart every robot you've got. We'll tear apart the food
lockers and have a celebration for a week, and when we've gotten sick
from too much food, we'll start growing some more with our own hands.
We'll make forges for the men and looms for the women. We'll burn our
clothes and make new ones. We'll grow corn in the fields. We'll pump
water from the ground. You're finished, Loveral."

Loveral stared at the revolver. "George," he said, pleading. "The plans.
The beautiful, beautiful plans. All of you, you all wanted peace and
contentment. Time to think and dream. You all wanted to get away from
the work and the worry and the responsibility. You--"

Atkinson fired the gun into Loveral's stomach.

Loveral gestured at the air and fell to his knees. Atkinson threw his
gun through a window and grabbed his wife by the hand. "Hurry!" he said,
laughing. "Hurry!"

Loveral felt of the blood on his shirt and rested on his knees. He could
hear footsteps, racing through the house and out to the yard. He held
out his bloody hand and looked at it. Atkinson's voice pealed through
the warm clear air. "He's dead! Loveral's dead!"

There was a sound of sudden activity, and everywhere went the cry,
"Loveral's dead!"

Loveral sank to his haunches and opened his lips. The blood was there,
too. He could hear the shouts and the laughter, and then the tearing of
steel, the smashing of glass. He bent over his knees, trembling with a
sudden chill. The sound of destruction grew like thunder. "Why?" he said
in his dying throat. "Oh, why? It was what they said they wanted."


THE END




Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from _If Worlds of Science Fiction_
    September 1953. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
    the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed. Minor spelling
    and typographical errors have been corrected without note.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Planet of Dreams, by James McKimmey

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PLANET OF DREAMS ***

***** This file should be named 30045.txt or 30045.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/0/0/4/30045/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
