The Project Gutenberg EBook of Has Anyone Here Seen Kelly?, by Bryce Walton

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Has Anyone Here Seen Kelly?

Author: Bryce Walton

Illustrator: Paul Orban

Release Date: September 25, 2009 [EBook #30086]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HAS ANYONE HERE SEEN KELLY? ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









[Illustration]


 _The body tanks had to be replenished and the ship had to
 be serviced--and the crew was having a Lotus dream in its
 bed of protoplasm. But Kelly knew how to arouse them...._


       _Has Anybody
         Here Seen
          Kelly?_

     By Kenneth O'Hara

 Illustrated by Paul Orban


The Crew pulsed with contentment, and its communal singing brought a
pleasant kind of glow that throbbed gently in the control room.

"'Has anybody here seen Kelly ... K-E-double-L-Y?'"

"Shut up and dig my thought!" Kelly's stubborn will insisted. "I'm going
on out for a while!"

The delicate loom of the Crew's light pattern increased its frequency a
little and the song stopped. "Better not," the Crew said.

"But why not?"

"No need."

"We could be running into something bad," Kelly thought.

"No danger now, Kelly. Checking the ship is just a waste of time."

"How can you waste what you have so damn much of?" Kelly thought.

"Do not leave us again, Kelly. We love you and you are the most
interesting part of the Crew when you're with it."

"The ship ought to be checked. Our bodies ought to be looked at."

"We know there is no danger any more, Kelly. Do not go. There are so
many interesting experiences we have not even begun to share yet. We are
only half way through your life and we have not even started to
experience your impressions of your colorful and complex Earth culture.
And we have not even started on the adult lives of Lakrit or Lljub. Come
back with your Crew, Kelly."

"But no one's checked the ship for over a year!"

"Please do not worry about the ship, Kelly. In fifty years nothing has
gone wrong. We can trust the ship thoroughly now, it will take care of
us."

"_It_ will take care of _us_! That's a helluva way to look at it!"

"There can be no danger now, Kelly. In fifty years we have encountered
every conceivable danger, every imaginable kind of world or possible
menace."

"Have we?" Kelly thought. "Every danger from outside maybe, and I'm not
even sure of that. But how about danger from inside?"

"Inside?"

"Us. How about apathy for instance? Apathy's a real danger. You talk
about this space-can like it was a big metal mother! Listen, I'm
supposed to see that this tub holds together. At least until we get back
somewhere near enough to the Solar system so we'll feel we've been
somewhere else!"

"But, Kelly--"

"I'm getting out for a while, I tell you!"

"All right," the Crew sighed. The light loom faded a bit, down to a
self-indulgent glow. "Hurry back to us, Kelly."

"I'll give some thought to it."

So Kelly concentrated on the increasingly painful and difficult task of
tearing his consciousness free of the big glob of protoplasm in the
tank, and getting it back into his body that hibernated in the bunkroom.

As usual the switch was too painful. It stretched and stretched and
finally snapped in an all too familiar explosion of shocking light.

       *       *       *       *       *

His bones creaked. His skin rustled as he sat up and looked around.
There was the old feeling that there was dust over everything when there
was no dust. There was all that emptiness sweeping away into the endless
silence and he thought again, as he always did, how comforting and cozy
it was being a part of the Crew.

But someone had to check the ship. It was only machinery after all, and
machinery could wear out, sooner or later. And he wasn't at all sure, as
he kept insisting, that they had encountered all the possible dangers.

It might seem that in fifty years you could run into everything. But
fifty years was no time at all out here where time had no real meaning
any more.

His body squeaked as he took a few tentative steps about the bunkroom.
One did not actually forget how to walk. It was just awkward as the
devil. And the blood, the entire autonomic system, tended to slow down.
It seemed reluctant to step up general metabolism.

Apathy. Sure it was a danger. This time, Kelly decided, I'll do
something about it. He was the engineer and he had signed on the great
odyssey to keep the ship going. But the Crew was part of the ship. Was
not there an obligation even greater to keep the Crew going?

The four others lived but almost imperceptibly in some very low state of
slowed metabolism there in the bunkroom and Kelly looked at them. The
faithful and the wonderful ones. The ones with whom he had shared so
many dangers and awful silences that the five of them had been able to
evolve the idea of the protoplasm in the tank and merge their
consciousness in it.

Kew, the Venusian, in her bowl of self-renewing nitrate. Lakrit from a
Jovian satellite, a fluorine fellow of distinction inside a sphere of
gaseous sulphur. A crystalline character with a sense of humor named
Lljub, whose form gave off a paled glint as it nourished itself on
silicates. And a highly intelligent but humble six-foot-long sponge
labeled Urdaz stuck in a foundation of chemical sediment at the bottom
of a tank of reprocessing salt water.

Each with their own special kind of appendages and sensitivities, each
able to move his special closed-system about through the ship by means
of clever types of mobility.

But basically, in outward form, they were too alien to have much in
common. Only as intelligences, as life forces, could they share a common
bed. And it had evolved to that in fifty years. A bed of protoplasm in a
shock-absorbent tank.

Kelly looked at them warmly and thought about how it had worked out. The
strange thing was that it did have a lot of good things to recommend it.
Or had had them. It had solved the problem of intimate communication and
driven back the tides of loneliness. It had lessened the dangers of
mental and physical illnesses in the material bodies and assured a
prolongation of the life of each body, which was important in itself,
for this trip had proven to be a lot longer than even the most
pessimistic had anticipated.

The Crew, pulsing in its tank, Kelly thought oddly, is a new life form.
One that had evolved to meet the exigencies of deep space which had
proven to be alien to any adaptability common to any world that rotated
through it.

But maybe they were too damn happy, Kelly thought. Too contented. If
they ran into a real emergency now, the ship would be finished. The Crew
in the tank was, itself, incapable of action of any overt kind. It could
not manipulate anything. It could only be happy.

And the bodies here in the bunkroom could not rally fast enough to meet
a sudden crisis.

And they had agreed that the first law was survival.

But to survive this way might well mean destruction in another.

So Kelly walked and thought about it, and weighed the precarious
balance.

He slipped through the silent ship and to the control room. He peered
into the viewscope. Some galaxy or other spun its giant pinwheel outward
toward some destiny of its own. The high noon of the endlessness had
been unfamiliar for years. He checked the ship's instruments. The Crew
in the big tank simmered and throbbed in its introspective bliss,
utterly oblivious to Kelly now.

Kelly saw the red dwarf a few hundred million kilos away. Three planets
ground their familiar path around it. The second in distance had a
breathable oxygen, according to the scopes, but little else to recommend
it.

Kelly straightened up. He had no idea when the plan had really started
forming, but now it was formed. When Kelly made up his mind to a thing,
there was no other course but to conclude it. He knew what he had to do.

Somehow, even as part of the Crew, some part of Kelly had been able to
keep that forming plan a secret. Which was a lucky miracle, for if the
Crew had known his intentions it would certainly not have let him out
this time.

Even if you wanted out, Kelly reasoned, the Crew would keep you in. And
maybe after long enough you did not care to get out. But once out, he
wondered, could it keep you out if it decided to blackball a man for one
reason or another?

Like wrecking the ship?

       *       *       *       *       *

In the chrome strip above the control panel, Kelly saw his face grinning
strangely back at him, a bearded, hollowed, paled face with an
unfamiliar glitter in the eyes. Every time he had left the Crew to enter
and reactivate his own body, that body had seemed a little less
familiar. This time it seemed to be almost entirely someone else.

He stared at the face in the chrome, then whispered the hell with that
and he flipped the controls over to manual. He sat down. Behind him, the
Crew whispered in its tank, protoplasm developed in the labs and
quivering now with some unified sensation that was purely subjective and
blissfully unconcerned with what happened outside itself.

"It's sick," Kelly concluded, with an emphatic clamp of his jaws. "It's
not right!"

True, sharing the intimate sensations of alien life forms like Kew, the
female Venusian, had been exciting. Especially the sex experiences
which, in a flower of Kew's type, was certainly something. There were
interesting things to being a part of the Crew all right. But the main
purpose, survival, had been forgotten. Now being the Crew was an end in
itself. Kelly could imagine the Crew business going on and on until
finally even the material bodies in the bunkroom would be forgotten
entirely and allowed to rot away to dust about which the Crew would no
longer care.

And that was very bad. It should not have worked out this way. But it
was not too late to do something, shake them out of the Lotus dream.

He checked the scopes again. Now the second planet revealed plenty of
breathable atmosphere settled in the lower valleys. He headed straight
for it.

The Crew was soon going to get one devil of a jolt!

He put the ship into a close orbit around the planet. It seemed nothing
but a fearsome forest of oxydized spikes rising in corrosive silence,
with here and there a lean slash of valley. There was no indication of
life, no vegetation visible or revealed by the scopes. One of the
valleys had a thin mouth of water stretching down the length of its
face. Kelly set the speed and the controls and ran for the bunkroom and
the shock-absorbent cushions. He strapped himself in and waited.

It was done. As long as the thing had gone so far, Kelly decided, the
truth should never be revealed because that would lessen the therapeutic
value of his action. He would wreck the ship. Not too badly. Not so
badly that all of the bodies, distinct, separate individual bodies
again, couldn't put the ship back together, as in the old days. And that
would keep them in their bodies gladly for a while where they belonged!
Where the good Lord had intended for them to stay.

They would not be rocked away to apathy in a phony metal mother womb,
thinking the ship was going to take care of _them_!

The more Kelly thought about it, the better he felt. He stretched inside
the straps. He felt his slightly atrophied muscles luxuriate over the
tissues and bones of his big frame.

Any body, no matter what its shape, should be proud of itself. That was
Kelly's belief, and this thing that had happened seemed somewhat
blasphemous. Without bodies and their complex sensory recording
apparatus, the rich consciousness enjoyed by the Crew could not exist,
would never have been created at all. The Crew was living off the
largesse of experience built up by their bodies. The Crew was just
narcotized enough that it did not realize that the body banks had to be
replenished.

Metal shrieked.

Kelly yelled feebly. He fought, he grappled with the threatening
blackout like a man fighting an invisible opponent on an endless flight
of stairs.

The grinding rolling terror of the sound, the ripping, twisting, tearing
scream of it cried on and on. Kelly knew one thing then.

He had not figured it right. His calculations were off. _The ship had
hit too damn hard._

       *       *       *       *       *

Later, when he managed to get the straps off and tried to move, he fell
painfully onto the tilted deck. One of his eyes felt sticky. He rubbed
at it and his hand was smeared with blood.

He shuffled around in a stumbling circle. Minor damages could have been
repaired. But this--the ship was peeled open in glaring strips like a
breakfast cannister. A cold wind moaned through the ship that was now
nothing but a metal sieve. A hazy light filtered down and ran off the
metal like cold flour rust.

Kelly fell to his knees. "Kew," he whispered. "Lljub, Urdaz--Lakrit...."

The Venusian flower lady was sliced down the middle like a cabbage, and
the nitrate bowl was shattered and Kew was dead in a pool of fading
green blood.

Smashed into the bulkhead was Lakrit's sulphuric bathtub, and his
atmosphere had already filtered away with the wind to wherever it was
going. Lljub's pale glow was out for good, and his crystalline heart was
as opaque as a dead eye. Only a few pieces of Urdaz's tank were visible,
and Urdaz himself had already turned to a powdery food that the wind ate
slowly in long trailing streamers.

"What--what in the name of God have I done?" Kelly whispered.

All dead--

No! He slammed at the bulkhead until the warped metal gave and he ran to
the control room. The Crew--the Crew--

He stared at the tank.

Through a jagged opening in the ship's walls, the wind whined and
plucked at Kelly's red hair. The wind was colder now. He kept on looking
at the tank. He reached out and touched the big transparent curve of it
and then jerked his hand back with a whimper in his breath.

There was nothing in the tank, nothing but a blob of slowly drying
slime. He pressed his nose to the tank. "Crew--" he whispered.

There was no life in the slime. When he pounded on the tank, the stuff
collapsed in upon itself in withering flatness.

Kelly yelled. The cold wind froze at his teeth. It sucked at his breath
and dried at the interior of his mouth. He ran and climbed. The jagged
periphery of the opening sliced at his flesh. But he did not feel it,
and he fell twenty feet, without feeling that either, down the side of
the ship. He started crawling over the hard naked belly of the rock.

He got to his feet. He ran stumbling down an incline of shale worn round
and shiny by the wind that had blown here just as it blew now, and would
blow for God alone possibly knew how long. He fell and rolled to the
edge of the water.

He looked into it. He felt of it. He jerked his hand away. The stuff was
icy. But it was worse than icy. It was dead. It was dead water. It was
without any bottom, and without any life in it anywhere. You could tell
by looking into it. The wind moved over the top of it as though the
water were glass, and the water was the color of a slightly transparent
naked blue steel.

There was no life here. Maybe there had been once, who knew when, who
could guess how long ago. But there was none now and even the water had
forgotten it.

Kelly cried out as he stood up. "What have I done?" He raised his arms
at the hazy red sun lying over the spires of towering stone and metal
like a bloated balloon scraping precariously over rusty spikes. "God,
what have I done?"

The cry echoed tinnily on the rocks and fled on the wind.

Kelly ran for a long way, falling and stumbling and getting up again.
Kelly had always had one primary drive, and that was to keep going, no
matter what. So now he tried to keep going.

But there was no life on this planet. He had known that before. Some
strange kinds of intelligence could tolerate some unpleasant worlds. But
nothing would live here.

Nothing _could_ live here.

"That's your fate," Kelly thought. He sat down and stared at the walls
of rock and metal all around. "Your fate, Kelly. Your punishment, your
well deserved hell."

That was what it was. Retribution. And knowing that, he tried not to
care. He tried to be glad and face what he deserved.

If that were not the answer, then why had only Kelly been spared to face
emptiness and silence and no life, all alone?

The irony of it was that he would go on as long as possible keeping
himself alive in his own hell. There was food aplenty in the ship,
enough to last as long as hell cared to have him.

He turned and started walking back toward the ship that seemed some five
miles away. At that instant, the ship disappeared in an abrupt explosion
that twisted the rocks, and a mushroom cloud flowered gently above the
lake as Kelly fell trembling on his belly and hugged the ground and
pushed his face into the shale, while the wind tore and screamed around
him and particles of flint ripped his clothes and slashed at his flesh.

       *       *       *       *       *

He did not bother walking much farther toward where the ship had been.
There was only a crater there now which would offer him nothing in the
way of sustaining his very personal and thoroughly private hell.

He walked. The effort became more difficult and finally he was on his
hands and knees, crawling. The wind sucked at his ripped clothes, and
felt like cold sharp steel in his raw wounds. But slowly and
deliberately he continued to crawl.

Kelly had always had the idea that a man should keep going and so now he
kept on going. Even if there was no place to go, and you could not
remember particularly where you had been, you kept on moving and
fighting and slugging along until you could no longer move.

He lay there looking up at the hazy rust of the sky with the naked
spires pointing up into it for no reason at all, because there was
nothing up there.

He had been there and he knew. Nothing up there but space, black and
without a beginning or end. He had not even checked the records of the
ship so that now, lying here, he did not even know how far away from
Earth he was. At the speed they had traveled, a ship went a long way in
fifty years. But the ship, the records, everything was lost.

And no one would ever know now how far they had come.

Or gone. What was the difference, anyway?

But Kelly had no difficulty in remembering _why_ they had come.

They had come into space because that was how it was with those who
fought their way up to being the dominate life form of whatever world
they had lived on and grown and died on. If you were the kind who went
into space, you went because space was there.

Who needed a better reason than that?

"Kew," he whispered. "Lakrit, Lljub, Urdaz, listen now--I thought I was
doing the right thing--maybe my idea was right--but I just made a
mistake in the calculations. I just made a helluva mistake--"

The wind sighed over the naked rock and the rusted metal and the rock
and the dead blue water.

He turned and pushed his head against the rock, and his body curled up
against the bitter wind. "You've got to forgive me," he said.

"'_Has anybody here seen Kelly? K-E-double-L-Y?_'"

He shivered and kept his eyes closed. It was part of the wind. He did
not want to go out that way, hearing crazy voices in the wind.

"'Has anybody here seen Kelly--?'"

He raised his head and blinked and the wind drove tears down his cheeks.

"Am I just hearing something that's going crazy inside my head?" He
peered around. There was nothing, nothing anywhere of course, nothing
where nothing had ever been, and nothing else but nothing could ever be.

"You're wrong, Kelly. Your Crew's here."

Kelly raised himself painfully to an elbow. "Where--_where_?"

"Right here, Kelly. We had a difficult time locating you. Sure, we
forgive you. You were trying to do what was right. We know that."

"There's nothing--nothing--" Kelly said.

"You're wrong. The Crew's here and we're waiting."

He stared at the rock. He put his face against it and pushed his hands
to it. There was a kind of dull glow in it, a faint hint of warmth in
the rock.

"How can this be?" Kelly said.

"This is the life here, Kelly. Perhaps there is life everywhere in the
most impossible seeming places. And where life is, Kelly, we can live
with it and be welcomed by it. Here, this rock is life, and it has taken
us in. It has been here a long time. And it will be here for a much
longer time."

"Rock," Kelly said.

"But hurry and come back."

"But no one will ever know. How long--how long can we wait?"

"Who can answer that, Kelly? But maybe they will find the Crew someday."

Kelly looked up once at the completely unfamiliar distances growing
darker. Sometime, he thought, they'll come from wherever Earth is and
find the Crew of the ship, find a rock here waiting the ages out.

"Hurry, Kelly!"

His head dropped against the rock. His hands slid down it, and a smile
moved over his lips and froze there as the wind whispered over it.


                                                           ··· THE END




Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from _If Worlds of Science Fiction_ July
    1954. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed. Minor spelling and
    typographical errors have been corrected without note.





End of Project Gutenberg's Has Anyone Here Seen Kelly?, by Bryce Walton

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HAS ANYONE HERE SEEN KELLY? ***

***** This file should be named 30086-8.txt or 30086-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/0/0/8/30086/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
