Project Gutenberg's Show Business, by William C. Boyd and Lyle G. Boyd

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Show Business

Author: William C. Boyd
        Lyle G. Boyd

Illustrator: Mel Hunter

Release Date: October 6, 2009 [EBook #30189]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SHOW BUSINESS ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









    _Here's the behind-the-scenes lowdown on Luna City life and a
    promoter of Martian dancing girls, vaudeville, and--other things.
    But remember: stop us if you've heard this one!_


SHOW BUSINESS

By Boyd Ellanby

Illustrated by Mel Hunter


Except for old Dworken, Kotha's bar was deserted when I dropped in
shortly after midnight. The ship from Earth was still two days away, and
the Martian flagship would get in next morning, with seven hundred
passengers for Earth on it. Dworken must have been waiting in Luna City
a whole week--at six thousand credits a day. That's as steep to me as it
is to you, but money never seemed to worry Dworken.

He raised the heavy green lids from his protruding brown eyes as I came
in. He waved his tail.

"Sit down and join me," he invited, in his guttural voice. "It is not
good for a man to drink alone. But I haf no combany in dis
by-de-gods-deserted hole. A man must somet'ing be doing, what?"

I sat down in the booth across from my Venusian friend, and stared at
him while he punched a new order into the drinkboard.

"For me, another _shchikh_," he announced. "And for you? De same?"

Against my better judgment, for I knew I'd have plenty to do handling
that mob of tourists--the first crowd of the season is always the
roughest--tomorrow, I consented. Dworken had already consumed six of the
explosive things, as the empty glasses on the table showed, but he
exhibited no effects. I made a mental note, as I'd so often done before,
that this time I would not exceed the safe terrestrial limit of two.

"You must be in the money again, drinking imported _shchikh_," I
remarked. "What are you doing in Luna City this time?"

He merely lifted his heavy eyelids and stared at me without expression.

"Na, in de money I am not. Dere are too many chiselers in business. Just
when I t'ink I haf a goot t'ing, I am shwindeled. It is too bad." He
snorted through his ugly snout, making the Venusian equivalent of a
sigh. I knew there was a story waiting behind that warty skin, but I was
not sure I wanted to hear it. For the next round of drinks would be on
me, and _shchikh_ was a hundred and fifty credits a shot. Still, a man
on a Moon assignment has to amuse himself somehow.

So I said, "What's the latest episode in the Dworken soap opera? What is
the merchandise this time? Gems? Pet Mercurian fire-insects? A new
supply of _danghaana_?"

"I do not smuggle drugs, dat is a base lie," replied my friend stolidly.
He knew, of course, that I still suspected him to be the source of the
last load of that potent narcotic, although I had no more proof than did
the Planetary Bureau of Investigation.

He took a long pull at his drink before he spoke again. "But Dworken is
never down for long. Dis time it is show business. You remember, how I
haf always been by de t'eater so fascinated? Well, I decided to open a
show here in Luna City. T'ink of all the travelers, bored stiff by space
and de emptiness thereof, who pass through here during the season. Even
if only half of them go to my show, it cannot fail."

I waited for some mention of free tickets, but none was made. I was
about as anxious to see Dworken's show as I was to walk barefoot across
the Mare Imbrium, but I asked with what enthusiasm I could force,

"What sort of act are you putting on? Girls?" I shuddered as I recalled
the pathetic shop-worn chorus girls that Sam Low had tried to pass off
last year on the gullible tourists of the spaceways. That show had
lasted ten nights--nine more than it deserved to. There are limits, even
to the gullibility of Earth-lubbers.

"Yes, girls," replied Dworken. "But not what you are perhaps t'inking.
Martian girls."

       *       *       *       *       *

This was more interesting. Even if the girls were now a little too old
for the stage in the Martian capital, they would still get loud cheers
on the Moon. I knew. I started to say so, but Dworken interrupted.

"And not de miserable girls dey buy from de slave traders in Behastin.
Dese girls I collected myself, from de country along de Upper Canal."

I repressed my impulse to show my curiosity. It could all be perfectly
true--and if it were not the opening night would tell. But it sounded a
lot like one of Dworken's taller tales. I had never been able to
disprove any one of them, but I found it a _little_ hard to believe that
so many improbable things had ever happened to one man. However, I like
being entertained, if it doesn't cost me too much, so finally I said,

"I suppose you are going to tell me you ventured out into the interior
of Mars, carrying a six weeks' supply of water and oxygen on your back,
and visited the Xo theaters on the spot?"

"How did you know? Dat is just what I did," solemnly affirmed my
companion. He snorted again, and looked at his glass. It was empty, but
he tilted it into his face again in an eloquent gesture. No words were
needed: I punched the symbols for _shchikh_ into the drinkboard on my
side of the table. Then, after hesitating, I punched the "two in"
signal. I must remember, though, that this was my second and last.

His eighth _shchikh_ seemed to instill some animation into Dworken. "I
know you feel skepticality--I mean skepticism--after my exploits. You
will see tomorrow night dat I speak true."

"Amazing!" I said. "Especially as I just happen to remember that three
different expeditions from Earth tried to penetrate more than a hundred
kilometers from Behastin, but either they couldn't carry the water and
oxygen that far, or they resorted to breathing Mars air, and never came
back. And they were Earthmen, not Venusians who are accustomed to two
atmospheres of carbon dioxide."

"My vriend, you must not reason: it was so, it always will be so. The
brinciple of induction is long exbloded. I did indeed breathe Mars air.
Vait! I tell you how."

He took another long swig of _shchikh_. "Vat your Eart'men did not
realize was dat dey cannot acclimate themselves as do we Venusians. You
know de character of our planet made adaptability a condition of
survival. It is true dat our atmosphere is heavy, but on top of our
so-high mountains de air is t'in. We must live everywhere, de space is
so few. I first adapted myself on Eart' to live. I was dere a whole
year, you vill recollect. Den I go further. Your engineers construct air
tanks dat make like de air of mountains, t'in. So, I learn to live in
dose tanks. Each day I haf spent one, two, three hours in dem. I get so
I can breathe air at one-third the pressure of your already t'in
atmosphere. And at one-sixt' the tension of oxygen. No, my vriend, you
could not do this. Your lungs burst. But old Dworken, he has done it.

"I take wit' me only some water, for I know de Martians dey not give
water. To trade, some miniature kerosene lamps. You know dey got no fuel
oil now, only atomics, but dese little lamps dey like for antiques, for
sentiment, because their great-grandfathers used dem.

"Well, I walk through Vlahas, and not stop. Too close by the capital.
Too much contact with men of odder planets. I walk also through Bhur and
Zamat. I come to a small place where dey never see foreigner. Name
Tasaaha. Oh, I tell you, ze men of ze odder planets do not know Mars.
How delightful, how unsboiled, are ze Martians, once you get away from
de people by tourists so sboiled! How wonderful, across the sands to go,
free as birds! The so friendly greetings of de Martian men. And de
Martian women! _Ah!_

"Well, in Tasaaha I go to t'eater. Such lovely girls! You shall see. But
I saw somet'ing else. That, my friend, you hardly believe!"

Dworken looked down at his empty glass and snorted gently. I took the
hint, although for myself I ordered the less lethal Martian _azdzani_. I
was already having difficulty believing parts of his narrative; it would
be interesting to see if the rest were any harder.

My companion continued. "They not only have de chorus, which you haf
seen on Earth, imported from Mars--and such a chorus! Such girls! But
they had somet'ing else."

"You recall your terrestrial history? Once your ancestors had performers
on the stage who did funny motions and said amusing remarks, de
spectators to make laugh. I t'ink you called it 'vaudeville.' Well, on
Mars they have also vaudeville!" He paused, and looked at me from under
half-shut eyelids, and grinned widely to show his reptilian teeth.

I wondered if he'd really found something new. I would even be willing
to pay for a glimpse of Martian vaudeville. I wondered if my Martian was
too rusty for me to understand jokes in the spoken lingo.

"They haf not only men and women telling jokes. They haf trained animals
acting funny!" Dworken went on.

This was too much. "I suppose the animals talked, too?" I said
sarcastically. "Do they speak Earth or Martian?"

He regarded me approvingly. "My friend, you catch on quick." He raised a
paw. "Now, don't at conclusions jump. Let me exblain. At first, I did
not believe it either.

"Dey sprang it with no warning. Onto de stage came a _tllooll_ (you know
him, I t'ink), and a _shiyooch'iid_. The _shiyooch'iid_ was riding a
bicycle--I mean a monocle. One wheel. The _tllooll_ moved just as
awkward as he always does, and tried to ride a tandem four-wheeled
vehicle which had been especially for him made."

In spite of my resolve, I chuckled. The picture of a _tllooll_ trying to
ride a four-wheeled bicycle, pumping each of his eight three-jointed
legs up and down in turn, while maintaining his usual supercilious and
indifferent facial expression, was irresistibly funny.

"Wait!" said my friend, and again raised a paw. "You have as yet not'ing
heard. They make jokes at same time. De _shiyooch'iid_ asks de
_tllooll_, 'Who was dat _tlloolla_ I saw you wit' up the Canal?' and the
_tllooll_ replies, 'Dat was no _tlloolla_, dat was my _shicai_.'"

I doubled up, laughing. Unless you have visited Mars this may not strike
you as funny, but I collapsed into a heap. I put my head on the table
and wept with mirth.

It seemed like five minutes before I was able to speak. "Oh, no!"

"Yes, yes, I tell you. Yes!" insisted my friend. He even smiled himself.

       *       *       *       *       *

If you don't know the social system of the Martians there is no point in
my trying to explain why the idea of a _tllooll's_ being out with that
neuter of neuters, a _shicai_, is so devastatingly funny. But that,
suddenly, was not quite the point.

_Did it happen?_ I had large doubts. Nobody had ever heard a _tllooll_
make any sort of a sound, and it was generally supposed that they had no
vocal chords. And no _shiyooch'iid_ (they somewhat resemble a big
groundhog, and live in burrows along the canals of Mars) had ever been
heard to make any noise except a high-pitched whistle when frightened.

"Now, just a minute, Dworken," I said.

"I know, my vriend. I know. You t'ink it is impossible. You t'ink the
talking is faked. So I t'ought too. But vait."

It seems Dworken had inquired among the audience as to who owned the
performing animals. The local Martians were not as impressed as he was
with the performance, but they guided him to the proprietor of the
trained animal act. He was a young Martian, hawk-nosed, with flashing
black eyes, dusky skin, and curly hair.

"So I say to him, dis Martian," Dworken continued, "'If your act on the
level is, I buy.' I had three small diamonds with," he explained.

"But de Martian was hard to deal wit'. First, he said he vould not sell
his so-valuable and so-beloved animals. De only talking animals on Mars,
he said--de liar! At long last I get him to make a price. But, on
condition dat he bring ze animals around to my inn in the morning, for a
private audition."

"I suppose," I interrupted, "you were beginning to have some doubts as
to the Martian's good faith? After all, a talking _tllooll_ and a
talking _shiyooch'iid_ all at one time is quite a lot to ask. I would
have--"

"Blease, vriend, blease!" interrupted my companion. "Do you not t'ink
old Dworken knows dese things? Of course he does! I t'ink. De owner, he
is pulling a fake, I guess. I know dat animals do not really talk.

"Next morning, I t'ink he no show up. But no, I am mistaken. Bromptly at
nine o'clock he come to my inn with a little dogcart, wit' de animals.
He puts dem on de stage in de bar of de inn. They act like before."

"But they didn't talk, of course?"

"Oh, my vriend, dat's where you are wrong. Dey talk like nobotty's
business. De jokes are funnier than ever. Even dirtier, maybe. But
Dworken is not fooled. He t'ink. 'Aha!' I say to de Martian, 'You fake
this, what? De animals not talk. Suppose you have them do de act while
you outside stay, what?' Then I t'ink I have him.

"Ze Martian tear his curly hair, flash his black eyes. He takes insult
that I t'ink he is fake. 'Name of de Martian gods!' he cry. But at last
he agree to go away, and tell animals to go ahead."

"Dworken, you were a sap to string along with him even that far," I said
wearily. "I hope you hadn't paid the guy any money."

He shook his head. "No, my old and best," he said. "Dworken no fool is,
even on Mars. No, no money. But wait! De animals go on without the
owner. Same stage business, same talk, same jokes, and even funnier
yedt. What?"

I started at Dworken. He did not smile, but finished off the eleventh
_shchikh_--the fifth I had bought him.

"Listen," I said. "Are you sitting there telling me you have a _tllooll_
and a _shiyooch'iid_ that can really talk?"

"You listen, my vriend. Like you, I t'ink something is wrong. I say to
Martian owner, 'My vriend, maybe I buy your act, if you tell me how it
is done. But you know as well as I do dat it is impossible to dese
animals to talk. Tell me what is de trick?'"

Dworken lifted his glass and shook it, as though he could not believe it
was empty, then looked at me questioningly. I shook my head. He snorted,
looked melancholy, writhed up from his chair and reached for his fur
cape.

"Vell, thanks for de drinks," he said.

A dark suspicion crept into my mind, but I could not restrain myself.

"Wait, Dworken!" I shouted. "You can't just leave me up in the air like
that! What happened then?"

Dworken snorted into his green handkerchief.

"De Martian admitted it was a fake, after all," he said mournfully. "Can
you imachine it? What a chiseler!

"'De _shiyooch'iid_,' he said, 'can't really talk; de _tllooll_ just
t'rows his voice!'"


THE END




Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from _If Worlds of Science Fiction_ November
    1953. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed. Minor spelling and
    typographical errors have been corrected without note.





End of Project Gutenberg's Show Business, by William C. Boyd and Lyle G. Boyd

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SHOW BUSINESS ***

***** This file should be named 30189.txt or 30189.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/0/1/8/30189/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
