The Project Gutenberg EBook of Dead Ringer, by Lester del Rey

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Dead Ringer

Author: Lester del Rey

Illustrator: Dick Francis

Release Date: October 11, 2009 [EBook #30234]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DEAD RINGER ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









Dead Ringer

By LESTER DEL REY

Illustrated by DICK FRANCIS


 _There was nothing, especially
 on Earth, which could set him
 free--the truth least of all!_


Dane Phillips slouched in the window seat, watching the morning crowds
on their way to work and carefully avoiding any attempt to read Jordan's
old face as the editor skimmed through the notes. He had learned to make
his tall, bony body seem all loose-jointed relaxation, no matter what he
felt. But the oversized hands in his pockets were clenched so tightly
that the nails were cutting into his palms.

Every tick of the old-fashioned clock sent a throb racing through his
brain. Every rustle of the pages seemed to release a fresh shot of
adrenalin into his blood stream. _This time_, his mind was pleading. _It
has to be right this time...._

Jordan finished his reading and shoved the folder back. He reached for
his pipe, sighed, and then nodded slowly. "A nice job of researching,
Phillips. And it might make a good feature for the Sunday section, at
that."

It took a second to realize that the words meant acceptance, for
Phillips had prepared himself too thoroughly against another failure.
Now he felt the tautened muscles release, so quickly that he would have
fallen if he hadn't been braced against the seat.

He groped in his mind, hunting for words, and finding none. There was
only the hot, sudden flame of unbelieving hope. And then an almost
blinding exultation.

       *       *       *       *       *

Jordan didn't seem to notice his silence. The editor made a neat pile of
the notes, nodding again. "Sure. I like it. We've been short of shock
stuff lately and the readers go for it when we can get a fresh angle.
But naturally you'd have to leave out all that nonsense on Blanding.
Hell, the man's just buried, and his relatives and friends--"

"But that's the proof!" Phillips stared at the editor, trying to
penetrate through the haze of hope that had somehow grown chilled and
unreal. His thoughts were abruptly disorganized and out of his control.
Only the urgency remained. "It's the key evidence. And we've got to move
fast! I don't know how long it takes, but even one more day may be too
late!"

Jordan nearly dropped the pipe from his lips as he jerked upright to
peer sharply at the younger man. "Are you crazy? Do you seriously expect
me to get an order to exhume him now? What would it get us, other than
lawsuits? Even if we could get the order without cause--which we can't!"

Then the pipe did fall as he gaped open-mouthed. "My God, you believe
all that stuff. You expected us to publish it _straight_!"

"No," Dane said thickly. The hope was gone now, as if it had never
existed, leaving a numb emptiness where nothing mattered. "No, I guess I
didn't really expect anything. But I believe the facts. Why shouldn't
I?"

He reached for the papers with hands he could hardly control and began
stuffing them back into the folder. All the careful documentation, the
fingerprints--smudged, perhaps, in some cases, but still evidence enough
for anyone but a fool--

"Phillips?" Jordan said questioningly to himself, and then his voice was
taking on a new edge. "Phillips! Wait a minute, I've got it now! _Dane_
Phillips, not _Arthur_! Two years on the _Trib._ Then you turned up on
the _Register_ in Seattle? Phillip Dean, or some such name there."

"Yeah," Dane agreed. There was no use in denying anything now. "Yeah,
Dane Arthur Phillips. So I suppose I'm through here?"

Jordan nodded again and there was a faint look of fear in his
expression. "You can pick up your pay on the way out. And make it
quick, before I change my mind and call the boys in white!"

       *       *       *       *       *

It could have been worse. It had been worse before. And there was enough
in the pay envelope to buy what he needed--a flash camera, a little
folding shovel from one of the surplus houses, and a bottle of good
scotch. It would be dark enough for him to taxi out to Oakhaven
Cemetery, where Blanding had been buried.

It wouldn't change the minds of the fools, of course. Even if he could
drag back what he might find, without the change being completed, they
wouldn't accept the evidence. He'd been crazy to think anything could
change their minds. And they called _him_ a fanatic! If the facts he'd
dug up in ten years of hunting wouldn't convince them, nothing would.
And yet he had to see for himself, before it was too late!

He picked a cheap hotel at random and checked in under an assumed name.
He couldn't go back to his room while there was a chance that Jordan
still might try to turn him in. There wouldn't be time for Sylvia's
detectives to bother him, probably, but there was the ever-present
danger that one of the aliens might intercept the message.

He shivered. He'd been risking that for ten years, yet the likelihood
was still a horror to him. The uncertainty made it harder to take than
any human-devised torture could be. There was no way of guessing what an
alien might do to anyone who discovered that all men were not
human--that some were ... zombies.

There was the classic syllogism: _All men are mortal; I am a man;
therefore, I am mortal._ But not Blanding--or Corporal Harding.

It was Harding's "death" that had started it all during the fighting on
Guadalcanal. A grenade had come flying into the foxhole where Dane and
Harding had felt reasonably safe. The concussion had knocked Dane out,
possibly saving his life when the enemy thought he was dead. He'd come
to in the daylight to see Harding lying there, mangled and twisted, with
his throat torn. There was blood on Dane's uniform, obviously spattered
from the dead man. It hadn't been a mistake or delusion; Harding had
been dead.

It had taken Dane two days of crawling and hiding to get back to his
group, too exhausted to report Harding's death. He'd slept for twenty
hours. And when he awoke, Harding had been standing beside him, with a
whole throat and a fresh uniform, grinning and kidding him for running
off and leaving a stunned friend behind.

It was no ringer, but Harding himself, complete to the smallest personal
memories and personality traits.

       *       *       *       *       *

The pressures of war probably saved Dane's sanity while he learned to
face the facts. All men are mortal; Harding is not mortal; therefore,
Harding is not a man! Nor was Harding alone--Dane found enough evidence
to know there were others.

The _Tribune_ morgue yielded even more data. A man had faced seven
firing squads and walked away. Another survived over a dozen attacks by
professional killers. Fingerprints turned up mysteriously "copied" from
those of men long dead. Some of the aliens seemed to heal almost
instantly; others took days. Some operated completely alone; some seemed
to have joined with others. But they were legion.

Lack of a clearer pattern of attack made him consider the possibility of
human mutation, but such tissue was too wildly different, and the
invasion had begun long before atomics or X-rays. He gave up trying to
understand their alien motivations. It was enough that they existed in
secret, slowly growing in numbers while mankind was unaware of them.

When his proof was complete and irrefutable, he took it to his
editor--to be fired, politely but coldly. Other editors were less
polite. But he went on doggedly trying and failing. What else could he
do? Somehow, he had to find the few people who could recognize facts and
warn them. The aliens would get him, of course, when the story broke,
but a warned humanity could cope with them. _Ye shall know the truth,
and the truth shall make you free._

Then he met Sylvia by accident after losing his fifth job--a girl who
had inherited a fortune big enough to spread his message in paid ads
across the country. They were married before he found she was
hard-headed about her money. She demanded a full explanation for every
cent beyond his allowance. In the end, she got the explanation. And
while he was trying to cash the check she gave him, she visited Dr.
Buehl, to come back with a squad of quiet, refined strong-arm boys who
made sure Dane reached Buehl's "rest home" safely.

Hydrotherapy ... Buehl as the kindly firm father image ... analysis ...
hypnosis that stripped every secret from him, including his worst
childhood nightmare.

His father had committed a violent, bloody suicide after one of the many
quarrels with Dane's mother. Dane had found the body.

[Illustration]

Two nights after the funeral, he had dreamed of his father's face,
horror-filled, at the window. He knew now that it was a normal
nightmare, caused by being forced to look at the face in the coffin, but
the shock had lasted for years. It had bothered him again, after his
discovery of the aliens, until a thorough check had proved without doubt
that his father had been fully human, with a human, if tempestuous,
childhood behind him.

       *       *       *       *       *

Dr. Buehl was delighted. "You see, Dane? You _know_ it was a nightmare,
but you don't really believe it even now. Your father was an alien
monster to you--no adult is quite human to a child. And that
literal-minded self, your subconscious, saw him after he died. So there
are alien monsters who return from death. Then you come to from a
concussion. Harding is sprawled out unconscious, covered with
blood--probably your blood, since you say he wasn't wounded, later.

"But after seeing your father, you can't associate blood with
yourself--you see it as a horrible wound on Harding. When he turns out
to be alive, you're still in partial shock, with your subconscious
dominant. And that has the answer already. There are monsters who come
back from the dead! An exaggerated reaction, but nothing really
abnormal. We'll have you out of here in no time."

No non-directive psychiatry for Buehl. The man beamed paternally,
chuckling as he added what he must have considered the clincher.
"Anyhow, even zombies can't stand fire, Dane, so you can stop worrying
about Harding. I checked up on him. He was burned to a crisp in a hotel
fire two months ago."

It was logical enough to shake Dane's faith, until he came across Milo
Blanding's picture in a magazine article on society in St. Louis.
According to the item, Milo was a cousin of _the_ Blandings, whose
father had vanished in Chile as a young man, and who had just rejoined
the family. The picture was of Harding!

An alien could have gotten away by simply committing suicide and being
carried from the rest home, but Dane had to do it the hard way, watching
his chance and using commando tactics on a guard who had come to accept
him as a harmless nut.

In St. Louis, he'd used the "Purloined Letter" technique to hide--going
back to newspaper work and using almost his real name. It had seemed to
work, too. But he'd been less lucky about Harding-Blanding. The man had
been in Europe on some kind of a tour until his return only this last
week.

Dane had seen him just once then--but long enough to be sure it was
Harding--before he died again.

This time, it was in a drunken auto accident that seemed to be none of
his fault, but left his body a mangled wreck.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was almost dark when Dane dismissed the taxi at the false address, a
mile from the entrance to the cemetery. He watched it turn back down the
road, then picked up the valise with his camera and folding shovel. He
shivered as he moved reluctantly ahead. War had proved that he would
never be a brave man and the old fears of darkness and graveyards were
still strong in him. But he had to know what the coffin contained now,
if it wasn't already too late.

It represented the missing link in his picture of the aliens. What
happened to them during the period of regrowth? Did they revert to their
natural form? Were they at all conscious while the body reshaped itself
into wholeness? Dane had puzzled over it night after night, with no
answer.

Nor could he figure how they could escape from the grave. Perhaps a man
could force his way out of some of the coffins he had inspected. The
soil would still be soft and loose in the grave and a lot of the coffins
and the boxes around them were strong in appearance only. A determined
creature that could exist without much air for long enough might make
it. But there were other caskets that couldn't be cracked, at least
without the aid of outside help.

What happened when a creature that could survive even the poison of
embalming fluids and the draining of all the blood woke up in such a
coffin? Dane's mind skittered from it, as always, and then came back to
it reluctantly.

There were still accounts of corpses turned up with the nails and hair
grown long in the grave. Could normal tissues stand the current tricks
of the morticians to have life enough for such growth? The possibility
was absurd. Those cases had to be aliens--ones who hadn't escaped. Even
they must die eventually in such a case--after weeks and months! It took
time for hair to grow.

And there were stories of corpses that had apparently fought and twisted
in their coffins still. What was it like for an alien then, going slowly
mad while it waited for true death? How long did madness take?

He shivered again, but went steadily on while the cemetery fence
appeared in the distance. He'd seen Blanding's coffin--and the big,
solid metal casket around it that couldn't be cracked by any amount of
effort and strength. He was sure the creature was still there, unless it
had a confederate. But that wouldn't matter. An empty coffin would also
be proof.

       *       *       *       *       *

Dane avoided the main gate, unsure about whether there would be a
watchman or not. A hundred feet away, there was a tree near the
ornamental spikes of the iron fence. He threw his bag over and began
shinnying up. It was difficult, but he made it finally, dropping onto
the soft grass beyond. There was the trace of the Moon at times through
the clouds, but it hadn't betrayed him, and there had been no alarm wire
along the top of the fence.

He moved from shadow to shadow, his hair prickling along the base of his
neck. Locating the right grave in the darkness was harder than he had
expected, even with an occasional brief use of the small flashlight. But
at last he found the marker that was serving until the regular monument
could arrive.

His hands were sweating so much that it was hard to use the small
shovel, but the digging of foxholes had given him experience and the
ground was still soft from the gravediggers' work. He stopped once, as
the Moon came out briefly. Again, a sound in the darkness above left him
hovering and sick in the hole. But it must have been only some animal.

He uncovered the top of the casket with hands already blistering.

Then he cursed as he realized the catches were near the bottom, making
his work even harder.

He reached them at last, fumbling them open. The metal top of the casket
seemed to be a dome of solid lead, and he had no room to maneuver, but
it began swinging up reluctantly, until he could feel the polished wood
of the coffin.

Dane reached for the lid with hands he could barely control. Fear was
thick in his throat now. What could an alien do to a man who discovered
it? Would it be Harding there--or some monstrous thing still changing?
How long did it take a revived monster to go mad when it found no way to
escape?

He gripped the shovel in one hand, working at the lid with the other.
Now, abruptly, his nerves steadied, as they had done whenever he was in
real battle. He swung the lid up and began groping for the camera.

His hand went into the silk-lined interior and found nothing! He was too
late. Either Harding had gotten out somehow before the final ceremony or
a confederate had already been here. The coffin was empty.

       *       *       *       *       *

There were no warning sounds this time--only hands that slipped under
his arms and across his mouth, lifting him easily from the grave. A
match flared briefly and he was looking into the face of Buehl's chief
strong-arm man.

"Hello, Mr. Phillips. Promise to be quiet and we'll release you. Okay?"
At Dane's sickened nod, he gestured to the others. "Let him go. And,
Tom, better get that filled in. We don't want any trouble from this."

Surprise came from the grave a moment later. "Hey, Burke, there's no
corpse here!"

Burke's words killed any hopes Dane had at once. "So what? Ever hear of
cremation? Lots of people use a regular coffin for the ashes."

"He wasn't cremated," Dane told him. "You can check up on that." But he
knew it was useless.

"Sure, Mr. Phillips. We'll do that." The tone was one reserved for
humoring madmen. Burke turned, gesturing. "Better come along, Mr.
Phillips. Your wife and Dr. Buehl are waiting at the hotel."

The gate was open now, but there was no sign of a watchman; if one
worked here, Sylvia's money would have taken care of that, of course.
Dane went along quietly, sitting in the rubble of his hopes while the
big car purred through the morning and on down Lindell Boulevard toward
the hotel. Once he shivered, and Burke dug out hot brandied coffee. They
had thought of everything, including a coat to cover his dirt-soiled
clothes as they took him up the elevator to where Buehl and Sylvia were
waiting for him.

She had been crying, obviously, but there were no tears or
recriminations when she came over to kiss him. Funny, she must still
love him--as he'd learned to his surprise he loved her. Under different
circumstances ...

"So you found me?" he asked needlessly of Buehl. He was operating on
purely automatic habits now, the reaction from the night and his failure
numbing him emotionally. "Jordan got in touch with you?"

Buehl smiled back at him. "We knew where you were all along, Dane. But
as long as you acted normal, we hoped it might be better than the home.
Too bad we couldn't stop you before you got all mixed up in this."

"So I suppose I'm committed to your booby-hatch again?"

Buehl nodded, refusing to resent the term. "I'm afraid so, Dane--for a
while, anyhow. You'll find your clothes in that room. Why don't you
clean up a little? Take a hot bath, maybe. You'll feel better."

       *       *       *       *       *

Dane went in, surprised when no guards followed him. But they had
thought of everything. What looked like a screen on the window had been
recently installed and it was strong enough to prevent his escape.
Blessed are the poor, for they shall be poorly guarded!

He was turning on the shower when he heard the sound of voices coming
through the door. He left the water running and came back to listen.
Sylvia was speaking.

"--seems so logical, so completely rational."

"It makes him a dangerous person," Buehl answered, and there was no
false warmth in his voice now. "Sylvia, you've got to admit it to
yourself. All the reason and analysis in the world won't convince him
he's wrong. This time we'll have to use shock treatment. Burn over those
memories, fade them out. It's the only possible course."

There was a pause and then a sigh. "I suppose you're right."

Dane didn't wait to hear more. He drew back, while his mind fought to
accept the hideous reality. Shock treatment! The works, if what he knew
of psychiatry was correct. Enough of it to erase his memories--a part of
himself. It wasn't therapy Buehl was considering; it couldn't be.

It was the answer of an alien that had a human in its hands--one who
knew too much!

He might have guessed. What better place for an alien than in the guise
of a psychiatrist? Where else was there the chance for all the refined,
modern torture needed to burn out a man's mind? Dane had spent ten years
in fear of being discovered by them--and now Buehl had him.

Sylvia? He couldn't be sure. Probably she was human. It wouldn't make
any difference. There was nothing he could do through her. Either she
was part of the game or she really thought him mad.

Dane tried the window again, but it was hopeless. There would be no
escape this time. Buehl couldn't risk it. The shock treatment--or
whatever Buehl would use under the name of shock treatment--would begin
at once. It would be easy to slip, to use an overdose of something, to
make sure Dane was killed. Or there were ways of making sure it didn't
matter. They could leave him alive, but take his mind away.

In alien hands, human psychiatry could do worse than all the medieval
torture chambers!

       *       *       *       *       *

The sickness grew in his stomach as he considered the worst that could
happen. Death he could accept, if he had to. He could even face the
chance of torture by itself, as he had accepted the danger while trying
to have his facts published. But to have his mind taken from him, a step
at a time--to watch his personality, his ego, rotted away under him--and
to know that he would wind up as a drooling idiot....

He made his decision, almost as quickly as he had come to realize what
Buehl must be.

There was a razor in the medicine chest. It was a safety razor, of
course, but the blade was sharp and it would be big enough. There was no
time for careful planning. One of the guards might come in at any moment
if they thought he was taking too long.

Some fear came back as he leaned over the wash basin, staring at his
throat, fingering the suddenly murderous blade. But the pain wouldn't
last long--a lot less than there would be under shock treatment, and
less pain. He'd read enough to feel sure of that.

Twice he braced himself and failed at the last second. His mind flashed
out in wild schemes, fighting against what it knew had to be done.

The world still had to be warned! If he could escape, somehow ... if he
could still find a way.... He couldn't quit, no matter how impossible
things looked.

But he knew better. There was nothing one man could do against the
aliens in this world they had taken over. He'd never had a chance. Man
had been chained already by carefully developed ridicule against
superstition, by carefully indoctrinated gobbledegook about insanity,
persecution complexes, and all the rest.

For a second, Dane even considered the possibility that he was insane.
But he knew it was only a blind effort to cling to life. There had been
no insanity in him when he'd groped for evidence in the coffin and found
it empty!

He leaned over the wash basin, his eyes focused on his throat, and his
hand came down and around, carrying the razor blade through a lethal
semicircle.

       *       *       *       *       *

Dane Phillips watched fear give place to sickness on his face as the
pain lanced through him and the blood spurted.

He watched horror creep up to replace the sickness while the bleeding
stopped and the gash began closing.

By the time he recognized his expression as the same one he'd seen on
his father's face at the window so long ago, the wound was completely
healed.

                                                      --LESTER DEL REY




Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from _Galaxy Science Fiction_ November 1956.
    Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed. Minor spelling and
    typographical errors have been corrected without note.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Dead Ringer, by Lester del Rey

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DEAD RINGER ***

***** This file should be named 30234.txt or 30234.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/0/2/3/30234/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
