The Project Gutenberg EBook of Modus Vivendi, by Gordon Randall Garrett

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Modus Vivendi

Author: Gordon Randall Garrett

Illustrator: Schoenherr

Release Date: October 22, 2009 [EBook #30311]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MODUS VIVENDI ***




Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







                         Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from Analog Science Fact & Fiction September
    1961. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed.


                            MODUS VIVENDI


                            By WALTER BUPP


     _It's undoubtedly difficult to live with someone who is
      Different. He must, because he is Different, live by other
      ways. But what makes it so difficult is that, for some
      reason he thinks you are Different!_


                     _Illustrated by Schoenherr_

       *       *       *       *       *




By the time I got to the office, I was jittery as a new bride. The day
started out all wrong. I woke up weak and washed out. I was pathetic
when I worked out with the weights--they felt as heavy as the
Pyramids. And when I walked from the subway to the building where Mike
Renner and I have our offices, an obvious telepath tailed me all the
way.

I was ready for a scrap. St. Francis himself would have irritated the
hell out of me, and I'd have gone speechless with rage at the mere
sight of sweet Alice Ben Bolt. The guy sitting with Mike in our law
library didn't have a chance.

"What's this?" I growled, seeing Mike seated silent and staring at our
caller across the big table. There wasn't a book or sheet of foolscap
resting on the walnut. Work hadn't started. They were lying in wait
for me. Well, I was lying in wait for the first guy who opened his
mouth.

"The Grievance Committee!" Mike said in a tone of stifled fury. "This
is Horace Dunn."

"_Carpe Diem_," I snarled at Horace, a hammered-down heavyweight.
"What's Renner done now?"

"Me?" Renner demanded, letting his fat jowls quivver. He's one of
those burly types who looks like he should be playing pro ball and
instead thrives on showing clients how to keep two sets of books while
staying out of jail.

"Not Renner," Horace said. "You, Maragon. The Bar Association gets
upset when reputable attorneys successfully defend one of these Stigma
cases."

"Forgive me my hobbies," I sneered, sitting down beside my partner.
"But I try to win them all. You know I didn't seek that
business--Judge Passarelli appointed me Public Defender when that Psi,
Crescas, bleated that he was destitute."

Mike Renner apparently decided one of us had to be reasonable.
"Coincidence, Dunn," he said. "Pure coincidence. You can't hold it
against--"

"No coincidence," I snapped. It wasn't my day to agree with anybody.
Renner's fat little eyes opened wide.

"Judge Passarelli _knew_ I'd be in his courtroom," I said. "His Honor
wanted to get my views on a point I'd made in that pleading the
previous week."

"Passarelli _again!_" Horace breathed. "Well, well. What do you know?
And two weeks ago he found a Stigma case named Mary Hall 'Not Guilty'
of bunco game against the 99th National Bank. You know the case?"

Renner was too upset for speech. He shook his head, looking over at
me. I didn't give him the satisfaction. Mike hasn't any patience with
my interest in keeping abreast of Psi developments anyway.

"This Mary Hall is a hallucinator," Horace said. He leaned forward and
gave it to us in not much more than a whisper. "This witch used her HC
to pass five dollar bills off as hundreds, getting change. But they
caught her at it." He laughed harshly. "And tried her for it," he
added. "Get the picture on that 'Not Guilty' verdict?"

"No," Renner admitted. I slouched down, scowling.

"She used HC on Judge Passarelli, too. Foozled his vision, whatever
you want to call it. When the 'cutor handed him the evidence, the five
dollar bill she had tried to pass for a hundred, all sealed up in
plastic, Passarelli _saw_ a _hundred_, thanks to her Psi powers."

"Get out of here," I told Horace, getting to my feet.

"Pete! For heaven's sake!" Mike protested. You didn't talk like that
to the Grievance Committee. Did you ever see a guy wring his hands?
Renner was pathetic.

"Can't you quit pussy-footing around, Renner?" I growled. "This comic
isn't from the Grievance Committee!"

Horace Dunn paled on that one. "How do you know that?" he said. He
sounded a lot more dangerous.

"Too polite," I sneered. "And it ill becomes you. What's going on?"

"So I level," Horace conceded. "So I'm _not_ from the Grievance
Committee, and I'm not all hot that Maragon defended Keys Crescas."

"Much better," I said, sitting down again.

"This guy Passarelli is coming up for re-election shortly," our caller
said. A light began to dawn. "We're making sure he doesn't make
it--and that _our_ man does."

My laugh was more a bark. "He can't find Mary Hall," I told Renner.

Horace's lower jaw shot out at me. "I don't like guys who know what
I'm thinking!" he snapped.

I had to laugh in his face. "Who needs TP? You want to tar Passarelli
with the brush of Psi--and this hallucinator would be Exhibit 'A'."

He subsided. "So I can't find her. What then?"

I shook my head. "You say it," I suggested. "Too early to have to wash
my mouth with soap."

Dunn made his big pitch to Renner. "Maragon has a connection with
these Psis--it's all over town that he got Keys Crescas off. This
Crescas can find Mary Hall--you know how Psis stick together." Renner
nodded rapt agreement. "And," Dunn added, finally sticking it in us,
"it would be good politics for Maragon to do it--would kind of sweeten
up the stench of his getting Crescas off, eh?"

Renner thought he had to sell me: "Pete," he insisted, "You've _got_
to! Defending Crescas was sure to hurt our reputation. That girl has
it coming for--"

I waved a hand in his face, shutting him up. "Why should I care what
happens to the girl?" I said, getting up. "Just make sure Horace pays
us a fat fee. After all, it's tax exempt."

"Tax exempt?" he asked, frowning.

"Sure," I said, walking out. "Religious contribution. Thirty pieces of
silver."

       *       *       *       *       *

Keys Crescas is the kind of odd-ball you can't find till after dark.
Good looking in a romantic, off-beat sort of way. No visible means of
support--a typical Psi. Renner made one white-jowled attempt to read
me the riot act for failing to plead him guilty when Passarelli had
tapped me as Public Defender. I came close to throwing the meat-ball
out of my private office.

What could I have done? Sure, Crescas has the Stigma--he doesn't try
to hide it. It's only TK, though, and I don't suppose much of that.
Just enough, the cops will tell you, to make him a good man at picking
locks and earn his nickname--Keys.

People like Crescas run to a pattern. I left my number in about ten of
the spots he might turn up, and around six o'clock one of them hit pay
dirt.

I pressed the "Accept" key when the phone rang, and Keys Crescas'
olive face and curly black hair filled the screen. His black eyes had
that lively watchfulness you associate with Psis. He had the gain way
down and the aperture wide, so that he wasn't in focus any farther
back than his ears. And that scope setting hid from where he was
calling as effectively as a veil. Did you ever know a Psi who didn't
seem to be harboring a secret?

"Hi, Mouthpiece," he grinned, showing even white teeth. "How'd you
know where to find me?"

"Best place for worms is under a manure pile," I said. "I used
parallel logic."

That took that smug, Stigma grin off his puss. "What do you want?" he
asked, sullen now.

"A lead to a Psi who's gone into hiding."

You know what he told me to do. "Mary Hall," I added. "She's got
Stigma Troubles."

"Not even counting you, eh?" Crescas sneered. He made the same
suggestion again. I let it ride. "Go on," he dared me. "Make your
pitch. I'll laugh later."

"That 'Not Guilty' verdict doesn't mean a thing, Crescas," I told him.
"That was a National Bank she tried to rob. There's a Federal rap
still to be settled. She has big Stigma troubles and needs
counsel--and not one of those shysters who hang around the Criminal
Courts building sniffing for Psi business."

"She's in no trouble till they find her," he said accurately, and I
could see his hand come up to cut the image. "For my dough they've
given up trying to find her and are using you for a stalking horse,"
he added with fiendish accuracy.

"So don't trust me," I snarled. "You can send her saw blades baked in
a cake." I reached up, too.

"Hold it."

I stopped, trying to keep my glower going.

"Passarelli would have to be in on it, too," he decided. "And I can't
figure _him_ for a louse. O.K., Maragon. I'll pick you up at your
office at about eight o'clock."

       *       *       *       *       *

With nearly two hours to kill, I went out to eat. I still felt glum
and lousy. Part of it was the knifelike penetration of Crescas'
intuition--his knowing that I was just a stalking horse so that the
big guns could zero in on Mary Hall. And there was that little tremor
of fear that comes from knowing that a Psi may think you've
doublecrossed him. They have some powerful abilities when it comes to
exacting vengeance. Well, if everything about the deal was as much
screwed up as the part I had heard so far, I decided, I might get out
with a whole skin at that.

That was my attempt at consolation--that and an order of sweet-breads,
Financiere, which is a ridiculous dish for a sawed-off shyster tending
toward overweight.

I was back in the law library by ten minutes of eight, trying to
occupy my mind with the latest _Harvard Law Review_, when the 'phone
rang. Keys' face, a little tight-lipped and bright-eyed, peered at me
from the screen, which it completely filled. He must have darned near
swallowed the 'scope.

"Ready?" he asked softly.

"Sure. You picking me up?"

His lip curled in half a smile. "What do I look like?" he sneered.
"Grab a cab. You know a bar called the Moldy Fig?" I nodded. "That's
where." He cut the image.

Well, this was more like it. You can't deal with Psis without the
whole affair acting like something out of E. Phillips Oppenheim. I
closed up the office, turned out the ceiling, and rode the elevator
down to the street.

The night howled and shrieked with air-borne traffic. A hot-rodding
kid gunned his fans up the street a way and ripped what silence might
have remained to the night into shreds as he streaked past me. The
jerk wasn't forty feet off the ground, and was pouring the coal to his
turbine. The whine of his impellers sounded a strong down-Doppler as
his ripped past me, nose dropped a good thirty degrees and dragging
every knot he could get out of his 'copter.

I waved to a cab standing at the rank up the block a way and watched
the skim-copter rise a couple inches off the ground as the hacker
skimmed on the ground-cushion toward me. City grit cut at my ankles
from the air blast before I could hop into the bubble and give him my
destination. He looked the question at me hopefully, over his
shoulder, his hand on the arm of his meter.

"Oh, what the hell," I said, still sore at the world, and a little
worried about what I was trying to do. "Let's 'copter!" He grinned and
swung the arm over to the "fly" position with its four-times-higher
rate. His turbine screamed to a keener pitch with wide throttle, and
he climbed full-bore into the down-town slow lane.

       *       *       *       *       *

The swift ride down to the Village was long enough to induce that odd
motion-hypnosis so common in night flight over a metropolitan area.
The dizzy blur of red and green running lights from air-borne traffic
at levels above and below us, the shapes of 'copters silhouetted
beneath us against the lambent glow of the city's well-lit streets,
all wove into a numbing pattern.

[Illustration]

"Here's the _Fig_, Mac," the hacker said as we grounded. I stuck my
credit card in the meter and hopped out, not fast enough to duck the
fan-driven pin-pricks of sand as he pulled away.

Crescas appeared as if by magic--Psis act like that--and had me by the
arm. "Quick!" he said, pushing me back into the spot he had appeared
from. It was a doorway beside the Moldy Fig, opening on a flight of
steps running to an apartment above the bar. As we climbed the clean
and well-lit stairs, I reminded myself that I was probably entering a
den of Psis--and clamped down tight on my thoughts. There was plenty
they had better not peep.

Keys didn't have to knock on the door--there's always a telepath
hanging around these Stigma hideouts who knows who's coming. A husky
young man, quite blond and pink of face, opened the door. A soft
rustle of music spilled out around his big shoulders. He wore a
T-shirt, and his powerful forearms were bare.

"Hey!" he said to Keys, spotting himself as a Southerner as surely as
if he'd had the Stars and Bars tattooed on his forehead. We followed
him down a short hall into a room furnished, with a couple of couches,
an easy-chair, several small but delightful tables, and a piano. Here
was the music. A blond bombshell was drumming box chords on the
ivories, and grouped around her on side chairs were four young men,
playing with her. It was jazz, if that's what you call the quiet
racket that comes out of a wooden recorder, a very large pottery
ocharina that hooted like a gallon jug, a steel guitar and a pair of
bongo drums played discreetly with the fingertips.

My appearance stopped them right in the middle of a chorus of "Muskrat
Ramble." I'd have liked to hear more--it was Dixieland times two--what
the Psis call Psixieland. That's jazz played by a gang of telepaths.
Each one knows what the others are about to play. The result is
extemporaneous counterpoint, but without the clinkers we associate
with jazz. Almost too perfect, yet untrammeled.

My eyes ran around the room as the four men who had been playing with
the girl got up and prepared to leave. The place was spotless. Oh, the
furnishings weren't costly, but they were chosen with that sense of
fitness, of refinement of color and decor that is curiously Psi. I
suppose that's one of the little things that annoys Normals so much.
Stigma powers seem to go beyond telepathy, clairvoyance and
telekinesis--they extend in some hard to define way into the
aesthetic. A chaste kind of cleanliness is only part of it. _Taste_, I
guess that's the word. Their attire, their homes, everything about
Psis, seems tasteful.

       *       *       *       *       *

In moments only Keys, the blond Southerner and the still blonder bomb
on the piano bench were left to face me. Keys poked a finger at the
plow-jockey in the T-shirt. "Elmer," he explained.

"Take off yo' hat, Yankee," Elmer grinned. I felt it tipped from my
head by his TK.

I glowered at him. "Kid stuff!" I snorted. "So you can lift four
ounces from six feet away. But you don't have any idea what
incorporeal hereditaments are. Which is better?"

The pink of his face got red. He could have broken me in two.

"Just making a point," I said. "I'm stupid about TK. You're stupid
about the law. I figure that makes us even."

He clamped his mouth shut. I turned back to Keys and the girl I was
sure was Mary Hall. "What I came here for--"

"What we _got_ you here for," Keys interrupted, "was to set you
straight on something." I guess I looked as surprised as I felt. The
impossibly blond girl giggled. "Over the phone, Maragon," Keys went
on, sitting down on the bench beside the girl, "you said there was a
Federal rap hanging over Mary's head on this 99th National Bank
fracas."

I nodded.

"The theory being," he went on, "that the law doesn't let anybody with
the Stigma get away with a thing, right?"

"Right."

"Then relax. Mary hasn't got the Stigma. Have you, Mary?"

"No," she said. I looked her over more carefully. She was closer to
twenty than thirty, round-faced, with blue eyes that were about as
impossibly bright as her hair was impossibly white. It could have been
a corneal tattoo, but somehow I doubted it. Impossibly red lips made
up the patriotic triad of colors--but that was lipstick, pure and
simple.

"No Stigma?" I demanded. "I know Psixieland when I hear it, Miss Hall.
Don't tell me that wasn't telepathic jazz."

She tossed her short hair-do around. "My side-men were TP's," she
conceded. "Why do you think I was playing box chords? They knew what I
was playing--I didn't know what they'd play."

Well, some of it was adding up. Still, I had to be sure. "I see. Tell
me, Mary, where were your parents on the 19th of April in '75?"

She sat up straight beside Keys on the bench, and her fair face
flushed pinkly. "Drop dead!" she told me.

I stood up. "See you in jail," I said, and started for the door.

       *       *       *       *       *

Elmer had played tackle for Ol' Miss--he sure stopped me in my tracks.
"I reckon we ain't through with you yet, Yankee," he grinned. He hurt
me with his hands, big as country hams. My stiffened fingers jabbed
his T-shirt where it covered his solar plexus, and he dropped back,
gasping.

"You could learn a little about fighting, too, Psi," I growled. "And
you're through with me if that bottle blonde won't answer my
questions."

"Hey!" Keys protested. "Come on, relax. Everybody!" he snapped, as
Elmer got his breath back and came in for another tackle. I signaled
for a fair catch, and he eased up.

I peered over my shoulder at the girl at the piano. "Well?" I asked
her. "Where _were_ your parents on the 19th of April in '75?"

Her eyes sought out Keys'. He nodded, dropping his gaze to the floor.
"About fifty miles from Logan, Iowa," she said.

"And you don't have the Stigma?" I scoffed.

"Not everybody inside the Logan Ring was affected," she reminded me.
"Which is my tough luck. But I _am_ being crucified because Mother
and Dad _were_ in the Ring the day the N-bomb went off, whether I have
the Stigma or not."

I came back to stand in front of her. "I'm an attorney," I said. "I
have an idea what can happen to you if the Courts get hold of you.
Right now they can't find you--which must mean you've been hiding."
She confirmed that with a nod, biting her red, red lips. "They _are_
after you, and a Federal rap is just the start," I said. "You have
only one chance, Mary, and I'm glad you claimed it. The only way you
can keep them from putting you over a barrel is to prove you don't
have the Stigma. I think I know a way to do it. Are you ready to let
me help you?"

"Not _that_ fast," she said, looking worried. "Oh, I trust Keys'
judgment about you. Yes, I _do_," she said earnestly, turning to
Crescas. "Yes, I _know_ he got you off, Keys. But it doesn't sound
right. Why should he take a chance helping a Psi--even if I really
_don't_ have the Stigma? What's his angle?"

"Fair enough," Keys said. "How about it, Maragon?"

"I knew it was a bum rap they were trying to pin on Mary as soon as I
heard about it," I explained. "This business about Mary having HC.
There just isn't any such Psi power as hallucination, and every one of
you knows it--it's an old wives' tale. I wouldn't touch this little
lady with a ten-foot pole if I really thought she had the Stigma. I
have a living to make around this town--and you can't handle Stigma
business and get any decent trade, too."

I looked back at Mary. "How _did_ you work your swindle at the bank?"
I asked quietly.

She sighed. "Sleight of hand," she said. "A damned fool stunt. I
figured to put the money back in a day or so. If somebody else hadn't
been working the same racket, they'd never have caught me. But they
had set a trap--"

"I _thought_ it was some light-finger stuff," I grinned. "Well, it
will take me a while to set up a real test of your Psi Powers. Where
can I reach you--or are you spending the night here?"

"Certainly not!" she said, casting an annoyed glance at Elmer. She
looked at her watch. "Would it be much longer than an hour? I might
still be here, if Elmer--"

"Jes' fine," T-shirt said. "Unless yo' mine watching Keys and me
practice." He grinned at me. "Keys is he'ping me build up mah TK," he
explained.

"That'll make you popular," I sneered, as I wrote down Elmer's phone
number. They let me out. It had been a pretty room, and in a way I
hated to leave it. Still, by the time a cruising 'copter had taken me
halfway back to my office up-town, I could relax the shield over my
thoughts--and that was worth getting out of that Stigma hideaway.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was a little after nine when I walked into the lobby and rang for
the elevator. A man lounging against the wall over near the building
directory raised a wrist-phone to his mouth and spoke quietly into it
as I waited for the car to come. He didn't seem to be interested in
me--but then, he wouldn't want to show it if he were. Fool around with
the Stigma, would I?

The building was mostly dark--in our circle we make too much dough to
be interested in overtime. I keyed myself into our waiting room,
turned on the ceiling, and went into my private office. There was
enough light leaking in from our foyer, so I added none.

I found Lindstrom at home--after all, he should have been by nine
o'clock. "Maragon!" he said. "Kill your focus. I have guests!"

I reached up to twist the 'scope so that my image would be a blur on
his screen. Nice beginning. I was as welcome as a thriving case of
leprosy.

"I want you to make a test for me, Professor," I said. "Tonight."

He shook his head. "I told you I had guests. We're entertaining. No
thanks, Maragon."

"A Normal is being crucified," I said quietly. "They've got her pegged
as a Psi. I've got to get her off the hook."

"How could this happen?" he demanded.

"She hangs with a bunch of Stigma cases, for one thing," I said.

"Nobody forced her to associate with a gang of Psis," he said. "Serves
her right."

"Nobody forced you to, either, Prof," I snarled. "But you have a
steady stream of Stigma cases going through your laboratory."

"That's different!" he protested.

"Nuts. Now name a time when I can see you there."

"I don't want any part of it. If you're along, it will just mean
trouble, Maragon. You got too much publicity on defending that TK
locksmith. I've got a professional standing to maintain."

"You'd sure look silly if all the Psis in town blackballed you," I
snarled at him. "Let me pass the word around--and you darned well know
I've got the contacts to do it--and you've tested your last Stigma
case. Then let's see what kind of a professional standing you've got."

He knew some pretty dirty words. "What time?" I pressed him, knowing
the profanity was a confession of defeat.

"Not before eleven," he said glumly. "I won't forget this, Maragon."

"What the hell," I said. "I'm on every S-list in town already. You
hardly count beside the other enemies I'm making." I cut the image.

As if at a signal, there was a tapping on the door to the corridor. I
got out of my swivel, walked into the waiting room and opened up. The
man who stood there was faintly familiar--but it was the gun in his
fist that got most of my attention.

"Maragon?" he asked softly.

I spread my feet a little. "I knew I was making enemies pretty fast,"
I said to him. "But I didn't know how strongly. Listen," I snapped,
"I'll bet one thing never occurred to you."

He was taken back. You're not supposed to snarl at a guy who pokes a
gun at you. In theory it gives him the edge of any conversation.
"Huh?" he said.

"The only thing that lousy pop-gun of yours is good for is shooting
people. I don't think you came here to shoot me. Now what can you do?"

"Clown," he growled. "Where's Renner?"

"In bed, if he has any sense," I decided. "Make up your mind. Whom do
you want?"

"For Pete's sake," he said. "Grammar at a time like this!" He looked
down at his gun, decided I was right, and stuck it in a shoulder
holster. Then his wrist came up in front of his mouth and I recognized
him. It was the man who had lounged near the building directory when I
had come in. "Come ahead," he said into the mike.

       *       *       *       *       *

I turned my back on him and stomped into my office. Let them follow
me.

But only one man came in, a minute or so later. "Does it have to be so
dark?" he asked politely.

"Rheostat's by your elbow," I said. He reached for it and turned on
the ceiling, closing the door that cut us off from the waiting room.

"Good evening, Counselor," he said, taking the seat across my desk
from me. He looked different without his judicial robes, not quite as
much my senior as I had thought. He wasn't any taller than I was,
perhaps five feet nine, and thirty pounds lighter. Between us we had
about an average forehead--his went up to the top of his head--my
hairline starts about where my eyebrows leave off. Robes or no robes,
there was something judicial about him, as though he'd been born with
a gavel in his hand.

"Good evening, Your Honor," I said to Judge Passarelli. "You have a
pretty active pipeline into Stigma circles, don't you?"

It didn't bother him. "As long as judgeships are elective offices,
Maragon," he said. "Judges will play politics. Fill me in on this Mary
Hall thing."

"Without violating professional ethics?" I asked.

"You'll try cases again, in front of judges," he snapped not very
judicial. "Don't get me angry with you, Maragon."

I countered: "The shoe is on the other foot--I'm darned sore at you."
He tried to find his receding hairline with his thin eyebrows. "Don't
look so amazed--do you think I haven't figured out my defending that
TK Crescas was no accident? You set me up for it."

"Set you up for a resoundingly successful defense," he observed.

"And a resoundingly bad press!" I said. "I have a living to make in
this town--"

"Psis are still citizens," he said. "I'm tired of seeing them thrown
to the wolves by the jackals who practice law from a phone booth. Psis
deserve a decent defense. Without you, Crescas would be in prison."

[Illustration]

"And without _you_," I growled at him, "I might still have a law
practice."

"So you're helping them find Mary Hall--to embarrass me?"

"I've already found her," I said. "Feel embarrassed?"

"Not yet," he conceded. "What are you planning to do?"

"We've accepted a fee to turn her over to a client," I revealed. "I
guess that's not unethical to tell you."

"And you'll do that?"

"After one more step."

"And that is?"

"Prove that she hasn't got the Stigma."

"_Hasn't_ got it!" He hopped out of his chair and pressed his knuckles
on my desk.

"You'd better do a little more research, if you're going to let your
black heart bleed over these Stigma cases, Judge," I grinned at him.
"All this talk about Mary Hall using HC on your vision. That will
never embarrass you. There isn't such a thing as HC--hallucination is
an old wives' tale. It was sleight of hand, in the bank and in your
courtroom. Don't stand still for that noise about HC."

"I'll be switched," he said. "You're serious?"

"Sure."

He frowned at me. "She's still in trouble," he reminded me. "The
Federal Grand Jury--"

"Restitution ought to cure that," I said. "Especially if we threaten a
lawsuit for slander--I think it's libelous to claim a Normal has the
Stigma. Mutual release all around."

"You'll represent her?" he asked.

"Would you consider it ethical? I don't see how my assignment to turn
Mary Hall over to your political opponents will stop me from
representing her in a lawsuit, do you?"

He shook his head, straightening up. "I don't see how," he agreed. "I
hope you do defend her, Maragon. The Courts have had to be pretty
tough on these pathetic people. If they had reputable representatives,
I for one would be a lot more ready to suspend sentences and find
other ways to help them out of the jams their weird powers get them
into."

"I'll think about it," I said. "In the meantime--stay away from me."

"We're both poison right now," he agreed. "And thanks."

       *       *       *       *       *

Mary Hall was still at T-shirted Elmer's when I dialed his phone, and
she agreed to meet me on the street in front of the Moldy Fig. My
'copter had barely settled to the pavement when she came running from
the doorway to the stairs and hopped into the bubble with me.

"Columbia University," I told the hacker. "Rhine Building."

Professor Lindstrom was waiting for us in his laboratory, in carpet
slippers and without his tie. "Laboratory" is a perfectly silly term.
The "apparatus" in any Psi lab is no more complicated than a folding
screen, some playing cards, perhaps a deck of Rhine ESP cards and a
slide rule. This place went so far as to sport a laboratory bench and
a number of lab stools, on which Lindstrom, Mary Hall and I perched.
My egghead Psi expert was barely able to restrain himself--he had some
bitter things to tell me.

I beat him to it. "Take that injured glower off your puss," I snapped.
"Your business is testing people for their Psi powers. Why shouldn't I
call on you for help? What are friends for?"

"For a friend I might," Lindstrom said. "You don't rate that well with
me any more."

"I'll try to bear up under it," I told him. "In the meantime, this is
Mary Hall, a reputed Psi. Her power is HC."

He was interested in spite of himself. "Hallucination?" he said. "We
don't see much of that, Miss Hall. And you claim you can demonstrate
this power under controlled conditions?" These eggheads all talk
alike.

Mary shook her head. "No, I certainly do not. I'm as Normal as you
are, Professor." He sagged slightly in disappointment.

"Well," Lindstrom said. "This is going to be difficult to prove, Miss
Hall. Merely by withholding your HC ability, you can act Normal--but
what would that prove?"

She turned to me. "I thought you said you had a way to get me off the
hook," she protested. "How are we--?"

"Quiet," I told her. "I didn't come up here for a lecture in logic.
Especially from a dumb blonde." She started to bristle, but thought
better of it.

"It goes like this, Prof," I said. "This innocent looking piece of
fluff was caught slipping a five-dollar bill to a teller at a bank
down town, and asking for change for a hundred dollar bill. She says
it was nothing more than sleight of hand. You are an experienced
observer. I want you to watch her work her little trick. If she can
fool us, and not use Psi, the legal position is that she didn't need
Psi to fool the teller." I turned to her. "And the logical principle,
Miss Aristotle," I told her, "is equally simple: Occam's Razor. Prefer
the simpler explanation. Can you show us how you palmed the hundred
and slipped the teller a five?"

"You'll be watching for it," Mary protested, letting those ripe lips
pout.

"I suppose the teller wasn't? It's his business to watch the bills
when he's making change." I took out my wallet and handed her a one
and a five. "Hand me the one and make me think it's the five," I said.

Lindstrom leaned his elbows on the black composition top of the lab
bench, watching her narrowly. Mary got down off her stool and came
over closer to me, smoothing the two bills in her fingers. The five
was on top.

"I'd like change for a five," she said, handing it to me. She worked
it three times while we watched.

"Utterly smooth," Lindstrom said. "I didn't see her make the switch."

"Me, too," I agreed. I could see the tension drain from Mary's face.
She was prettier when she wasn't worried. She was pretty all the time,
when you got right down to it. No wonder she could fool a teller. He
probably hadn't taken his eyes off that dazzling smile.

"Is that all?" Lindstrom asked.

"Would you certify that you saw her make these switches, and that Psi
was not involved?" I asked him.

"Of course. I don't want to, but, if you call me as a witness, I'll
testify to what I saw," he said glumly.

"It may not be necessary," I said. "I really ought to call you, just
to teach you some manners, Prof. But then, we all have a right to be a
little yellow."

Mary would have preferred to remain in silence as we rode a cab back
to the Moldy Fig, and huddled over in her corner of the bubble. There
wasn't enough light, that high over the city, to read her expression.

"Here's the strategy," I said, about midtown. "If we can get the Bank
to agree to restitution, and to sign an admission that you did not use
HC or any other Psi powers to work your theft, I think you'll be off
the hook. I doubt the Federal Jury will listen to an information."

"I hope you're right."

"This is my business," I growled. "Do you want me to represent you?"

She didn't answer that until the 'copter had grounded in front of the
Fig. "All right," she said. "I don't know what you're so mad at all
the time, but it doesn't seem to be me. I'd like you to represent me."

I watched her scoot across the sidewalk and run up the stairs to
Elmer's place. For some screwy reason I hoped she had another place to
hole up for the night. I was getting as bad as Renner--looking
lecherously at the raffish display of shapely leg as the blond
bombshell beat it.

       *       *       *       *       *

I directed my hacker to my apartment, and grabbed the phone in the
bubble. The Mobile Operator got me Vito Passarelli at his home. He
sounded as if he had already retired.

"This is you know who," I said. "It's late, I know, but we'd better
talk before morning. My apartment is the safest spot I can think of.
I'm in the Directory."

"Now?"

"Now."

I beat His Honor to my apartment by long enough to hang up my jacket,
turn the ceiling on to a dim but friendly glow and get out a bottle of
Scotch. Judges don't drink bourbon.

I let Passarelli in when the buzzer sounded. "I'm reasonably sure
there are no microphones in this place," I said. "This Mary Hall thing
is getting hot--we'd better start taking precautions."

"Always," he said, running a hand over his balding head. His eyes saw
the bottle and asked me a question. I threw some of the Pinch Bottle
over ice and handed it to him, taking mine neat.

"Here's to crime," he said, sipping the liquor. "What happened?"

I poked a finger at my favorite easy-chair, which Passarelli took. I
stood in front of him, still holding my drink. "I got myself in a
jam."

"You're talking to the wrong man," he said coldly. "Get yourself a
lawyer--a _good_ Lawyer."

"You're in it with me, Passarelli."

"Never met you," he said, getting up. "Thanks for the drink." He
started for the door.

"That witch has the Stigma after all," I said to his back. That
stopped him. He came back and poked his angry face into mine.

"You had her tested?"

"Professor Lindstrom, at Columbia," I told him. "She is slick as a
whistle. Lindstrom fell for her yarn that it was sleight of hand--but
it was HC. I'd have sworn it didn't exist."

"Well," he said. "Well, well. All right, Maragon. What's the jam
you're in?"

"You suggested I should represent her, and I'm going to. But with the
Stigma? That's more than I bargained for. You know no reputable
attorney can afford to represent a Psi. Not if he wants any Normal
business. Too much feeling."

"Going to duck out on her?"

"Damned if I'll welch!" I said, more hotly than I had meant to. "You
sure don't seem very shaken up by the news."

"It's not any news to me," Passarelli said tightly. "You forget that
I've had first-hand experience with that little lady. She gave me the
business right in my courtroom. I'm no credulous egghead like
Lindstrom. I know the difference between sleight of hand and an
hallucination. She made me see just what she wanted me to see."

"Now you know why I think you're in the same jam, Judge," I said.
"You'll look great running for office, with your opposition telling
the public how a Psi foozled your vision. They'll stomp on the loud
pedal about how you let her get away with it and wangle a 'Not Guilty'
verdict when she was guilty as sin."

"Yes," he agreed. "It's a hot potato, all right."

"There's just one out," I insisted. "That girl would have made
restitution long ago if the Bank would have permitted it. And I've
been asking myself how come--why should the Bank get sniffy and not
want its money back?" That was the right question. He went back to the
easy-chair and sat down. His eyes came up to meet mine, and then he
held out his glass. I splashed some more Pinch in it.

"Politics, politics," he mourned. "The social workers are after me on
this thing. They _want_ that girl to be in a jam. They've asked me to
work on the Bank, asked that I make sure restitution can't be made.
They want the threat of a Federal indictment to hang over her head."

"Why?"

"So she'll agree to my committing her to their care. You know what
they try to do--it's the doctrine of sterilization. Remove young Psis
from the Psi society--cut them loose from their natural contacts,
force them to quit using their powers. It's the same technique they
use on narcotic violators, if they aren't too deeply committed to
drugs."

"And you are really resisting that?"

"Wouldn't you? Of course I had to tell the Bank to refuse restitution.
But do you think Psi is a sickness, like narcotic addiction? Nonsense.
Telepathy is no more sickness than the ability to discriminate colors,
or hear the tones of a scale. This is equivalent to the color-blind
and tone-deaf asking that the rest of us stop perceiving color or
hearing the pitch of sound. Ridiculous."

"What is the cure?"

"We could argue all night," he said wearily. Then my buzzer sounded.
"Expecting anybody else?" he said, alarmed in an instant.

"I can't think of anybody I'd like to find out that you were here," I
said. "Get out of sight." He carried his drink into my bedroom.

       *       *       *       *       *

Mike Renner was at the door. For a fat-faced bookkeeper with a law
degree, he looked pretty grim and formidable.

"You rotten double-crosser," he greeted me. I was the darling of
practically everybody in New York that night.

"It happens every time. Now what do you want, Renner?"

"To break your neck," he said. "You have found that Psi, Mary Hall,
and you haven't turned her over to Dunn. That's a dirty double--"

"With good reason," I cut in on him. "Do we both have to be idiots?
I've just finished having the girl tested. She hasn't got the Stigma,
Mike. Dunn will look like a fool trying to pin anything on the
Judge."

"That's not our business. Our fee depends on giving her to Dunn!" He
shook a fist in my face when he said that. He just doesn't look the
part.

"And the reputation of our firm can very well depend on my
successfully representing her, and proving that she hasn't got the
Stigma."

"You don't honestly mean you're going to represent that Psi!"

"I just _told_ you she hasn't got the Stigma!"

"You are a rotten lair," Renner said, getting dangerously red in the
face. "What kind of games are you playing with Passarelli? What has
_he_ got to do with the reputation of our firm? Don't try to lie," he
said sharply. "I know he's here. He's been tailed all night."

That was enough for Passarelli. He came out of the bedroom and walked
up to Renner. "Forgive me for saying this, Renner," he said. "But I
just hope you have a case in my court. I'll find some way to pin one
of your slippery tax frauds to you!"

Renner grew pale. He's conditioned to toady to judges. He didn't have
the guts to answer Passarelli, and took it out on me, instead. "Our
partnership is dissolved, as of right now," he seethed. He dragged
some money out of his pocket and threw it on the rug. "There's your
share of the rent. I'm throwing your stuff out in the hall in the
morning. The auditors will be there at nine o'clock for an accounting.
You won't need that address any longer--only reputable people come to
our building." He stormed out.

Passarelli and I faced each other in silence. "Jerk!" I raged at him
at last. "You couldn't check to see if you were being followed!"

"I regret that," he said. "But you invited me."

"Don't remind me," I snarled. "What now?"

"I don't know about you," Passarelli said. "But I'm going to start
looking out for myself. You're too tricky, Maragon."

"And I suppose you think it's time I ditched Mary Hall, eh?"

"What for?" he said mildly. "You're just one more Criminal Court
shyster now--Renner gave you the heave-ho. You might as well defend
her, even if I can't work with you."

I could feel my belly tighten with rage. "I thought you'd welcome a
reputable attorney who would represent Psis," I reminded him.

"Yes, I suppose I would. Very much."

"All of a sudden I'm not reputable?"

"Reputable?" he sneered. "You've been on every side of this thing.
Would you like to explain why you told Renner one thing and me
another?"

"Same reason you've been going through some contortions
yourself--trying to save my profession and occupation."

"Too tricky for me," Passarelli said.

I measured him with my eyes. "That's not the reason you're walking out
of here. What's bugging you?"

"Reading my mind?" he said coldly. It wasn't the first time I'd been
accused of it. "But you're right. You lied to me."

"To you? Not so."

"Oh, yes. How do you know that Mary Hall used HC on you in Lindstrom's
laboratory? Nothing but Psi could detect that. You had a TK there with
you. Admit it."

"Never," I said. "How did you spot it in your courtroom? If I needed a
TK, so did you. What about that?"

"That was different," he argued. "I had the--"

"Nuts," I told him. "Just because I have made as much of a study of
Psi as you have, don't blackball me. You going to act the same way if
I decide to specialize in Stigma cases?"

"Are you going to?"

"What else is left? I'll never get Normal trade after Renner finishes
with me. I come back to it: A reputable attorney representing Psis."

Passarelli paused with his hand on the door. "It would have some
interest, I guess," he conceded, "if I thought for a moment you could
guarantee the behavior of your clients. But no Normal can, Maragon.
That's the curse of the Logan Stigma. Normals are panicked by it. Look
at the Bar Association and all the trouble that's gone to just to make
sure no one with the Stigma is ever admitted to the Bar. Look at those
pathetic social workers--trying to control what they can't even
perceive. The color-blind man trying to make sure no one else sees
red. No, only Psis will ever be able to make Psis behave. They will
have to police themselves, and society is unwilling to give them any
standing to do it. This I believe is called a dilemma."

"It's a mess, that's for sure," I said gloomily as he left.

Well, what do you do when the props have been pulled out from under
your world? I like to believe that the reasonable man sits down and
thinks. That's what I did, anyway. I was a guy with very little left
to lose. It was time I bet the limit--shot my wad. There was one
possibility....

I looked at my watch. It was well after one in the morning. Still, I
tried Elmer's place again. He came sleepily to the phone.

"Mary there?"

"Of course not."

"Keys?"

"What if he is?"

"Put him on."

There was a delay, but Keys' romantic good looks replaced Elmer's
left-tackle belligerence. "What now?" he asked.

"Do you know where Mary is?" I started.

"Maybe."

"She tell you I'm her attorney?"

"Yes."

"I just found out that she's in twice the trouble I thought before.
The kid's a pawn in a fight for power between political oppositions.
They'll crucify her gladly, without respect to the merits of the case.
Too much is riding on it for justice to wind up triumphant."

"That's what I thought," he said. "She stays under cover."

"Think it over," I suggested. "I'm going to bed, but I'm leaving my
door unlocked--at my apartment. Dig her up, if you start making any
sense, and both of you beat it over here. Before dawn. Do you hear
me?"

[Illustration]

"Oh, I hear you," he said sourly. "I just don't know whether to trust
you."

"We all have the same trouble," I said, cutting the image.

       *       *       *       *       *

They showed up about three o'clock. I hadn't been able to go back to
sleep--feeling almost sure Keys would bring her there--and had spent
the time with the weights. I was back to strength. The surprise was
that Elmer came with them. Well, perhaps it was a help.

Nobody wanted a drink. Mary looked around the apartment a little--it
is a nice place, restful and homey, if you can ever achieve that in an
apartment fifty floors up.

"A Psi decorated this place," she said. Well, she was right, and I
admitted it to her with a nod. "What couldn't wait until morning,
Maragon?" she asked me.

"First, Mary, I want you to know that while you fooled Lindstrom, you
didn't fool me. You have the Stigma. Wait," I said, raising my hand as
she started to protest. "Lies won't do any longer. The chips are down.
You wouldn't even be here if the Council of the Lodge hadn't decided
it was time to protect you."

Keys took it away from her. "Lodge? What Lodge?"

"We'll come to that," I promised. "First, let's cut away the
underbrush. Yes or no. Does she have the Stigma?"

He sought out her eyes, and the way they dropped to my rug I knew that
the subterfuge was over. "Yes," he said in a strained, thin voice.
"Mary has the Stigma."

"And it is HC?"

All three of them nodded, and Mary's head came up with an odd sort of
pride. Well, she should have been proud--for all I could find out, she
was unique.

"All right," I said. "And now you can get out of my easy-chair, Elmer.
I'd like to sit there." He was obviously surprised by my bad manners.
"Get out!" I growled. "It's time you pups got used to taking orders.
You'll get your bellies full of it from now on."

"From you?" Elmer scoffed. "Ah reckon not, suh!" But he got out of the
chair, and I sat in it.

"Oh, yes you will," I said. "The Lodge will see to that."

"The Lodge again," Keys protested.

"Never heard of it, did you?" I taunted him. "Proof positive that
you're small potatoes in Stigma circles. Well, get set for a shock: I
represent an organization of Psis--an organization devoted to
protecting Stigma cases from Normal society, an organization devoted
to establishing discipline among Psis so that our conflicts with
Normals are kept to a reasonable minimum."

"And you call this a Lodge?" Mary Hall said. "What's its full name?"

"No other," I said. "It's ... well, it's a sort of benevolent and
protective order. It's as secret as Psis can make anything--a select
group."

"I'll bet," Keys sneered. "No TP's in it," he said, reminding me that
telepaths can't close their minds to the peeping of other TP's.

"Unfortunately, none," I agreed. "We are getting ready, however, to
extend membership beyond the TK's, CV's and HC's who are now
enrolled."

"I don't believe it," Mary said. "There aren't any other
hallucinators!"

"None foolish enough to reveal it," I conceded. "You had to louse us
up there--I wonder if any other Stigma power is as feared by Normals?
Certainly they're making a Roman circus over you."

Elmer stood up. "Ah've had enough," he said.

"One thing," I said to him. "The Lodge has a rule that no Psi may use
his powers to the detriment of a Normal, or reveal the existence of
the Lodge. Our discipline is formidable, Elmer. Remember what I say."

       *       *       *       *       *

Keys was frowning in thought. "Wait a minute, Elmer," he said. "Let me
try this one on him for size." He turned to me. "Are you trying to
tell me that you are a part of this Lodge, Maragon?"

"I'm their counsel," I said.

"A Normal?" he demanded. "It would make sense for Psis to get
together--I've often wondered why it has never worked out more
formally than it has. But to trust a Normal to represent them? Never!"

I grinned at him. "Know any attorneys with the Stigma?" I demanded. "I
know darned well you don't. The Bar Association screens every would-be
lawyer from the moment he enters law school. No, sir. The Lodge had no
choice. They picked on me as an attorney sympathetic with Stigma
Troubles, and trustworthy."

"You make it sound good," Keys admitted. "But then I know you are a
liar." He looked over at Mary Hall. "Although you can prove different
if you're able."

I raised an eyebrow at him.

"Tell me how you knew Mary hadn't used sleight of hand in Lindstrom's
laboratory," he demanded.

There was nothing I could say. I bit down on my teeth. Well, I had
decided to shoot the wad if I had to. He'd called my bet.

"I'll tell you, Maragon," he said. "I hate to admit it of a skunk like
you, but you've got the Stigma. You kept a TK grip on those bills she
shuffled. Her hallucination is too good for you not to think it was
sleight of hand."

"No!" Mary shrieked.

"Not him!" Elmer said.

I stood up to face them. "Yes," I said. "I _do_ have the Stigma. The
only lie was that I was the Lodge's counsel. I'm not."

"What then?" Keys demanded.

"I'm Grand Master of the Manhattan Chapter," I told him. "And you,
like every Psi who is made aware of the existence of the Lodge, are
now subject to my orders."

"Not me," Elmer said. "You ain't got the Stigma."

I fired a lift at an ashtray on the table beside him, and it sailed in
an arc toward the kitchen and crashed against the wall. My TK was
certainly a lot better than it had been in the morning. Well, I'd
spent an hour or so warming up before they had come in.

"_Who_ hasn't got the Stigma?" I said.

He looked at Keys. "You didn't do that," he said. "You _couldn't_!"

Keys was openmouthed. "What a bruiser!" he marveled.

"So I've got the Stigma, Elmer," I said quietly. "Now why won't you do
what I tell you?"

"Ah don't do what _anybody_ tells me!"

"What do you hate and fear the most?" I asked him.

"Snakes, ah reckon," he decided.

"Show him a snake, Mary," I said. Her face twisted in indecision. I
rammed a lift in under her heart--I know it hurt her. "Show him!" I
snapped.

Elmer didn't jump more than three feet. Mary gave all of us the same
hallucination. Her first try was a pretty sad kind of a snake, but it
was bigger than the nine-by-twelve rug it squirmed on, and was making
right for Elmer's legs, hissing in a horrible fashion.

"Enough," I said. "That's how, Elmer. And if that doesn't trouble you,
how about this?" I gave him a sample of what TK means when it's
clamped on the mitral valve. A heart attack is no joking matter, and
just before he hit the deck I eased off.

"Now," I said, "will you do what I tell you, or do I have to kill you
outright?"

He sank down to his knees, resting his palms on the carpet so recently
vacant of illusory snake. "Yo' got me convinced, suh," he admitted.
"No mo', you hear?"

"Any more protests?" I said. I got none. "Here's what we have to do,"
I went on, and spelled it out for them. At last they were ready to go,
three shaken young people. "I repeat--absolute secrecy--none of you is
a telepath, so only your lips can give you away if you keep your
thoughts screened around TP's. Later that may change--the Lodge is
preparing to come a little more into the open with Psis."

My whole membership nodded and left me. I was shaking from head to
foot.

       *       *       *       *       *

We had things to do in the forenoon, and I didn't try to see His Honor
Judge Vito Passarelli until after lunch. But the docket was crowded,
and there was no chance until after court had adjourned, which was
well on toward four o'clock. His Honor was hanging his robes on a
clothes-tree as I came into his Chambers, and he nodded me politely to
a chair, just as if our last words hadn't been pretty heated.

"Mary Hall?" he asked, fumbling around to find his in-Chambers
glasses. He's too vain to wear them on the bench.

I nodded an answer to his question as he came back to take a creaky
horse-hair swivel, relic of more judges and years than I like to think
about. "I'm here as her counsel," I said.

"What else?" he asked mildly, taking the lid off a big humidor on his
desk and starting to fill a pipe.

"We'd like you to know that Mary has joined an organization that
should do for her all that the social workers would like to see done
for her. She's no longer a behavior problem for Normal society."

"Quite some organization," he said, showing interest. "What one?"

"It has no formal name," I said. "Being a secret organization. In
point of fact, it's an organization of Psis that is revealing itself
for the first time."

"Odd that I never heard of it," Passarelli said, looking at his
fingernails. He puffed smoke around the stem of his pipe. His coolness
bothered me. He should have been much more excited about what I was
saying. I threw my high hard one.

"This organization exercises a formidable discipline over its
members," I went on. "One of its firm rules is that no Psi may use his
powers to the detriment of a Normal."

He chuckled softly. "You're taking advantage of what I told you
yesterday, Maragon," he said calmly. "You know, and I know, that Psis
have never done any such thing. And if they had, why would they pick
you to run their errands? What Psi would ever trust a Normal?"

It was getting sticky. I was skating perilously close to the
brink--once I revealed to a Normal that I had the Stigma, my days as
an attorney were done. "This organization--I'll call it the Lodge, if
I may--has to have an attorney to represent it in Court. And you know
as well as I do they can't hire a Psi attorney--the Bar Association
has taken care of that. They came to me because...."

"Yes, yes," he interrupted, taking his eyes off his nails, and showing
some real interest at last. "If you only knew how much I want to
believe you, Maragon. But I will never believe that Psis would permit
themselves to be represented by a Normal. Too bad, but the social
workers, and not your mythical Lodge, will get Mary Hall. That or a
Federal Grand Jury."

Well, this was the fork in the road, I had been kidding myself, and
now I knew it. Persist in my masquerade as a Normal, and I'd never get
Mary off the hook. But reveal myself as a Psi, and I was through as an
attorney. It really wasn't much of a decision--I had made it when I
revealed myself to Keys, Mary and Elmer.

I looked at the humidor of tobacco on his desk. Without changing
expression, I aimed a lift at it. The container came up smoothly from
the polished walnut and hovered in the air before us.

Passarelli looked at it blandly. I don't think anything in my life has
ever been a greater shock than his unconcern. He should have dropped
his teeth. Slowly I let the lift break, and lowered the humidor to his
desk.

"Fairly good TK, if that's all you're capable of," Passarelli said.
"Or can you do better, Maragon?"

"You slimy Normal!" I exploded. "You _tricked_ me into exposing
myself!"

"What am I, an idiot?" he snapped. "I had to know."

I stood up. "Until now, I never really hated Normals," I began.

"Oh, sit down, for Heaven's sake," he said testily. "Now don't get
emotional and lose all your perspective. Doesn't it occur to you that
there's been just too much coincidence in this whole thing?"

I think the word for it is "collapsed." I fell back into my chair.
"You'll have to spell it out," I said.

       *       *       *       *       *

Passarelli leaned forward, his face concentrated, almost angry. "You
have the Stigma, you admit it?"

"Of course I admit it."

"You think any other attorney is a Psi?"

"No. I certainly do not. It's only a miracle that I ever got through
the screening and made it."

"And yet you, the only attorney with the Stigma, gets tapped to be
Public Defender for a Stigma case--Keys Crescas. Doesn't this strike
you as more than coincidence can account for?"

"Now it does," I admitted. "Are you trying to tell me...."

"I'm telling you I've been suspicious of you for a long time, Pete,"
Passarelli said. "Perhaps you didn't know it, but I was one of the
young attorneys on the Committee from the Bar Association that checked
your heredity. No, you were born in San Francisco. No, your parents
didn't live in the Logan Ring--their home was in Sausalito. But--the
day that neutron bomb was accidentally fired and started the rash of
Psi mutations in the ring outside the fatal area centering on Logan,
your parents were in a jet airliner. I found that out--and kept my
mouth shut. I never told the rest of the Committee that on the 19th of
April in '75 that jet was over Iowa, en route to San Francisco, and
possibly close enough to Logan for its passengers to have been
affected by the neutron spray. Even then I knew the law was painting
itself into a corner with its attitude toward Psi. I hoped. I hoped
you _did_ have the Stigma, and I've waited my time to force you into
the open."

"Stinking Normal!"

"Stop acting like a child. I said I _hoped_!"

"Hoped?"

"Yes. I meant what I said about wishing there were a responsible
organization of Psis we could turn to. Are you serious about this
organization, this Lodge?"

"I guess I am," I said, shaken.

"How many members does it have?"

"It's a secret organization," I protested.

"How many members?"

"Four, including me."

He shrugged. "You start somewhere. Mostly with a man you can trust,
and I trust you, Maragon. You can keep this girl in line?"

"Our discipline is formidable," I reminded him, trying a grin. It was
pretty sick.

"I'll bet," he grinned back. "Well, it had better be, for I'm going to
take a chance on you. Sooner or later the law will have to admit the
existence of Psi. I know as well as you Stigma cases that this gene is
dominant--that there'll be more Psis every generation. We've got to
find some common ground between the two societies--some way to get
along. Give me your personal surety in this Mary Hall thing. As an
attorney, you're an officer of the Court, and I guess I have the
right to make her your responsibility. I certainly don't want it
getting out that I'm playing footsie with an organization of
Psis--this is an elective office, after all."

"After all," I agreed. "But I am glad to hear you sounding like a
politician again."

"We'll have to keep our dealings off the record," Passarelli insisted.
"But if I thought I could call on you when we get one of these sticky
Psi cases before the Courts...."

You'd recruit for the Lodge, I thought to myself. "You've got yourself
a deal, Your Honor!" I said fervently.

"Call it a _modus vivendi_," he smiled. "Now my big problem is to find
a way to eat my words, and let the 99th National Bank accept
restitution of what Mary Hall stole from them."

"No sweat," I grinned, beginning to feel better. "It's already been
done."

"Done? How could it be? I told the bank not to...."

"You told them," I conceded. "But they had no choice, Your Honor. Mary
Hall went to the 99th National Bank this morning and asked for change
of a five dollar bill."

"What!"

"And passed to the teller a hundred dollar bill. After all HC works
both ways. They've got their money back. By noon they had half a dozen
IBM technicians in there trying to figure why they were out of
balance!"

THE END

       *       *       *       *       *






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Modus Vivendi, by Gordon Randall Garrett

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MODUS VIVENDI ***

***** This file should be named 30311.txt or 30311.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/0/3/1/30311/

Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
