Project Gutenberg's Fifty Per Cent Prophet, by Gordon Randall Garrett

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Fifty Per Cent Prophet

Author: Gordon Randall Garrett

Illustrator: Schoenherr

Release Date: October 25, 2009 [EBook #30337]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FIFTY PER CENT PROPHET ***




Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net








                         Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from Analog Science Fact & Fiction September
    1961. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the
    U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.



                                FIFTY

                               PER CENT

                               PROPHET


                         By DARREL T. LANGART


     _That he was a phony Swami was beyond doubt. That he was a
      genuine prophet, though, seemed ... but then, what's the
      difference between a dictator and a true prophet? So was
      he...._


                      Illustrated by Schoenherr

       *       *       *       *       *




Dr. Joachim sat in the small room behind his reception hall and held
his fingers poised above the keys of the rather creaky electrotyper on
his desk. The hands seemed to hang there, long, slender, and pale,
like two gulls frozen suddenly in their long swoop towards some
precious tidbit floating on the writhing sea beneath, ready to begin
their drop instantly, as soon as time began again.

All of Dr. Joachim's body seemed to be held in that same stasis. Only
his lips moved as he silently framed the next sentence in his mind.

Physically, the good doctor could be called a big man: he was
broad-shouldered and well-muscled, but, hidden as his body was beneath
the folds of his blue, monkish robe, only his shortness of stature was
noticeable. He was only fifty-four, but the pale face, the full,
flowing beard, and the long white hair topped by a small blue skullcap
gave him an ageless look, as though centuries of time had flowed over
him to leave behind only the marks of experience and wisdom.

The timelessness of an idealized Methuselah as he approached his ninth
centennial, the God-given wisdom engraved on the face of Moses as he
came down from Sinai, the mystic power of mighty Merlin as he softly
intoned a spell of albamancy, all these seemed to have been blended
carefully together and infused into the man who sat behind the typer,
composing sentences in his head.

Those gull-hands swooped suddenly to the keyboard, and the aged
machine clattered rapidly for nearly a minute before Dr. Joachim
paused again to consider his next words.

A bell tinkled softly.

Dr. Joachim's brown eyes glanced quickly at the image on the
black-and-white TV screen set in the wall. It was connected to the
hidden camera in his front room, and showed a woman entering his front
door. He sighed and rose from his seat, adjusting his blue robes
carefully before he went to the door that led into the outer room.

He'd rather hoped it was a client, but--

"Hello, Susan, my dear," he said in a soft baritone, as he stepped
through the door. "What seems to be the trouble?"

It wasn't the same line that he'd have used with a client. You don't
ask a mark questions; you tell him. To a mark, he'd have said: "Ah,
you are troubled." It sounds much more authoritative and all-knowing.

But Cherrie Tart--_née_ Sue Kowalski--was one of the best strippers on
the Boardwalk. Her winters were spent in Florida or Nevada or Puerto
Rico, but in summer she always returned to King Frankie's _Golden
Surf_, for the summer trade at Coney Island. She might be a big name
in show business now, but she had never forgotten her carny
background, and King Frankie, in spite of the ultra-ultra tone of the
_Golden Surf_, still stuck to the old Minsky traditions.

The worried look on her too-perfect face had been easily visible in
the TV screen, but it had been replaced by a bright smile as soon as
she had heard Dr. Joachim opening the door. The smile flickered for a
moment, then she said: "Gee, Doc; you give a girl the creepy feeling
that you really _can_ read her mind."

Dr. Joachim merely smiled. Susan might be with it, but a good mitt man
doesn't give away _all_ his little secrets. He had often wished that
he could really read minds--he had heard rumors of men who could--but
a little well-applied psychology is sometimes just as good.

"So how's everything been, Doc?" She smiled her best stage
smile--every tooth perfect in that perfect face, her hair framing the
whole like a perfect golden helmet. She looked like a girl in her
early twenties, but Dr. Joachim knew for a fact that she'd been born
in 1955, which made her thirty-two next January.

"Reasonably well, all things considered," Dr. Joachim admitted. "I'm
not starving to death, at least."

She looked around at the room--the heavy drapes, the signs of the
zodiac in gold and silver, the big, over-stuffed chairs, all designed
to make the "clients" feel comfortable and yet slightly awed by the
ancient atmosphere of mysticism. In the dim light, they looked fairly
impressive, but she knew that if the lights were brighter the
shabbiness would show.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Maybe you could use a redecorating job, then, Doc," she said. With a
gesture born of sudden impulse, she reached into her purse and pulled
out an envelope and pressed it into the man's hands. He started to
protest, but she cut him off. "No, Doc; I want you to have it. You
earned it.

"That San Juan-New York flight, remember?" she went on hurriedly. "You
said not to take it, remember? Well, I ... I sort of forgot about what
you'd said. You know. Anyway, I got a ticket and was ready to go when
the flight was suddenly delayed. Routine, they said. Checking the
engines. But I'd never heard of any such routine as that. I remembered
what you told me, Doc, and I got scared.

"After an hour, they put another plane into service; they were still
working on the other one. I was still worried, so I decided to wait
till the next day.

"I guess you read what happened."

He closed his eyes and nodded slowly. "I read."

"Doc, I'd've been on that flight if you hadn't warned me. All the
money in the world isn't enough to pay for that." The oddly worried
look had come back into her eyes. "Doc, I don't know how you knew that
ship was going to go, and I won't ask. I don't want to know. But, ...
one thing: Was it _me_ they were after?"

_She thinks someone blew up the ship_, he thought. _She thinks I heard
about the plot some way._ For an instant he hesitated, then:

"No, Susan; they weren't after you. No one was trying to kill you.
Don't worry about it."

Relief washed over her face. "O.K., Doc; if you say so. Look, I've got
to run now, but we've got to sit down and have a few drinks together,
now that I'm back. And ... Doc--"

"Yes?"

"Anytime you need anything--if I can ever help you--you let me know,
huh?"

"Certainly, my dear. And don't you worry about anything. The stars are
all on your side right now."

She smiled, patted his hand, and then was gone in a flash of gold and
honey. Dr. Joachim looked at the door that had closed behind her, then
he looked down at the envelope in his hands. He opened it gently and
took out the sheaf of bills. Fifteen hundred dollars!

He smiled and shoved the money into his pocket. After all, he _was_ a
professional fortuneteller, even if he didn't like that particular
label, and he _had_ saved her life, hadn't he?

He returned to the small back room, sat down again at the typer, and,
after a minute, began typing again.

When he was finished, he addressed an envelope and put the letter
inside.

It was signed with his legal name: _Peter J. Forsythe_.

       *       *       *       *       *

It required less than two hours for that letter to end up at its
destination in a six-floor brick building, a rather old-fashioned
affair that stood among similar structures in a lower-middle-class
section of Arlington, Virginia, hardly a hop-skip-and-jump from the
Pentagon, and not much farther from the Capitol.

The letter was addressed to _Mr. J. Harlan Balfour, President, The
Society for Mystical and Metaphysical Research, Inc._, but Mr. Balfour
was not at the Society's headquarters at the time, having been called
to Los Angeles to address a group who were awaiting the Incarnation of
God.

Even if he had been there, the letter wouldn't have reached him first.
All mail was sent first to the office of the Executive Secretary, Mr.
Brian Taggert. Most of it--somewhat better than ninety-nine per
cent--went directly on to Mr. Balfour's desk, if it was so addressed;
Brian Taggert would never have been so cruel as to deprive Mr. Balfour
of the joy of sorting through the thousands of crackpot letters in
search of those who had the true spark of mysticism which so
fascinated Mr. Balfour.

Mr. Balfour was a crackpot, and it was his job to take care of other
crackpots--a job he enjoyed immensely and wholeheartedly, feeling, as
he did, that that sort of thing was the only reason for the Society's
existence. Of course, Mr. Balfour never considered himself or the
others in the least bit crackpottish, in which he was just as much in
error as he was in his assumption of the Society's _raison d'être_.

Ninety per cent of the members of the Society for Mystical and
Metaphysical Research were just what you would expect them to be.
Anyone who was "truly interested in the investigation of the
supranormal", as the ads in certain magazines put it, could pay five
dollars a year for membership, which, among other things, entitled
him to the Society's monthly magazine, _The Metaphysicist_, a
well-printed, conservative-looking publication which contained
articles on everything from the latest flying saucer report to careful
mathematical evaluations of the statistical methods of the Rhine
Foundation. Within its broad field, the magazine was quite catholic in
its editorial policy.

These members constituted a very effective screen for the real work of
the society, work carried on by the "core" members, most of whom
weren't even listed on the membership rolls. And yet, it was this
group of men and women who made the Society's title true.

Mr. Brian Taggert was a long way from being a crackpot. The big,
dark-haired, dark-eyed, hawknosed man sat at his desk in his office on
the fifth floor of the Society's building and checked over the mail.
Normally, his big wrestler's body was to be found quietly relaxed on
the couch that stood against a nearby wall. Not that he was in any way
averse to action; he simply saw no virtue in purposeless action. Nor
did he believe in the dictum of Miles Standish; if he wanted a thing
done, he sent the man most qualified to do it, whether that was
himself or someone else.

When he came to the letter from Coney Island, New York, he read it
quickly and then jabbed at a button on the intercom switchboard in his
desktop. He said three syllables which would have been meaningless to
anyone except the few who understood that sort of verbal shorthand,
released the button, and closed his eyes, putting himself in
telepathic contact with certain of the Society's agents in New York.

       *       *       *       *       *

Across the river, in the Senate Office Building, a telephone rang in
the office of Senator Mikhail Kerotski, head of the Senate Committee
on Space Exploration. It was an unlisted, visionless phone, and the
number was known only to a very few important officials in the United
States Government, so the senator didn't bother to identify himself;
he simply said: "Hello." He listened for a moment, said, "O.K., fine,"
in a quiet voice, and cut the connection.

He sat behind his desk for a few minutes longer, a bearlike man with a
round, pale face and eyes circled with dark rings and heavy pouches,
all of which had the effect of making him look like a rather sleepy
specimen of the giant panda. He finished the few papers he had been
working on, stacked them together, rose, and went into the outer
office, where he told his staff that he was going out for a short
walk.

By the time he arrived at the brownstone building in Arlington and was
pushing open the door of Brian Taggert's office, Taggert had received
reports from New York and had started other chains of action. As soon
as Senator Kerotski came in, Taggert pushed the letter across the desk
toward him. "Check that."

Kerotski read the letter, and a look of relief came over his round
face. "Not the same typewriter or paper, but this is him, all right.
What more do we know?"

"Plenty. Hold on, and I'll give you a complete rundown." He picked up
the telephone and began speaking in a low voice. It was an
ordinary-sounding conversation; even if the wire had been tapped, no
one who was not a "core" member of the S.M.M.R. would have known that
the conversation was about anything but an esoteric article to be
printed in _The Metaphysicist_--something about dowsing rods.

The core membership had one thing in common: _understanding_.

Consider plutonium. Imagine someone dropping milligram-sized pellets
of the metal into an ordinary Florence flask. (In an inert atmosphere,
of course; there is no point in ruining a good analogy with side
reactions.) More than two and a half million of those little pellets
could be dropped into the flask without the operator having anything
more to worry about than if he were dropping grains of lead or gold
into the container. But after the five millionth, dropping them in by
hand would only be done by the ignorant, the stupid, or the
indestructible. A qualitative change takes place.

So with understanding. As a human mind increases its ability to
understand another human mind, it eventually reaches a critical point,
and the mind itself changes. And, at that point, the Greek letter
_psi_ ceases to be a symbol for the unknown.

When understanding has passed the critical point, conversation as it
is carried on by most human beings becomes unnecessarily redundant.
Even in ordinary conversation, a single gesture--a shrug of the
shoulders, a snap of the fingers, or a nose pinched between thumb and
forefinger--can express an idea that would take many words and much
more time. A single word--"slob," "nazi," "saint"--can be more
descriptive than the dozens of words required to define it. All that
is required is that the meanings of the symbols be understood.

The ability to manipulate symbols is the most powerful tool of the
human mind; a mind which can manipulate them _effectively_ is, in
every sense of the word, truly human.

Even without telepathy, it was possible for two S.M.M.R. agents to
carry on a conversation above and around ordinary chit-chat. It took
longer, naturally; when speaking without the chit-chat, it was
possible to convey in seconds information that would have taken
several minutes to get over in ordinary conversation.

       *       *       *       *       *

Senator Kerotski only listened to a small part of the phone
discussion. He knew most of the story.

In the past eight months, six anonymous letters had been received by
various companies. As Taggert had once put it, in quotes, "We seem to
have an Abudah chest containing a patent Hag who comes out and
prophesies disasters, with spring complete."

The Big Bend Power Reactor, near Marfa, Texas, had been warned that
their stellarator would blow. The letter was dismissed as "crackpot,"
and no precautions were taken. The explosion killed nine men and cut
off the power in the area for three hours, causing other accidents due
to lack of power.

The merchant submarine _Bandar-log_, plying her way between Ceylon and
Japan, had ignored the warning sent to her owners and had never been
heard from again.

In the Republic of Yemen, an oil refinery caught fire and destroyed
millions of dollars worth of property in spite of the anonymous letter
that had foretold the disaster.

The Prince Charles Dam in Central Africa had broken and thousands had
drowned because those in charge had relegated a warning letter to the
cylindrical file.

A mine cave-in in Canada had extinguished three lives because a
similar letter had been ignored.

By the time the fifth letter had been received, the S.M.M.R. had
received the information and had begun its investigation. As an _ex
officio_ organ of the United States Government, it had ways and means
of getting hold of the originals of the letters which had been
received by the responsible persons in each of the disasters. All had
been sent by the same man; all had been typed on the same machine; all
had been mailed in New York.

When the sixth warning had come to the offices of Caribbean Trans-Air,
the S.M.M.R., working through the FBI, had persuaded the company's
officials to take the regularly scheduled aircraft off the run and
substitute another while the regular ship was carefully inspected. But
it was the replacement ship that came to pieces in midair.

The anonymous predictor, whoever he was, was a man of no mean ability.

Then letter number seven had been received by the United States
Department of Space. It predicted that a meteor would smash into
America's Moonbase One, completely destroying it.

Finally, a non-anonymous letter had come to the S.M.M.R. requesting
admission to the society, enclosing the proper fee. The letter also
said that the writer was interested in literature on the subjects of
prescience, precognition, and/or prophecy, and would be interested in
contacting anyone who had had experience with such phenomena.

Putting two and two together only yields four, no matter how often
it's done, but two to the eighth power gives a nice, round two hundred
fifty-six, which is something one can sink one's teeth into.

Brian Taggert cut off the phone connection. "That's it, Mike," he said
to the senator. "We've got him."

Two of the Society's agents, both top-flight telepaths, had gone out
to "Dr. Joachim's" place on Coney Island's Boardwalk, posing as
customers--"clients" was the word Dr. Joachim preferred--and had done
a thorough probing job.

"He's what might be called a perfectly sincere fraud," Taggert
continued. "You know the type I'm sure."

The senator nodded silently. The woods were full of that kind of
thing. Complete, reliable control of any kind of psionic power
requires understanding and sanity, but the ability lies dormant in
many minds that cannot control it, and it can and does burst forth
erratically at times. Finding a physical analogy for the phenomenon is
difficult, since mental activities are, of necessity, of a higher
order than physical activities.

Some of the operations of tensor calculus have analogs in algebra;
many do not.

       *       *       *       *       *

Taggert gestured with one hand. "He's been in business there for
years. Evidently, he's been able to make a few accurate predictions
now and then--enough to keep his reputation going. He's tried to
increase the frequency, accuracy, and detail of his 'flashes' by
studying up on the techniques used by other seers, and, as a result,
he's managed to soak up enough mystic balderdash to fill a library.

"He embellishes every one of his predictions to his 'clients' with all
kinds of hokum, and he's been doing it so long that he really isn't
sure how much of any prediction is truth and how much is embroidery
work.

"The boys are trying to get more information on him now, and they're
going to do a little deep probing, if they can get him set up right;
maybe they'll be able to trigger off another flash on that
moon-hit--but I doubt it."

Senator Kerotski thumbed his chin morosely. "You're probably right.
Apparently, once those hunches come to a precog, they get everything
in a flash and then they can't get another thing--ever. I wish we
could get our hands on one who was halfway along toward _the_ point.
We've got experts on psychokinetics, levitation, telepathy,
clairvoyance, and what-have-you. But precognition we don't seem to be
able to find."

"We've got one now," Brian Taggert reminded him.

The senator snorted. "Even assuming that we had any theory on
precognition completely symbolized, and assuming that this Forsythe
has the kind of mind that can be taught, do you think we could get it
done in a month? Because that's all the time we have."

"He's our first case," Taggert admitted. "We'll have to probe
everything out of him and construct symbol-theory around what we get.
I'll be surprised if we get anywhere at all in the first six months."

Senator Kerotski put his hand over his eyes. "I give up. First the
Chinese Soviet kidnaps Dr. Ch'ien and we have to scramble like maniacs
to get him back before they find out that he's building a space drive
that will make the rocket industry obsolete. Then we have to find out
what's causing the rash of accidents that is holding up Dr. Theodore
Nordred's antigravity project. And now, just as everything is coming
to a head in both departments, we find that a meteor is going to hit
Moonbase One sometime between thirty and sixty days from now." He
spread apart the middle and ring fingers of the hand that covered his
eyes and looked at Taggert through one eye. "And now you tell me that
the only man who can pinpoint that time more exactly for us is of no
use whatever to us. If we knew when that meteor was due to arrive, we
would be able to spot and deflect it in time. It must be of pretty
good size if it's going to demolish the whole base."

"How do you know it's going to be a meteor?"

"You think the Soviets would try to bomb it? Don't be silly, Taggert,"
Kerotski said, grinning.

Taggert grinned back. "I'm not thinking they'd bomb us; but I'm trying
to look at all the angles."

The worried look came back to the senator's pandalike face. "We have
to do something. If only we _knew_ that Forsythe's prediction will
really come off. Or, if it will, then exactly _when_? And is there
anything we can do about it, or will it be like the airline incident.
If we hadn't made them switch planes, nothing would have happened.
What if, no matter what we do, Moonbase One goes anyway?

"Remember, we haven't yet built Moonbase Two. If our only base on the
moon is destroyed, the Soviets will have the whole moon to themselves.
Have you any suggestions?"

"Sure," said Taggert. "Ask yourself one question: What is the purpose
of Moonbase One?"

Slowly, a beatific smile spread itself over the senator's face.

[Illustration]

The whole discussion had taken exactly ninety seconds.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Mrs. Jesser," said Brian Taggert to the well-rounded, fortyish woman
behind the reception desk at S.M.M.R. headquarters, "this is Dr.
Forsythe. He has established a reputation as one of the finest seers
living today."

Mrs. Jesser looked at the distinguished, white-bearded gentleman with
an expression that was almost identical with the one her grandmother
had worn when she met Rudolph Valentino, nearly sixty years before,
and the one her mother had worn when she saw Frank Sinatra a
generation later. It was not an uncommon expression for Mrs. Jesser's
face to wear: it appeared every time she was introduced to anyone who
looked impressive and was touted as a great mystic of one kind or
another.

"I'm _so_ glad to _meet_ you, Dr. Forsythe!" she burbled eagerly.

"Dr. Forsythe will be working for us for the next few months--his
office will be Room B on the fourth floor," Taggert finished. He was
genuinely fond of the woman, in spite of her mental dithers and
schoolgirl mannerisms. Mysticism fascinated her, and she was firmly
convinced that she had "just a _weenie_ bit" of psychic power herself,
although its exact nature seemed to change from time to time. But she
did both her jobs well, although she was not aware of her double
function. She thought she was being paid as a receptionist and phone
operator, and she was quick and efficient about her work. She was also
the perfect screen for the Society's real work, for if anyone ever
suspected that the S.M.M.R. was not the group of crackpots that it
appeared to be, five minutes talking with Mrs. Jesser would convince
them otherwise.

"Oh, you're _staying_ with us, Dr. Forsythe? How wonderful! We simply
_must_ have a talk sometime!"

"Indeed we must, dear lady," said Forsythe. His voice and manner had
just the right amount of benign dignity, with an almost indetectable
touch of pompous condescending.

"Come along, doctor; I'll show you to your office." Taggert's face
betrayed nothing of the enjoyment he was getting out of watching the
mental gymnastics of the two. Forsythe and Mrs. Jesser were similar in
some ways, but, of the two, Mrs. Jesser was actually the more honest.
She only fooled herself; she never tried to fool anyone else.
Forsythe, on the other hand, tried to put on a front for others, and,
in doing so, had managed to delude himself pretty thoroughly.

Taggert's humor was not malicious; he was not laughing at them. He was
admiring the skill of the human mind in tying itself in knots. When
one watches a clever contortionist going through his paces, one
doesn't laugh at the contortionist; one admires and enjoys the weird
twists he can get himself into. And, like Taggert, one can only feel
sympathy for one whose knots have become so devious and intricate that
he can never extricate himself.

"Just follow me up the stairs," Taggert said. "I'll show you where
your office is. Sorry we don't have an elevator, but this old building
just wasn't built for it, and we've never had any real need for one."

"Perfectly all right," Forsythe said, following along behind.

_Three weeks!_

Taggert had to assume that the minimum time prediction was the
accurate one. Damn! Why couldn't this last prediction have been as
precise as the one about the air flight from Puerto Rico?

It had taken six days for the "accredited" agents of the S.M.M.R. to
persuade Dr. Peter Forsythe that he should leave his little place on
the Boardwalk and come down to Arlington to work. It isn't easy to
persuade a man to leave a business that he's built up over a long
period of years, especially during the busy season. To leave the
Boardwalk during the summer would, as far as Forsythe was concerned,
be tantamount to economic suicide. He had to be offered not only an
income better than the one he was making, but better security as well.
At fifty-four, one does not lightly throw over the work of a lifetime.

Still, he had plenty of safeguards. The rent was paid on his Boardwalk
office, he had a guaranteed salary while he was working, and a
"research bonus," designed to keep him working until the Society was
finished with that phase of its work.

It's rather difficult for a man to resist the salesmanship of a
telepath who knows exactly what his customer wants and, better, what
he needs.

       *       *       *       *       *

On the fourth floor, there were sounds of movement, the low staccato
chatter of typers, occasional bits of conversation, and the hum of
electronic equipment.

Forsythe was impressed, though not a line on his face showed it. The
office to which he had been assigned was lined with electronic
calculators, and his name had already been put on the door in gold. It
was to his credit that he was impressed by the two factors in that
order.

In the rear of the room, two technicians were working on an open panel
in one of the units. Nearby, a dark-haired, dark-eyed, maturely
handsome woman in her early thirties was holding a clip board and
making occasional notes as the men worked. One of the men was using an
electric drill, and the whine of metal on metal drowned out the slight
noise that Taggert and Forsythe made as they entered. Only the woman
was aware that they had come in, but she didn't betray the fact.

"Miss Tedesco?" Taggert called.

She looked up from her clip board, smiled, and walked toward the two
newcomers. "Yes, Mr. Taggert?"

"'Bout done?"

"Almost. They're setting in the last component now."

Taggert nodded absently. "Miss Tedesco, this is Dr. Peter Forsythe,
whom I told you about. Dr. Forsythe, this is Miss Donna Tedesco; she's
the computer technician who will be working with you."

Miss Tedesco's smile was positively glittering. "I'm so pleased to
meet you, doctor; I know our work together will be interesting."

"I trust it will," Forsythe said, beaming. Then a faint cloud seemed to
come over his features. "I'm afraid I must confess a certain ... er ...
lack of knowledge in the realm of computerdom. Mr. Taggert attempted to
explain, but he, himself, has admitted that his knowledge of the details
is ... er ... somewhat vague."

"I'm not a computerman, myself," Taggert said, smiling. "Miss Tedesco
will be able to give you the details better than I can."

Miss Tedesco blinked. "You know the broad outline, surely? Of the
project, I mean."

"Oh, yes, certainly," Forsythe said hurriedly. "We are attempting to
determine whether the actions of human beings can actually have any
effect on the outcome of the prophecy itself. In other words, if it is
possible to avert, say, a disaster if it is foretold, or whether the
very foretelling itself assures the ultimate outcome."

The woman nodded her agreement.

"As I understand it," Forsythe continued, "we are going to get several
score clients--or, rather, _subjects_--and I am to ... uh ... exercise
my talents, just as I have been doing for many years. The results are
to be tabulated and run through the computers to see if there is any
correlation between human activity taken as a result of the forecast
and the actual foretold events themselves."

"That's right," said Miss Tedesco. She looked at Taggert. "That's what
the committee outlined, in general, isn't it?"

"In general, yes," Taggert said.

"But what about the details?" Forsythe asked doggedly. "I mean, just
how are we going to go about this? You must remember that I'm not at
all familiar with ... er ... scientific research procedures."

"Oh, we'll work all that out together," said Miss Tedesco brightly.
"You didn't think we'd plan a detailed work schedule without your
co-operation, did you?"

"Well--" Forsythe said, swelling visibly with pride, "I suppose--"

Taggert, glancing at his watch, interrupted. "I'll have to leave you
two to work out your research schedule together. I have an appointment
in a few minutes." He grasped Forsythe's hand and pumped it
vigorously. "I believe we'll get along fine, Dr. Forsythe. And I
believe our work here will be quite fruitful. Will you excuse me?"

"Certainly, Mr. Taggert. And I want to thank you for this opportunity
to do research work along these lines."

Brian Taggert thanked Forsythe and hurried out with the air of a man
with important and urgent things on his mind.

He went up the stairs to the office directly over the one he had
assigned to Forsythe and stepped in quietly. Two men were relaxed in
lounge chairs, their eyes closed.

_Meshing?_ Taggert asked wordlessly.

_Meshing._

Taggert closed the door carefully and went into his own office.

       *       *       *       *       *

General Howard Layton, USSF, looked no different from any other Space
Force officer, except that he was rather handsomer than most. He
looked as though he might have posed for recruiting posters at one
time, and, in point of fact, he had--back when he had been an ensign
in the United States Navy's Submarine Service. He was forty-nine and
looked a prematurely graying thirty.

He stood in the observation bunker at the landing area of St. Thomas
Spacefield and watched through the periscope as a heavy rocket settled
itself to the surface of the landing area. The blue-white tongue of
flame touched the surface and splattered; then the heavy ship settled
slowly down over it, as though it were sliding down a column of light.
The column of light shortened--

And abruptly vanished as the ship touched down.

General Layton took his eyes away from the periscope. "Another one
back safely. Thank God."

Nearby, the only other man in that room of the bunker, a rather short
civilian, had been watching the same scene on a closed-circuit TV
screen. He smiled up at the general. "How many loads does that make,
so far?"

"Five. We'll have the job done before the deadline time."

"Were you worried?"

"A little. I still am, to be honest. What if nothing happens at the
end of sixty days? The President isn't one of us, and he's only gone
along with the Society's recommendations so far because we've been
able to produce results. But"--he gestured outside, indicating the
newly-landed ship--"all this extra expense isn't going to set well
with him if we goof this once."

"I know," said the civilian. "But have you ever known Brian Taggert to
be wrong?"

General Layton grinned. "No. And in a lesser man, that sort of
omniscience could be infernally irritating. How is he progressing with
Forsythe?"

The civilian frowned. "We've got plenty of data so far, and the method
seems to be working well, but we don't have enough to theorize yet.

"Forsythe just sits in his office and gives 'readings,' or whatever
you want to call them, to the subjects who come in. _The
Metaphysicist_ has been running an ad asking for volunteers, so we
have all kinds of people calling up for appointments. Forsythe is as
happy as a kid."

"How about his predictions?"

"Donna Tedesco is running data processing on them. She's in constant
mental contact with him. So are Hughes and Matson, in the office
above. The three of them are meshed together with each other--don't
ask me how; I'm no telepath--and they're getting a pretty good idea of
what's going on in Forsythe's mind.

"Every once in a while, he gets a real flash of something, and it
apparently comes pretty fast. The team is trying to analyze the
fine-grain structure of the process now.

"The rest of the time, he simply gives out with the old guff that
phony crystal-ball gazers have been giving out for centuries. Even
when he gets a real flash, he piles on a lot of intuitive
extrapolation. And the farther he gets from that central flash, the
less reliable the predictions are."

"Do you think we'll get theory and symbology worked out before that
meteor is supposed to hit Moonbase One?" asked the general.

The civilian shrugged. "Who knows? We'll have to take a lot on faith
if we do, because there won't be enough time to check all his
predictions. Each subject is being given a report sheet with his
forecast on it, and he's supposed to check the accuracy of it as it
happens. And our agents are making spot checks on them just to make
sure. It'll take time. All we can do is hope."

"I suppose." General Layton took a quick look through the periscope
again. The ship's air lock still hadn't opened; the air and ground
were still too hot. He looked back at the civilian. "What about the
espionage reports?"

The civilian tapped his briefcase. "I can give it to you in a capsule,
verbally. You can look these over later."

"Shoot."

"The Soviets are getting worried, to put it bluntly. We can't hide
those rockets, you know. Their own Luna-based radar has been picking
up every one of them as they come in and leave. They're wondering why
we're making so many trips all of a sudden."

"Have they done any theorizing?" the general asked worriedly.

"They have." The civilian chuckled sardonically. "They've decided
we're trying for another Mars shot--a big one, this time."

The general exhaled sharply. "That's too close for comfort. How do
they figure?"

"They figure we're amassing material at Moonbase One. They figure we
intend to build the ship there, with the loads of stuff that we're
sending up in the rockets."

"_What?_" General Layton opened his mouth, then closed it. Then he
began to laugh.

The civilian joined him.

       *       *       *       *       *

Donna Tedesco pushed the papers across Brian Taggert's desk. "Check
them yourself, Brian. I've gone over them six ways from Septuagesima,
and I still can't see any other answer."

Taggert frowned at the papers and tapped them with a thoughtful
finger, but he didn't pick them up. "I'll take your word for it,
Donna. At least for right now. If we get completely balled up, we'll
go over them together."

"If you ask me, we've already completely balled up."

"You think it's that bad?"

She looked at him pleadingly. "Can you think of any other
explanation?"

"Not just yet," Brian Taggert admitted.

"Nor can I. There it is. Every single one of his valid predictions,
every single one of his precognitive intuitions--_without
exception_--has been based on the actions of human beings. He can
predict stock market fluctuations, and family squabbles, and South
American election results. His disaster predictions, every one of
them, were due to _human_ error, _human_ failure--not Acts of God. He
failed to predict the earthquake in Los Angeles; he missed the flood
in the Yangtze Valley; he knew nothing of the eruption of Stromboli.
All of these were disasters that took human lives in the past three
weeks, and he missed every one of them. And yet, he managed to get
nearly every major ship, airplane, and even automobile accident
connected with his subjects.

"Seven of his subjects had relatives or friends who were hurt or
killed in the earthquake-flood-eruption sequence, but he didn't see
them. Yet he could pick up such small things as a nephew of one of the
men getting a bad scald on his arm.

"In the face of that, how can we rely on his one prediction about a
meteor striking Moonbase One?"

Taggert rubbed his forehead thoughtfully. "I don't know," he said
slowly. "There must be a connection somehow."

"Oh, Brian, Brian!" Her eyes were glistening with as yet unshed tears.
"I've never seen you go off on a wild tangent like this before! On the
word of an old fraud like Forsythe, a man who lies about half the
time, you talk the Administration into sinking hundreds of millions of
dollars into the biggest space lift in history!

"Oh, sure; I know. The old fraud is convinced he was telling the
truth. But were you tapping his mind when the prediction flash came?
No! Was anyone? No! And he's perfectly capable of lying to himself,
and you know it!

"And what will happen if it doesn't come off? We're past the first
deadline already. If that meteor doesn't hit within the next
twenty-eight days, the Society will be right back where it was ten
years ago! Or worse!

"And all because you trusted the word of Mr. Phony-Doctor Forsythe!"

"Donna," Taggert said softly, "do you really think I'm that big a
fool?" He handed her a handkerchief.

"N-no," she answered, wiping at her eyes. "Of c-course I don't. It's
just that it makes me so d-darn _mad_ to see everything go wrong like
this."

"Nothing's gone wrong yet. I suggest you go take a good look at
Forsythe's mind again and really try to understand the old boy. Maybe
you'll get more of the fine-grain structure of it if you'll try for
more understanding."

"What do you mean?" she asked, sniffing.

"Look. Forsythe has made his living being a fraud, right? And yet he
sent out those warning _free_--and anonymously. He had no thought of
any reward or recompense, you know that. Why? Because he is basically
a kind, decent human being. He wanted to do all he could to stop any
injury or loss of life.

"Why, then, would he send out a fraudulent warning? He wouldn't. He
didn't. Every one of those warnings--_including the last one_--was
sent out because he _knew_ that something was going to happen.

"Evidently, once he gets a flash about a certain event, he can't get
any more data on that particular area of the future, or we could get
more data on the Moonbase accident. I think, if we can boost his basic
understanding up past the critical point, we'll have a man with
controlled prescience, and we need that man.

"But, Donna, the only way we're ever going to do that--the only way
we'll ever whip this problem--is for you to increase _your_
understanding of _him_.

"You're past the critical point--way past it--in _general_
understanding. But you've got to keep an eye on the little specific
instances, too."

She nodded contritely. "I know. I'm sorry. Sometimes a person can get
too near a problem." She smiled. "Thanks for the new perspective,
Brian. I'll go back to work and see if I can't look at it a little
more clearly."

       *       *       *       *       *

In the White House, Senator Mikhail Kerotski was facing two men--James
Bandeau, the Secretary of Space, and the President of the United
States.

"Mr. President," he said evenly, "I've known you for a long time. I
haven't failed you yet."

"I know that, Mike," the President said smoothly. "Neither has your
Society, as far as I know. It's still difficult for me to believe that
they get their information the way you say they do, but you've never
lied to me about anything so far, so I take your word for it. Your
Society is the most efficient espionage and counterespionage group in
history, as far as I know. But this is different."

"Damned right it's different!" snapped Secretary Bandeau. "Your own
Society, senator, admits that we've stirred the Soviets up with this
space lift thing. They've got ships of their own going out there now.
According to reports from Space Force intelligence, Chinese Moon cars
have been prowling around Moonbase One, trying to find out what's
going on."

"More than that," added the President, "they've sneaked a small group
aboard the old _Lunik IX_ to see what they can see from up there."

Secretary Bandeau jerked his head around to look at the President.
"The old circumlunar satellite? Where did you hear that?"

The President smiled wanly. "From the S.M.M.R.'s report." He looked at
Kerotski. "I doubt that it will do them any good. I don't think
they'll be able to see anything now."

"Not unless they've figured out some way to combine X rays with
radar," the senator said. "And I'm quite sure they haven't."

"Senator," said the Secretary of Space, "a lot of money has been spent
and a lot of risks have been taken, just on your say-so. I--"

"Now, just a minute, Jim," said the President flatly. "Let's not go
off half-cocked. It wasn't done on Mike's say-so; it was done on mine.
I signed the order because I believed it was the proper, if not the
_only_ thing to do." Then he looked at the senator. "But this is the
last day, Mike. Nothing has happened.

"Now, I'm not blaming you. I didn't call you up here to do that. And I
think we can quit worrying about explaining away the money angle. But
we're going to have to explain _why_ we did it, Mike. And I can't tell
the truth."

"I'll say you can't!" Bandeau exploded. "That would look great,
wouldn't it? I can see the headlines now: _'Fortuneteller Gave Me
Advice,' President Says_. Brother!"

"Jim," the President said coldly, "I said to let me handle this."

"What you want, then, Mr. President," Kerotski put in smoothly, "is
for me to help you concoct a good cover story."

"That's about it, Mike," the President admitted.

Kerotski shook his head slowly. "It won't be necessary."

Bandeau looked as though he were going to explode, but a glance from
the President silenced him.

"Go on, Mike," he said to the senator.

"Mr. President, I know it looks bad. It's going to look even worse for
a while. But, let me ask you one question. How is the Ch'ien space
drive coming along?"

"Why ... fine. It checked out months ago. The new ship is on her
shakedown cruise now. You know that."

"Right. Now, ask yourself one more question: What is the purpose of
Moonbase One?"

"Why, to--"

The telephone rang.

The President scooped it up with one hand. "Yes?"

Then he listened for a long minute, his expression changing slowly.

"Yes," he said at last. "Yes, I got it. No; I'll release it to the
newsmen. All right. Fine." He hung up.

"Twelve minutes ago," he said slowly, "the old _Lunik IX_ smashed
into Moonbase One and blew it to smithereens. The Soviets say that a
meteor hit _Lunik IX_ at just the right angle to slow it down enough
to make it hit the base. They send their condolences."

       *       *       *       *       *

Brian Taggert lay back on the couch in his office and folded his hands
complacently on his abdomen. "So Donna's theory held water and so did
mine. The accident was due to human intervention. Forsythe saw
something from space hitting Moonbase One and assumed it was a meteor.
He never dreamed the Soviets would drop old _Lunik IX_ on it."

Senator Kerotski carefully lit a cigar. "There's going to be an awful
lot of fuss in the papers, but the President is going to announce that
he accepts the Soviet story. I convinced him that it is best to let
the Soviets think they're a long way ahead of us in the space race
now. There's nothing like a little complacency to slow someone down."

"How'd you convince him?"

"Asked the same question you asked me. Now that we have the Ch'ien
space drive, what purpose does a moon base serve? None at all, of
course."

Donna Tadesco leaned forward in her chair. "Did you happen to notice
the sequence of events, senator? We were warned that the base would be
struck. We decided to abandon it. We organized the biggest space lift
in history to evacuate the men and the most valuable instruments. But
the Soviets thought we were sending equipment _up_ instead of bringing
it _down_. They didn't know what we were up to, but they decided to
put a stop to it, so they dropped an abandoned space satellite on it.

"If we hadn't decided to evacuate the base, it would never have
happened.

"_That_ is human intervention with a vengeance. We still don't know
whether or not Forsythe's predictions will ever do us any good or not.
Every time we've taken steps to avoid one of his prophesied
catastrophes, we've done the very thing that brought them about."

The senator puffed his cigar in thoughtful silence.

"We'll just have to keep working with him," Taggert said. "Maybe we'll
eventually make sense out of this precognition thing.

"At least we've got what we wanted. The Soviets think they've put us
back ten years; they figure they've got more time, now, to get their
own program a long ways ahead.

"When they do get to Mars and Venus and the planets of Alpha Centauri
and Sirius and Procyon, they'll find us there, waiting for them."

Senator Kerotski chuckled softly. "You're a pretty good prophet,
yourself, Brian. The only difference between you and Forsythe is that
he's right half the time.

"You're right _all_ the time."

"No," said Taggert. "Not all the time. Only when it's important."


THE END

       *       *       *       *       *







End of Project Gutenberg's Fifty Per Cent Prophet, by Gordon Randall Garrett

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FIFTY PER CENT PROPHET ***

***** This file should be named 30337-8.txt or 30337-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/0/3/3/30337/

Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
