The Project Gutenberg EBook of The One and the Many, by Milton Lesser

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The One and the Many

Author: Milton Lesser

Release Date: November 1, 2009 [EBook #30386]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ONE AND THE MANY ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









 _Only One Question Is Eternal--
 What Lies Beyond the Ultimate?_


     THE ONE
      _and_
     THE MANY

 By Milton Lesser


There are some who tell me it is a foolish war we fight. My brother told
me that, for one, back in the Sunset Country. But then, my brother is
lame and good for nothing but drawing pictures of the stars. He connects
them with lines, like a child's puzzle, and so makes star-pictures. He
has fish stars, archer stars, hunter stars. That, I would say, is what
is foolish.

Perhaps that is what started it all. I was looking at the stars, trying
to see the pictures, when I should have been minding my sentry post.
They took me like a baby, like a tot not yet given to the wearing of
clothing. The hand came out of the darkness and clamped over my mouth,
and I ceased my struggling when I felt a sharp blade pricking at the
small of my back.

At first I feared that they would slay the entire camp as it slept and I
cursed my brother for his star-pictures, cursed our leader who had sent
us here, twenty archers, against the Onist outpost on our country's
border. But the Onists had other ideas. They took me away. I had to
admire their vitality, because all night we ran through the silent
woodlands, and they seemed tireless. I could maintain their pace, of
course: but I'm a Pluralist.

I could see their village from a long way off, its night fires glowing
in the dark. It was only then that we slowed our pace. Soon we entered
the place, a roughly circular area within a stockade, and my captors
thrust me within a hut. I couldn't do much worrying about tomorrow, not
when I was so tired. I slept.

I dreamed a stupid dream about the Onist beliefs, the beliefs of an
unimaginative people who could picture one Maker and one Maker only. I
must have chuckled in my sleep.

       *       *       *       *       *

"You're awake."

A brilliant statement, that--because I had sat up, squinted into the
bright sunlight streaming in through the doorway, yawned and stretched.
The Onists, I tell you, lack imagination.

The girl who spoke was a pretty enough little thing for an Onist. She
smiled, showing even white teeth. "Do you Pluralists eat?"

I nodded and rubbed my belly. I was to have had dinner after my turn as
sentry the night before, and now I felt like I could do justice to my
portion even at one of the orgies for which the Onists are so famous.

"Bring on your food and I'll show you," I told her, and she turned her
back to walk outside. It was early and the village seemed silent--surely
they hadn't intended this one slim maid to guard me! Yet she seemed
alone.

I leaped at her, circled her neck with my arm, prepared to make my exit.
They would laugh around our fire when I told them of this fine example
of the Onist lack of foresight....

Except that the girl yelped. Not loudly, but it was loud enough, and a
big muscular Onist came striding in with his throwing spear. He backed
me off into a corner, prodding my hungry belly with his weapon.

"Will you behave?"

       *       *       *       *       *

I told him I would and he backed outside, but this time I could see his
shadow across the doorway.

The girl brought food and partook of it with me. I was surprised,
because we Pluralists will not eat with an Onist out of choice. Well, I
have said they are a strange people. Soon the girl stood up, patting her
mouth daintily with a square of cloth, and in that, of course, she was
trying to mime our graceful Pluralist women. "I suppose you think we are
going to kill you," she said. Just like that.

"To tell you the truth, I haven't given it much thought. There isn't
much I can do about it."

"Well, we're not. We could have done that back at your camp. We could
have killed all of you. No, we want to show you something."

I had a ridiculous thought that they made star-pictures, too--even those
who are not lame like my brother. I said, "Well, what will happen to me
after you show me?"

She smiled. "You still think we're going to kill you. What's your name?"

I told her, but I thought: she can't even keep a conversation going
without changing the subject.

"Jak," she repeated after me. "That's a common enough name. We have Jaks
among our Onist people, you know."

"No, I didn't. But you probably copied it."

"I doubt that. We were here first, Jak. Our records say so. Probably,
you once captured a man with that name, long ago, liked it, and took it
for your people."

"_You_ were here first!" I sneered. "Maybe that's what your records tell
you, but it isn't so. Look: the Makers endowed us with life, then went
away in to the sky. By mistake they left one idiot-Maker behind, and he
had nothing to do. He made you Onists before he perished, and that is
why you think there is only one Maker."

She seemed highly insulted. "Idiot-Maker? Idiot! There was only one
Maker, ever, but because your minds cannot conceive of all that glory
residing in one figure, you invented a score."

Now it was my turn to be indignant. "A score? Hundreds, you mean;
thousands--more than there are leaves on the trees."

"Well, I won't argue with you. Our war has been arguing that point well
enough." I was sorry she would not argue. She looked very pretty when
she argued, her breasts heaving, her eyes sparkling fire.

"What's your name?" I asked.

"Nari. My name is Nari. And don't tell me you had that name first!"

I smiled blandly. "Of course we did. I have an aunt, my mother's sister,
who goes by that name. My brother's wife's cousin, also; but she is very
ugly."

"And am I ugly?" Nari wanted to know. I guess in that sense at least,
women are the same everywhere--Pluralist or Onist, it doesn't matter.

       *       *       *       *       *

I looked at her. I looked at her so hard that it made her blush, and
then she looked even prettier. But I didn't tell her so.

"You will pass, for an Onist," I admitted. "I guess the Onists might
consider you pretty; the Onist men might stamp their feet and shout if
you go by--but then, they are Onists."

At that, she seemed on the verge of leaving my prison hut, but something
made her change her mind. She stayed all morning and on into the
afternoon. We argued all the time, except at midday, when she went
outside to get our lunch. She stumbled a little and fell half against my
shoulder. I moved toward her to hold her up, and it was the most natural
thing in the world to take her in my arms and kiss her. She must have
thought so, too; she responded beautifully--for an Onist.

After lunch, Nari did not mention the kiss, nor did I. It now seemed the
most natural thing in the world not to talk about it. We argued some
more, Nari defending her primitive beliefs, I trying to show her the
light of truth. But it was no use: the war had been fought and the war
would continue.

Later that day we set out. That came as a surprise to me, because I had
taken it for granted that whatever the Onists wanted to show me was
right here in this little village. A dozen of us went, and when we had
been on the trail for some little time, Nari joined us, declaring that
she wanted to see it again--whatever it was.

We went for three days, and although these Onists turned out to be
better woodsmen than I had thought, still, they could not match the
skill we Pluralists have mastered over the generations. I believe I
could have escaped, had I wanted to; but I hardly seemed a prisoner of
war, and besides, once or twice when we had lagged to the rear of the
column, Nari stumbled against me like that day in the hut, and what
could I do but kiss her?

It was another village we reached at the end of our march, much bigger
than the first. Surprisingly, it looked a lot like a Pluralist town,
although it may only have seemed so because I had been out in the
woodlands for three days. They took me straightways to the village
square, and it was there that I saw the statue.

       *       *       *       *       *

These statues of the Makers are rare, and I was surprised to see one in
an Onist village. I got on my knees at once to do it reverence. I
realize it was impious to look up, but I did--I had to see if it were
the genuine thing. And it was, to the last detail. Constructed of the
forbidden substance known as metal, it towered three times a Pluralist's
height, or three times an Onist's, for that matter. I have always
wondered why the Makers did not create our ancestors in their own
substance, as they had fashioned us in their image. But that is an
impious thought.

A stern gray-haired Onist who said he was Nari's father took me aside
afterwards. "Now, Jak," he asked me, "what can you say of what you have
seen?"

I shrugged. "I can say that somehow you've found one of the Maker
statues. What more?"

"It's one, is it not?"

"Of course it's one. They are rare, but I have seen three, all told, in
Pluralist villages."

"And each time they were separate? You never saw a group?"

"No. No, I didn't."

He slapped his hands together triumphantly. "Then that proves it. Each
is a copy of the original Maker, but there was only one. Otherwise you
would have seen statues in groups. And that is why you are here, Jak: we
want you to go back to your people and tell them what you saw."

I shook my head. "What you say isn't logical. So what if the statues are
never in pairs or groups? We've only seen a few, when once there must
have been many. Also, when your artists do their magic with dyes and
create portraits, are they generally done one at a time or in groups?"

"One at a time, so the artist may capture the personality in each face,
naturally. I have seen group portraits, but I think they are silly
things."

"Exactly." Now I was triumphant. "Exactly as the Makers thought, which
is why the statues are always single--"

"But it is impious to say there was more than one Maker! He had all the
knowledge in the world at his fingertips, and so there was no need for
more than one. More than this world, even: he went to the stars. Or
don't you believe that?"

"Of course I believe it. Only, _they_ went to the stars, the thousands
of Makers. It isn't impious, because if you can think of one being as
great as that, try to picture thousands. Yes, thousands. That makes me
thousands of times more pious than you Onists."

He shook his head wearily. "What's the use? It is for this we are
fighting our war, and we thought if we took one of you here, showed him
the undeniable truth of our statue.... Well, will you at least return to
your people with a tale of what you have seen?"

I agreed readily enough: probably, the alternative was death. Although
Pluralists on rare occasions have been known to take Onist women as
their wives, an Onist prisoner of war was an unwanted thing. The reverse
would also be true.

       *       *       *       *       *

They all bid me goodbye, except for Nari. I could not find her anywhere
in the village, and a little sadly I set out on my long journey back to
the Sunset Land. By now our raiding party had finished its work on the
small Onist village on the rim of our country, and I could do nothing
but return to my people, where we might plan new strategy against the
unbelievers.

But I had wanted to bid Nari farewell.

I met her in the woodlands, a travel bag slung over her shoulder like a
male's. "I wanted to say goodbye privately," she told me.

"Good," I said, but I knew she was lying. Else why the travel bag?

"Goodbye," Nari whispered, but she was not looking at me. Looking,
instead, behind her, at the land of her people.

"Nari," I told her, "I have to admit it. You are very pretty--even by
Pluralist standards. You are--"

This time she did not stumble against me. It wasn't necessary. I drew
her to me, and I kissed her a long kiss. Then I told her I loved her,
and women, I suppose, will always be women, because she said she knew
it.

I will take Nari back to our village in the Sunset Land, where we will
be married by the laws of my people. And if ever there is to be peace
between the Pluralists and the Onists, it may, after all, come on these
grounds. The Onists have their beliefs, and so I hate them for their
impious thoughts. But the love of a man for a maid exists apart from
that.

It won't be easy. Our arguing continued all the way back to the Sunset
Land, and Nari is as stubborn as I am firm.

"There is one Maker," she said.

And I told her, "No, there are many."

Or later, as we neared the Sunset Land, we picked up the thread of our
thoughts again. Pluralist or Onist, we androids are dogmatic creatures.

"One Robot created us all before he went to the stars," said Nari.

"Robots," I said. "Many Robots." But I kissed her.


THE END




Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from _If Worlds of Science Fiction_ July
    1952. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed. Minor spelling and
    typographical errors have been corrected without note.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The One and the Many, by Milton Lesser

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ONE AND THE MANY ***

***** This file should be named 30386.txt or 30386.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/0/3/8/30386/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
