The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Clean and Wholesome Land, by Ralph Sholto

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Clean and Wholesome Land

Author: Ralph Sholto

Release Date: November 5, 2009 [EBook #30405]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE CLEAN AND WHOLESOME LAND ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









    _Utopia had been reached. All the problems of mankind had been
    solved. It was the perfect State. If you doubted it, you died._


The Clean and Wholesome Land

By Ralph Sholto


While Professor Cargill lectured from the rostrum, Neal Pardeau prowled
the dark auditorium. This, he knew, was the place to find them. Here was
where they whispered and plotted and schemed--feeling safe in this pure,
hard core of patriotism.

Safe because Cargill was the Director of Education in the New State,
just as Pardeau was the Director of Public Security. Safe because
Cargill's lectures were given before a commanded audience, with
attendance strictly mandatory.

The insistence was not really necessary of course. The people would have
come to hear Cargill regardless. His was a compelling, magnetic
personality. Even now his great voice was booming out:

"--and upon this anniversary of the New State, we can look out with
great pride upon a clean and wholesome land. With strong emotion, we can
look upon the physical manifestation of our glorious principles--that
only through self-effacement--through fanatic love for the state--can
the individual come to complete physical and mental fruition. Upon this
anniversary we see our enemies, both within and without, broken, and
completely subjugated--"

This was the place they whispered and schemed and plotted. Pardeau
prowled the aisles, his eyes piercing the darkness--spotting them,
cataloguing them. And thus he came upon Emil Hillerman, his Deputy of
Vital Intelligence sitting dutifully in the end seat of a middle aisle.
Hillerman's thick lips hung lax, his eyes squinted laboriously as he
sought to follow the thread of Cargill's lecture.

Pardeau tapped Hillerman on the shoulder. The latter started guiltily.
He whirled and sought to identify Pardeau in the semi-darkness. Pardeau
said, "Please step outside with me. I have some questions."

There was fear in Hillerman's bearing as he got clumsily to his feet and
followed Pardeau. But none of Cargill's speech was missed. A battery of
loudspeakers carried it even into the foyer where Pardeau stopped and
turned on Hillerman. He regarded the man through cold, calculating eyes.
He seemed to be both enjoying Hillerman's discomfort and also listening
to Cargill's booming words.

"--these pale weaklings, these traitors with twitching muscles and
twitching minds who skulked in dark places have been finally and
decisively defeated. Even their vaunted leader--"

"What have you been doing," Pardeau asked, "relative to Karl Lenster?"

The frightened Hillerman licked his fat lower lip as he sought for
words. "Everything--everything possible. But Lenster is clever. You know
that. You know that yourself."

Pardeau's eyes bored into those of the Intelligence Director. They were
noted for their icy penetration, but upon this night they were like
steel knives. It was as though he surveyed Hillerman from behind the
bulwark of some new and hostile information. Even as he stared, Cargill
was booming from the rostrum:

"--Karl Lenster, their _peerless_ leader--"

And Cargill's voice crackled with the inflections of pure contempt.

"--a degenerate--a dope addict whose greatness lay only in the realms of
his sensual dreams. A weak, pitiful figure bereft of followers, cringing
alone in--"

When Pardeau spoke, his voice held a new sharpness to complement the new
ice in his eyes. He said, "In half an hour I am attending a meeting of
the Council. They will want a report. What about Lenster?"

Hillerman looked quickly to right and left, then back at his Chief. He
hesitated as though fearing the consequences of what he was about to
reveal. "You know of the Wyckoff Chemical Transformation Process--"

"Certainly I know of it," Pardeau blazed. "What about it?"

"I--I--" But Hillerman seemed to lose the courage he'd screwed up to
continue in this direction. He straightened and a little of the hangdog
servility dropped away. "I am doing all that is humanly possible to
apprehend Lenster. All that any man could do. The secret jails are full.
My interrogators work night and day. Even a superficial check of my
records would show that more has been done in the last six months and is
being done now than--"

Pardeau raised an impatient hand, opening a gap of silence into which
the voice of Cargill poured.

"--land in which the voice of dissenter is not heard; in which Lenster
and men of his despicable ilk are forever crushed and beaten--"

Pardeau was scowling. Almost unconsciously he had held the pause, with
hand upraised, until Cargill finished his passage. As Cargill stopped
for breath, Pardeau jerked his hand down sharply, completing the
gesture. "I have no time for any more of this. And I resent having to
seek you out. Next time report to my office as is proper and keep me
posted as to your activities. Next--"

Pardeau eyed Hillerman for one blank moment and allowed the threat to
reflect clearly that possibly there would not be many more next times.
Then he turned and strode swiftly from the foyer.

       *       *       *       *       *

Cargill's voice had hardly faded when he picked it up again on his car
radio. It was a foregone conclusion that every radio in the land would
be tuned to the lecture. So great was Cargill's popularity that every
citizen traveling in a car would wish to hear it and turn on his
receiver. It was foolish not to have a radio properly tuned when Cargill
spoke. He was saying:

"--and so under the banner of complete solidarity, we will march
forward, a solid phalanx against which no force can stand. Now that our
own house is swept clean of vermin--rid forever of carrion like Lenster
and his ilk, we can--"

Pardeau had traveled swiftly through the streets at the high speed
reserved for higher servants of the New State. Lesser servants of the
New State had learned caution and thus no regrettable deaths or maimings
occurred; the lesser servants having grown wary and fleet of foot.

Pardeau switched off his motor but left his radio blaring. Cargill's
voice followed him up the broad steps of the Executive Building and was
just fading out when Pardeau was able to pick it up again from the
loudspeaker under the great arches.

He entered the building and traversed the vast foyer to a niche which
housed a private elevator. He entered the lift, deserting it on the
ninth floor, where he entered an unobtrusive door and joined a group
which consisted of the New State's well guarded pool of power and
brains.

There was Blanchard of Finance; Keeley, Director of Foreign Education;
Masichek, overlord of the nation's larder, and seven others.

When Pardeau entered, all conversation stopped and every man looked up
from a luxurious overstuffed chair. Pardeau must certainly have swelled
inwardly with pride at this unconscious tribute. It was well known that
he held a key position on the chessboard of politics. His was in reality
the most important job of all. It was to Pardeau that this powerful
group of men looked for that which they most treasured--their own
personal safety.

A chair was waiting for Pardeau. He said, "I'm sorry to be late,
gentlemen. I have been on a personal tour of inspection. I'm sure you
will forgive me however. I have a most interesting report."

He seated himself, timing the action so it coincided with the ebb of
applause coming over the speaker--applause from the loyal multitudes
who had just heard Professor Cargill end his lecture. As it was now
permissible, Blanchard reached under the table and snapped a button. The
speaker went silent.

"An interesting report?" Keeley asked.

"Amazingly so," Pardeau said. "I have just unearthed a traitor--a
traitor in a high place."

Every man in the group strove not to react and this striving was in
itself a reaction. "Most interesting," Blanchard murmured. "Are you
ready to name names?"

"That is my intention, but in order to forestall a great many questions,
let me give you a complete background."

Leiderman, Ambassador without Portfolio, and very close to the Man of
Almost Sacred Name who never attended these meetings, felt strong enough
to evince impatience. "The name, man! First the name. Then the details."

Pardeau smiled coldly. "Very well. The name is, Karl Lenster."

Leiderman sprang from his chair, his face bordering on purple. "Is this
a joke, Pardeau? We all know Lenster is the arch-traitor of our
times--the leader of the resistance movement. Talk sense!"

Pardeau, not in the least disconcerted, smiled coldly. "I'm sorry.
Perhaps I should have said Emil Hillerman, my Deputy of Vital
Intelligence, the man who holds immeasurable power in his two hands."

Blanchard was not given to outbursts. But his lips were grim as he said,
"We are waiting for you to talk sense, Pardeau."

"The confusion comes from your not allowing me to tell it as I wished.
There is a gap between Lenster and Hillerman; one which--with your
permission--I will fill."

"Talk, man! Talk!"

"You have all heard of Formula 652, known also as the Wyckoff Chemical
Transformation Process."

There were expressions of both understanding and bewilderment. Noting
these, Pardeau said, "For those of you who haven't made a point of
looking into the thing, I'll explain. Wyckoff, in case you don't recall,
was a chemical engineer of more than average ability who stumbled onto
this formula before he died, most regretfully, four years ago, in 1984."

Leiderman continued to scowl. "We all know each other, Pardeau. Call a
spade a spade. Wyckoff was a reactionary scoundrel whom you did away
with for reasons of security."

"Precisely," Pardeau said. "In its essence, the formula is a process for
taking over a man's brain--his body--his personality."

"You mean--"

Pardeau refused to be interrupted. "We were of the opinion that Wyckoff,
though he and Lenster were great friends, was not able to impart his
knowledge to the latter. We took him into custody shortly after he
perfected the formula and were fortunate in persuading him to give it to
us."

"But he gave it to Lenster also?"

"We were certain, at the time of his death, that he had not been able to
do that--we are still certain."

Keeley, with a gesture, requested the floor. "I wonder if you could go
into a little more detail concerning the formula--for those of us who--"

"Of course," Pardeau said. "The formula is a combination of six
chemicals and the process of transformation is relatively simple, yet
highly dangerous to both subjects involved. It means sure death for the
proposed host, and if not delicately handled will also result in death
for the usurper. The transformation requires three hours to perform.
Once completed successfully, the usurper can never return to his own
body. It must be destroyed. Also, the mentality of the host vanishes
after it is pushed from its original brain tissue through the influence
of the formula."

"Then if Wyckoff didn't give the formula to Lenster, it was stolen from
our vaults--or wherever it was kept?"

"Exactly. Certain investigations I have made prove beyond doubt that
Lenster got to my Deputy, Hillerman. I never considered Hillerman very
bright, but I thought him to be honest and loyal. But beyond all doubt,
with his aid, Lenster stole the formula--possibly got it verbally--and
used it to take Hillerman's body from him." Pardeau smiled grimly.
"Therefore, gentlemen, we have a traitor in a high place. My Deputy of
Vital Intelligence."

       *       *       *       *       *

Pardeau sat silent now, seeming to enjoy the fear he had engendered in
his colleagues--sat silent until Leiderman said, "You've arrested him of
course."

"No. I have not."

"Then get at it, man--get at it."

"I have no intention of arresting Hillerman."

Leiderman's eyes widened as did those of the rest of the company. But
Blanchard, even under the impact of such a bombshell had the presence of
mind to glance at his watch. Immediately he snapped on the loudspeaker.
The voice of Professor Cargill blared forth:

"--and upon this anniversary of the New State, we can look with pride
upon a clean and wholesome land--"

It was the rebroadcast, from recordings, of Cargill's speech and no man
in his right mind would have refrained from tuning it in because
everyone wanted to hear it at least twice.

Leiderman, almost apoplectic, ignored the speech. "Not arresting him!
Are you mad?"

"I'm quite sane, and the situation is well in hand." Pardeau grinned and
there was wickedness in the grin--wickedness and intelligence. "As I
said before, Hillerman was not a smart man. His job was too much for
him and I would have been faced, soon, with the necessity of replacing
him regardless. Lenster, on the other hand, is of grade-A intellect.
But, gentlemen, he is frightened--badly frightened in his new
environment--and, in order to insure his own safety, is doing an
excellent job. Ever since the transformation, that department has gained
in efficiency until it now ranks as one of the highest in our entire
government."

Slowly, Pardeau's strategy dawned on the group. Blanchard suddenly
smiled. Then Pardeau scowled and went on with a new and sudden ferocity.
"I have the proof, and I have Lenster-Hillerman under my palm. So he
stays--continues to do a good job for us. But he'll be watched,
gentlemen. He won't be able to go to the bathroom without being under
surveillance. We will learn a great deal from him. All we need to know."

"Then you'll arrest him?" the boss of the state larder wanted to know.

Pardeau came to his feet. His fist slammed down on the table. "I shall
_not_ arrest him--ever. When the time comes, I shall personally shoot
him down in the street like a dog. There will come a day, gentlemen,
when you will witness this act of vengeance--when I shall make such an
example of Lenster-Hillerman as the resistance will not forget--a
morale-crumbling example, I promise you."

"--in which Lenster and his ilk are forever crushed and beaten," the
speaker said.

Blanchard took the floor. "Gentlemen--I move a vote of thanks and
confidence for our colleague, Neal Pardeau."

The Director of Public Security stood at attention and assayed a sharp,
military bow. It was a moment of rare triumph. "Thank you, gentlemen,"
he said.

       *       *       *       *       *

An hour later, Lenster-Pardeau was alone in his apartments. He stripped
off his uniform with an air of grim satisfaction. While he undressed, he
thought of the martyrs to the Cause; the men who had died. He thought of
Wyckoff and wished Wyckoff could have had the pleasure of knowing who
had usurped the body of Neal Pardeau--Pardeau the Butcher--the infamous
Pardeau.

From the speaker came the third and final rebroadcast of Cargill's
speech:

"--a clean and wholesome land--"

"A clean and wholesome land," Lenster murmured, and the tone of his
voice was a prayer.


THE END




Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from _If Worlds of Science Fiction_
    September 1952. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
    the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed. Minor spelling
    and typographical errors have been corrected without note.





End of Project Gutenberg's The Clean and Wholesome Land, by Ralph Sholto

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE CLEAN AND WHOLESOME LAND ***

***** This file should be named 30405.txt or 30405.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/0/4/0/30405/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
