The Project Gutenberg EBook of Larson's Luck, by Gerald Vance

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Larson's Luck

Author: Gerald Vance

Illustrator: Robert Fuqua

Release Date: November 9, 2009 [EBook #30437]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LARSON'S LUCK ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









LARSON'S LUCK

by GERALD VANCE


 Larson couldn't possibly have known what was
 going on in the engine room, yet he acted....


[Illustration: There would be hell to pay; Larson was stunting again.]

"We moor in ten minutes," I said.

We were flying at reduced speed because of the heavy fog we had run into
at the outer fringe of Earth's atmosphere. But I knew we were within
forty or fifty miles of the Trans-Space base. I had counted the miles on
this particular trip because of the load of radium we were carrying from
the Venusian mines. I wouldn't draw a completely relieved breath until
we were down and the stuff was in the hands of the commerce agents.

I eased my position slightly to relieve the pressure on my broken
flipper and grinned at the pilot, Lucky Larson, the screwiest, most
unpredictable void trotter who had ever flown for dear old Trans-Space.

"You've been too good to be true this trip," I said, "and it's a good
thing. The chief told me that if you so much as _thought_ about clowning
around or stunting he was going to clip your wings for good."

Lucky grinned, an impish, devil-may-care grin that lightened up his
freckled face and bunched the tiny wrinkles at the corners of his eyes.
Then with characteristic abruptness he scowled.

"That grandmother," he said disgustedly. "Who does he think I am,
anyway? Some crazy irresponsible madman who hasn't got enough brains to
stay on a space beam?"

"That's just what he does think," I grinned, "and you've given him
plenty of reason to think it. You can't bring your crate in to the base
without stunting around and showing off and risking your damn neck.
That's why he sent me along with you this trip. Just to see that you
act like a pilot--instead of circus acrobat."

"A lot of good you'd do," Lucky mumbled. "You got a broken arm. The only
reason he sent you is because he didn't want to pay you while you was in
the hospital so he cooks up this trip to get his money out of you. And
say," he turned to me belligerently, "when did I ever crack up a ship?
When did I ever even dent one of the babies?"

"You haven't," I was forced to admit, "but that's just because of that
screwy luck of yours. But it won't last forever and one of these days
it's going to run out just when you need it. So just remember--no
stunting this trip or you'll be out of the strata for the rest of your
natural life."

"Aw, that's the trouble with this racket," Lucky grumbled, "a guy can't
have no fun no more. Back when I was with the Space circus--"

"Okay, okay," I cut in, "I've heard that before. Just fly your ship,
now, and forget about the deep dark plot of the company to take all the
joy out of your life. I'm going to take a look-see at the atomic floats
and get the passengers bundled together."

I stood up and crawled over him and opened the door leading to the body
of the ship. I could still hear him grumbling as I slid the light
chrome-alloy door shut. I chuckled to myself and headed up the aisle to
the baggage compartments. Lucky Larson was a legend as space pilots go.
An unpredictable, erratic screwball but one of the finest rocket riders
who ever flashed through the void.

Company regulations and interplanetary commissions were the bane of his
existence. He made his own rules and regulations and got by with it.
That is he _had_ gotten by with it. Now they were cracking down on him.
He had been grounded twice and the chief had threatened to set him down
for life if any more infractions were charged to him. I shook my head
gloomily. He was a great guy, the last of a great and gallant army of
space adventurers, but he was on the way out. The rules were necessary,
vital to safe space travel and the Lucky Larsons would have to live up
to them, or else.

       *       *       *       *       *

My mind was a long way away from the cabin of the space ship and maybe
that's why I got what I did. I didn't see it coming. One minute I was
walking through the aisle, thinking about Lucky Larson and the next
second something slammed into the back of my head knocking me to my
knees.

Through a haze of red and white lights I heard a voice bark, "Toss him
into a chair and grab that good arm of his."

I wasn't out. Just damn sick. Something like a cold hand seemed to have
closed over my stomach and for an awful moment I gagged and tried to
retch. But the moment passed and I forced open my eyes and focused them
on two tough-looking, hard-eyed gents who stood in front of me. Another
unpleasant-looking little man knelt along side of me, twisting my good
arm behind my back.

"Okay," I gritted, "what's the gag?"

The tallest of the three, evidently their leader, smiled at me. "It's no
gag," he murmured calmly, "we happen to need the radium you're carrying.
We're going to take it. Any objections?"

"You'll never get away with this," I snapped, "your names and
descriptions are registered with the passenger office. You'll be tracked
down in twenty-four hours."

I was bluffing, of course, and I knew from their contemptuous smiles
that they knew it, too. They probably had given fictitious names, and
the descriptive information which the bureau required consisted of a few
generalities, such as height, weight and the like. I cursed myself for a
stupid, careless fool. The three men had been the only passengers from
Venus and they had kept to themselves the entire trip. Once or twice I
had wondered at their reticence and quietness but I had not been
suspicious enough to make a check-up.

One of the men laughed shortly. "Let us worry about that. We've covered
every angle that could possibly come up. With the help of your friend up
front, this ship will be flown to a certain deserted asteroid where a
few friends of _ours_ are to meet us with another ship. How you come out
afterward will depend on how you co-operate now. Clear enough?"

It was clear enough all right. Lucky and I wouldn't last long after we
served our purpose.

The tall man turned from me and nodded significantly to the man standing
next to him and then pointed to the closed door to the pilot's chambers.

"Take care of the pilot," he murmured, "and tell him if he isn't
obliging we'll take the cast off his friend's arm and--" he smiled at
me, "massage it a bit."

I felt a cold sweat break out on my forehead.

The thug grinned wolfishly at me and then winked at his leader. "I'll
tell him, boss." He dug his hand into his pocket and drew out a stubby
atomic pistol. "If he won't listen to me maybe this'll persuade him."

Still grinning he turned and headed up the aisle, the gun clenched in
his huge fist.

       *       *       *       *       *

I glanced at the tall figure standing in front of me and saw that he was
watching the retreating figure of his henchman with a saturnine smile on
his face. I thought swiftly. If I could yell a warning to Lucky, he
could bolt the door of the pilot's chamber and then set the ship down at
the Trans-Space base. It was the only way to save Lucky and the radium.
I wasn't very optimistic about my own chances. I knew they were zero.

I opened my mouth, took a deep breath and then, before I could scream
the words that would warn Lucky, it happened. The ship shuddered for an
instant and then zoomed upward, the smooth hum of the rocket motors
crescendoing to a roaring song of power and speed.

The sudden jolting acceleration hurled me to the tail of the ship and I
saw, like an image in a kaleidoscope, the tangled thrashing figures of
the space bandits as they were tossed to the floor, a dazedly struggling
mass of arms and legs.

The ship was lying over on its back in a few seconds, and before I could
catch a breath it suddenly whipped over and blasted toward Earth in a
screeching, hissing power-dive.

It was terrific punishment even for this type of space crate but it was
worse for human beings. The three bandits were clutching at their
stomachs as if they were afraid of losing them. Their faces were mottled
and blotchy and their eyes were rolling beseechingly.

I didn't mind the erratic convolutions the ship was making but my arm
was burning as if it were on fire. Numbing waves of pain were coursing
up and down my entire body.

I tried to crawl to my knees but the floor rolled under me as the ship
whipped over in a twisting spiral and I crashed forward on my face. Then
everything dissolved into inky blackness....

       *       *       *       *       *

When I came to, I heard a great commotion, then a sudden shot and then a
babble of voices booming around me. I remember thinking fleetingly of
crooks, Lucky Larson and a mountain of radium and then--because nothing
made sense--I passed out again.

       *       *       *       *       *

The next time I opened my eyes I found myself stretched out on a cot in
the chief's office. I turned my head slightly and saw Lucky Larson, the
chief and a half dozen other guys staring down at me.

"It's not very original," I said, "but where the hell am I?" That was
silly of me because I knew where I was, so I said: "Never mind that but
please tell me what the hell happened?"

The chief laughed and Lucky Larson laughed and then they slapped each
other on the back. "Don't worry about a thing," the chief said, "those
crooks are under lock and key and there's not a thing to worry about."

"But how--I mean what...?" My voice trailed off. Nothing made sense.

"Well," the chief broke in, "Lucky here really deserves the credit for
catching them. And I'm not forgetting your good work either. Both of you
will receive more tangible evidence of my appreciation. But Lucky really
did the brainwork."

"Awww," Lucky mumbled, "it wasn't much. Just a little common sense and,
uh, a little luck."

"It was damn fast thinking," the chief cut in belligerently, "you knew
your stunting over the base would drive me crazy. You knew I'd get so
mad I'd call out the base police and have you thrown in when you moored.
And when you did moor and the crooks toppled out we were right on hand
to receive them. They were so weak from the shaking up you gave them
that they didn't have a chance."

Lucky rolled innocent eyes to the ceiling. "Sometimes," he remarked
piously, "stunting has its uses."

"Congratulations," I said weakly. "You certainly used your head. Caught
the chief's attention with your stunting and almost knocked the crooks
out with it too. That's killing two birds with one stone, all right."
Then another thought occurred to me.

"How did you know I was in trouble?" I asked curiously. "How did you
know we had those crooks on board?"

"Why--why," Lucky sputtered, "that was simple. I just happened to look
behind me and I saw those boys piling into you. So I did a little fast
thinking and then I whipped the ship into a few maneuvers and, like the
chief says, they caught his eye all right."

The chief was beaming fondly and I turned my head to hide the smile on
my lips. "So you just looked behind you," I muttered. "Well, Lucky, you
certainly are--and were."

He grinned down at me and winked. "You said it, kid."

I wanted to ask him a question then, but I decided to wait until we were
alone. I closed my eyes and smiled again, thinking of his expression
when I would ask him how he had been able to look behind him and see me
struggling with those crooks, _when the door of the pilot's chamber was
closed all the time_....


THE END




Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from _Amazing Stories_ January 1943.
    Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed. Minor spelling and
    typographical errors have been corrected without note.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Larson's Luck, by Gerald Vance

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LARSON'S LUCK ***

***** This file should be named 30437.txt or 30437.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/0/4/3/30437/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
