The Project Gutenberg EBook of Blind Spot, by Bascom Jones

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Blind Spot

Author: Bascom Jones

Illustrator: Kossin

Release Date: November 11, 2009 [EBook #30454]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BLIND SPOT ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









   BLIND
 SPOT

   By BASCOM JONES, JR.

   Illustrated by KOSSIN


 _Everyone supported the Martian
   program--until it struck home!_


Johnny Stark, director of the department of Interplanetary Relations for
Mars' Settlement One, reread the final paragraph of the note which he
had found on his desk, upon returning from lunch earlier in the day.

His eye flicked rapidly over the moistly smeared Martian scrawl,
ignoring the bitterness directed at him in the first paragraphs. He was
vaguely troubled by the last sentences. But he hadn't been able to pin
the feeling down.

    _... Our civilization predates that of Earth's by millions of years.
    We are an advanced, peaceful race. Yet, since Earth's first rocket
    landed here thirteen years ago, we have been looked upon as freaks
    and contemptuously called 'bug-men' behind our backs! This is our
    planet. We gave of our far-advanced knowledge and science freely, so
    that Earth would be a better place. We asked nothing in return, but
    we were rewarded by having forced upon us foreign ideas of
    government, religion, and behavior. Our protests have been silenced
    by an armed-police and punitive system we've never before needed.
    Someday you will awaken to this injustice. On that day in your life,
    you have my sympathy and pity!_

Stark knew that the Settlement's Investigations Lab could readily
determine the identity of the Martian who had written the note. But he
hesitated to send it over. Under the New System, such troublemakers were
banished to the slave-labor details of the precious-earth mines to the
North.

Crumpling the note in sudden decision, Stark dropped it into the office
incendiary tube. The morning visi-report had shown that there were more
than 17,000 workers at the mines. Only five had been Earthlings. Let the
armed-police system find the Martian through their own channels. It
wasn't his job.

       *       *       *       *       *

A glance at the solar clock on the far wall reminded him there was still
time for one more interview before the last bell, so he impatiently
signaled his secretary to send in the waiting couple.

Ordinarily, he liked his work and time meant little to him. He had
jumped from interpreter to director in the ten years since the
department had been created. But this day was different.

Stark was to announce his engagement at the Chief's monthly dinner party
that evening and time had seemed to drag since his lunch with Carol.

When the door opened, he rose and nodded to the plump, freckle-faced
girl who entered. The girl topped five feet by one or two inches, but
she was no taller than the Martian man who followed her at the
prescribed four feet.

After the girl had seated herself, Stark and the Martian sat down. Stark
opened the folder, which his secretary had placed on his desk earlier.

"Your names are Ruth and Ralph Gilraut? And you want permission to move
into Housing Perimeter D?" It was merely a formality, since the
information was in the folder.

When the girl nodded, Stark placed a small check mark in the space
beside her name. Then he turned to the Martian.

The large, single red eye set deep in the Martian's smooth, green
forehead above the two brown ones blinked twice before he answered.

He spoke deliberately. "As is required of all Martians under the New
System, I have taken the name of one of the early Earthlings to write
and pronounce." The large red eye blinked again. "My wife would like
to move into Housing Perimeter D. By regulation, I respect her wish."

[Illustration]

Stark placed a check mark by the Martian's name. He wiped the smudge of
ink off his hand and said, "You both know, of course, that Perimeter D
is reserved for couples who have intermarried and are about to have
offspring?"

The girl and the Martian nodded, and the girl passed Stark a medical
report. Stark looked over the report and then made a notation on a small
pink slip.

He said, "This permit certifies that you are eligible to move from
Perimeter E to Housing Perimeter D. It also certifies that your husband
has no record as a troublemaker." Stark looked at the girl. "You
understand that you may visit your friends in Perimeter E, but, by law,
they will not be allowed to enter Perimeter D to visit you. And, of
course, the new law clearly states that neither of you may visit
Earthlings in Housing Perimeter A, B or C."

The girl looked down at her hands. Her voice was almost inaudible. "My
husband and I are familiar with the advantages and disadvantages listed
under the section pertaining to intermarriage in the new law, Mr. Stark.
Thank you."

       *       *       *       *       *

Stark rose as they left. For a brief moment, he thought he had detected
a sense of rebellion in their attitude. But that was not possible.

The new law provided equality for all. And his department had been
created to iron out relations between the two races--excepting
complaints originated by troublemakers for the purpose of weakening the
New System. In such cases, Investigations had stepped in and the Martian
or Earthling troublemaker had been sent to the rare-earth mines.

The reddish light filtering in through the quartz and lead wall of his
office showed that it was almost time for the last bell.

On the street below, shoppers were streaming out of the stores on their
way to the various housing perimeters.

Earthlings were climbing into their speedy little jet cars for the short
trip to the recently modernized inner perimeters. Martians were waiting
for the slower auto buses. The traffic problem had been solved, under
the New System, by restricting the use of the Martian-built jet cars to
persons living in the inner perimeters.

As Stark watched, a black jet car impatiently hurtled out of the line of
traffic, bowled through a crowd of Martians waiting for an auto bus, and
skidded to a stop at the curb in front of the building.

A tall girl got out. The red evening glow reflecting from her golden
hair, made her breathing globe almost amber. Male Martians and
Earthlings alike turned to stare in appreciation as she pushed her way
through the crowd to the building's compressor lock. Carol was that kind
of girl.

       *       *       *       *       *

Almost at the exact moment that Carol opened the door into Stark's
office, the yellow visi-screen of the vocal box upon Stark's desk
flashed on brilliantly and the Chief's booming voice filled the office.
The light from the screen picked up the highlights on the furniture and
gave a sallow, greenish cast to Stark's features. Carol stepped back
into the doorway to stay out of range of the two-way unit.

"Stark!" The automatic tuner on the box corrected to bring the Chief's
image in wire-sharp focus.

"Yes, sir?"

"About the dinner tonight. Just checking to make sure you're planning to
be there. We want a full turnout. An inspection team has come up from
Earth and we have two visiting dignitaries from Venus."

Stark nodded and waited for the Chief to say something else, but the
visi-screen blanked out.

Carol said, "That was Dad, wasn't it?"

Stark felt very depressed suddenly. "Haven't you told him yet?"

"No. He's been tied up with those inspectors all afternoon. And you know
how Dad is, Johnny. There's a right and a wrong time to tell him things.
Right now, he's only interested in hearing about Earth."

"But we're supposed to announce our engagement tonight at the dinner."
He shook his head. "We can't go on forever with just a few stolen
moments here and there, eating an occasional lunch or third meal
together in little out-of-the-way places."

Carol laughed, the youthful swell of her breasts against the soft,
spun-glass material of her blouse. "Don't worry so, Johnny! I'm a big
girl now. This is my eighteenth birthday. Dad's bark is much worse than
his bite. I'll tell him about us on the way home."

She moved closer to him, until he could feel the warmth of her body. He
could see the warm, damp indentation where her breathing globe had
rested against her shoulders and chest.

She asked teasingly, "What did you get me for my birthday, Johnny?
Something real nice?"

"What did you want?" Johnny asked her gently.

       *       *       *       *       *

And suddenly she wasn't teasing any more. She put her arms around him.
"Dad and my brother would say I'm crazy. But all I want, Johnny, is you.
Just you! You know that."

Stark had picked out her birthday present, but he wanted it to be a
surprise for that night. He said, "I already saw one of your presents. A
black jet car!"

"How did you know that?"

"I saw you drive up in it a few minutes ago."

Carol giggled. "Dad gave it to me. Did you see me plow through that
crowd waiting for the auto bus?"

"Did your brother send you anything?"

She nodded. "Three new outfits from Earth. They were on the same liner
that brought the inspection team to the Settlement this morning. Oh,
yes, and the captain of the liner brought me this."

She showed him the tiny pin she wore attached to her collar. The pin
itself was a carefully wrought but cruel caricature of an awkward
buglike creature. A small ruby set in the center of its face served as
its eye.

Stark frowned. "Carol, you shouldn't be wearing that." He reached up and
unpinned it. "That's the sort of thing our department is fighting."

"But the captain said it was the latest rage back on Earth. They're even
making toys like it. I'm sure they're not designed to ... to poke fun at
anyone."

Stark started to say something, but the last bell interrupted him. He
said, "If you're going to take your father home and tell him about us
before the dinner, you'd better hurry. I'll come early."

Carol kissed him and said good-by. She left the pin on Stark's desk and
was smiling at him as she closed the door.

       *       *       *       *       *

After waiting until the first rush of workers had gone and the building
was quiet, Stark caught the elevator down. The overhead lights in the
compressor lock were reflected in the twin rows of breathing globes. The
green-tinted ones had to be used by Martians in the building, and the
clear ones were used by Earthmen when they were outside in the Martian
atmosphere. Stark stopped in at a little open shop down one of the many
side streets. The sign said "Closed," but he rang the bell until a
little, dried-up Martian appeared.

The storekeeper handed him a small box. Stark opened it to examine the
ring--Carol's birthday present. The single, large diamond set in the
thin precious-metal band dated back to an all-but-forgotten custom
practiced on Earth. Stark thought the engagement ring would please
Carol, though.

Standing in the compressor lock at the Chief's home later, Stark rubbed
the diamond against the sleeve of his tunic. He fumbled with his
breathing globe and then pushed the button that activated the door. The
tele-guard beyond the opening door scanned him rapidly. As he stepped
forward, a red light above the tele-guard flashed on and the door began
to close again.

Stark threw all his strength against the door and squeezed through into
the house.

Throughout the house, Stark could hear the alarm bell. A taped voice,
activated by the tele-guard, said, "Do not enter! Do not enter!"

He found Carol and the Chief in the library alone. Nearly purple with
rage, the Chief drew himself up to his full six feet.

The Chief bellowed, "Stark! Are you crazy?"

The growing feeling of sickness spread through Stark.

"Who do you think you are?" the Chief yelled. "Get back to your office
and consider yourself under arrest as a troublemaker. Give you people an
inch and you try to walk away with everything. Why, I wouldn't let you
touch my daughter if you were the last living being in the Universe!"

Carol didn't look up. She stood through it all, silently, without
moving. Stark knew now where his blind spot had been. He turned and left
them.

       *       *       *       *       *

Back at his office, he waited for the police. Stark stared down at his
reflection in the polished top of the desk. A yellow, moist film of
sweat covered his face. The red eye set in his forehead blinked. But the
pain visible just behind the surface of that eye was not over Carol or
himself.

The pain was for what he was seeing for the first time ... now.

                                                   --BASCOM JONES, JR.




Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from _Galaxy Science Fiction_ February 1955.
    Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed. Minor spelling and
    typographical errors have been corrected without note.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Blind Spot, by Bascom Jones

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BLIND SPOT ***

***** This file should be named 30454.txt or 30454.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/0/4/5/30454/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
