The Project Gutenberg EBook of With a Vengeance, by J. B. Woodley

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: With a Vengeance

Author: J. B. Woodley

Illustrator: Knoth

Release Date: November 14, 2009 [EBook #30475]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WITH A VENGEANCE ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









[Illustration: Illustrated by KNOTH]


With a Vengeance

By J. B. WOODLEY


 _Keep this in mind in teaching
 apprentices: They are future
 journeymen--and even masters!_


                                                      October 10, 2119
                                                     New San Francisco

Today, at precisely 9:50 a.m., Kyle became First Imperator of Terra. His
coup was so fantastically direct and facile that I am almost tempted to
believe that old cliche "the time was right."

Well, however badly it can be expressed, I suppose the world _was_ ripe
for this sort of thing. I can remember when much the same used to
happen in elections. One man would win over another by a tremendous
majority, and historians would then set about to show how "the time was
right."

Why do I persist in tormenting myself with that phrase! Analytically, I
might say I resent this new aristocracy of politics. Specifically, I
might say I resent Kyle.

And both are true, both are true.

This swing, though, to absolute monarchy, complete with the installation
of the Kyle Dynasty--damn him! This is something which psychologists,
not historians, must explain. Has the age of the Common Man, so bravely
flaunted for over one hundred years, truly come to nothing? Would people
really prefer a figurehead and a symbol of undisputed authority?

In this instance, one may again conclude that "the time was right."
Contact with planets like Mars and Venus undoubtedly had its influence.
I must confess that the televised audiences with the Mrit of Venus and
the Znam of Mars _did_ make Terra's President--I should say, late
President--look a bit seedy. I daresay there is such a thing as a too
common Common Man.

Kyle was such, twenty years ago. His name wasn't Kyle then, although it
was something very like that. I must see if any of the old ledgers are
about! I'd like to see what the Imperator's name was when His Most
Imperial Majesty was an apprenticed nobody!

       *       *       *       *       *

                                                      October 12, 2119
                                                     New San Francisco

I found it! Buried in stacks of dust behind the old printing press that
was once the heart of my _Beacon-Sentinel_. There were others there too.
Spent a delightful morning with them, reading back through those old
account books.

I wonder whatever happened to Hastings? And Drew? Best linotype men I
ever had. They became pilots, or something, as I recall. Too bad, too
bad. They could have had such brilliant futures, both of them. Why they
felt they must ally themselves with the non-thinking, muscle-flexing
variety of mankind--of which our Ruler is an excellent example--I'll
never know.

Ah, yes, Kyle! In those days he was Kilmer Jones. I don't remember him
too well, actually, except for the day I fired him.

I suppose he was right in changing his name. We couldn't very well have
an Imperator named Kilmer the First, or Jones the First. Much too
common, not at all in keeping.

Gawky fellow--that Kilmer. When Bard brought me a sample of his work--I
guess I'll have to call it that--we both had a good laugh over it!
Atrocious spelling! Couldn't follow the proofreader's marks. Indeed, I
wonder if the fellow could even read! The punctuation! And the grammar!

I called the boy to the office that morning--or was it the next day? No
matter. I called him in and told him, as kindly as possible, that I
thought there were other vocations to which he might be better suited.
The irony of it! Kilmer Jones--Kyle I!

And he stood there, I remember, with those seventeen-year-old hands that
were all knuckles and bone and chapped skin, twisting those hands and
shifting his weight from one foot to the other.

"Please, Mr. Booth," he said, his voice cracking. "I ain't got no other
job in mind. I wanna be a noospaper man. I ain't got no--"

If not for that "ain't got no," I think I might have relented. But no
one is going to ruin the English language as he did! Not in my offices!

I took him to task severely for his offensive usage, outlined a correct
example of what he had attempted to say, gave him a brief lesson in the
history of the tongue, and explained why it had been chosen as the
official Terran speech. I think my conclusion was, "You'll be much
better off in a position which requires you to quote neither Milton nor
Shakespeare nor any author save possibly those who write the comic
strips."

"Got no training," he said softly. (I supposed it was to keep his voice
from exhibiting its usual adolescent gymnastics.)

I shuddered slightly, I remember. "You mean, 'I _have_ no training.'"

"Yeah ..." softly again. "Yeah, Mr. Booth."

"_Yes!_" I cried impatiently. "Not 'yeah,' but _yes_!"

I searched for his severance pay on my desk, wondering who the devil had
hired him in the first place. Gave him three weeks pay, as I recall it,
one more than necessary.

Unmannerly pup! He just stood there for a minute and then finally left
without even a "Thank you," or "Good-by."

And this is the man who is Kyle the First, Ruler of Terra at the age of
thirty-seven! I wonder what he is like now....

       *       *       *       *       *

                                                          January 1, 1
                                                     New San Francisco

There is no longer any need to wonder. Surprisingly few heads have
rolled, but apparently Jonesy chooses to exhibit his power in other
ways.

Thanksgiving Day, a custom preserved in certain portions of the
Directorate of North America, is three weeks away--even though it is
January.

The Year One. There used to be some childish joke about the Year One.
Don't remember it just now.

Thanksgiving harvest in January. Christmas celebration in February.
Spring planting in July! To say nothing of the inconvenience this has
caused in my bookkeeping department! I suppose the man will now try to
change the weather to suit his new calendar!

       *       *       *       *       *

                                                          January 8, 1
                                                     New San Francisco

He can't last! He can't! A dictator is one thing. A monarch is another.
But Kyle is something else!

Naturally he had to remove certain persons from his way. And his summer
palace in the plains region of America--that's all right, that's all
right! An authority of Kyle's stature is expected to remove
undesirables, and to have a summer palace, and a winter palace, and
anything else he wants! Of course!

But why this? Why _this_ of all things!

No newspapers! Just like that! _He_ waves an edict, and just like that,
_no newspapers_! The _Beacon-Sentinel_ has been a great paper for the
last twenty-five years! It was nothing, and I was nothing, and together
we became a Voice! And now again, we are nothing!

Oh, I see what's behind it! It's revenge, that's what it is! Because he
once couldn't become a "noospaper" man, he's taking his vengeance this
way.

A man as petty as that shall be overthrown! Mark my words! And the
clumsiness of it!

I see what he is! I know him! He's still that pup of seventeen, playing
king with the world, twisting his hands in glee over his childish
triumph.

No subtlety! Just a direct pushing over an applecart he couldn't steer!
Doesn't matter whose apples you destroy, does it, Jonesy? Just push it
over--push it over!

       *       *       *       *       *

                                                         January 16, 1
                                                     New San Francisco

Closed the _Beacon-Sentinel_ yesterday. My savings are enough to take
care of me for a few years. After that--ah, well, I am no longer a young
man. I am glad that Elsa is not here to see this.

       *       *       *       *       *

                                                        February 12, 1
                                                     New San Francisco

Received a letter this morning, requesting me to appear at the chambers
of His Most Imperial Majesty, Kyle the First, on Tuesday of next week.
His Most Imperial Majesty can see me between 10:15 and 10:25 on that
morning.

Ten minutes--rather a brief spell in which to roll another head.

I find myself amazed, though. Is this man so truly powerful that he
needs no police to make his arrests for him? Can he really send messages
via jetmail and be certain his enemies will not try to escape?

I don't want to attempt flight. Life without my work is no longer life.

       *       *       *       *       *

                                                        February 17, 1
                                         Kyleton Palace, North America

I don't understand. I've gone over it twice, and I don't understand. If
only Elsa were still with me! I could talk to her. She would help me
decipher what it's all about.

This morning, at 10:15 sharp, I was taken to the public audience chamber
in the palace.

His Majesty was seated behind a desk facing the doors. Behind him, on
the wall, was His Coat of Arms.

He stood up and walked toward me, waving away the guards. "How are you,
Mr. Booth?" he said. And offered me His Hand!

I recovered my presence of mind, of course, and replied as was fitting.

And then He said it! "I shall be at liberty later this week to discuss
more fully the details of these past years." (Shades of "ain't got no!")
"Meanwhile, my secretary will give you a complete dossier on my planned
Official Bulletin." He lighted a cigarette after offering me one. "I
should deem it an honor," he continued, "to have a man of your literary
versatility and--I must add--your vast practical experience become Chief
Editor of that Bulletin. The publication, which I should enjoy
christening _The Terran Beacon-Sentinel_--with your permission,
sir--shall be more than my official organ. It shall set the standards
for the coming newspaper world."

He cocked an eyebrow at me and smiled. "I believe we are in perfect
accord about certain standards, are we not, Mr. Booth? The deplorable
grammatical practices of some newspapers! Well, really, Mr. Booth! I
feel assured of your agreement!"

He led me around the desk and pointed to the Coat of Arms. As He stood
silent, I felt obliged to look more closely. I had seen it before, of
course, but seeing it now, greatly enlarged, I was able to make out its
detail.

What I had thought was a mere decorative border, I now realized was a
motif I have seen all my life! A tiny lighthouse sending forth a beam!
The trademark of my paper!

As I stood there, gaping, His Majesty laughed softly and said, "That,
Mr. Booth, I felt impelled to include. For, without your most fortuitous
termination of my apprenticeship in your organization, I should not have
risen to my present position."

       *       *       *       *       *

Again He took my hand and shook it, warmly. His hair is just a bit gray
at the temples, and there are signs of strain on His finely featured
face. Those awkward hands are now strong and purposeful.

He apologized that He must return to His duties, and went with me to the
door. "My secretary will fill in further details about your new
position. Newspapers shall once again be published. No--don't say a
word, Mr. Booth! I know what you are thinking.

"Your salary," he continued as we stood at the open door, "shall, of
course, be commensurate to your high authority in this new field. Allow
me, now, to thank you most deeply and sincerely for your unwitting aid
in my youth. I assure you, Mr. Booth, I have often thought of that day
we talked. And I hope to repay you, in some measure, for what you did."

He said more, mostly polite phrases of good-by. And then I was outside
after being handed a folder by some man.

An official jetmobile took me to my residence--which turned out to be in
the East Wing. Here I am, and I don't understand. I came prepared to
suffer heaven only knows what as part of Kilmer Jones's childish pattern
for revenge.

Instead, here I am, head of the Official Bulletin, titular ruler and
ruler-in-fact of the future journalism of the world!

There is something behind this--I keep feeling there is. But what? What?
Or is he truly generous, to a degree never before known among absolute
monarchs?

       *       *       *       *       *

                                                        February 13, 1
                                         Kyleton Palace, North America

I am a suspicious and most humble old man. I see now that Kyle's
generosity amazed me only because I myself would have been incapable of
such an action.

Just now, I fear for His Majesty. I was right, before, when I said there
was no subtlety in the man. He is too open, too fair, too forgiving. A
ruler with such greatness of heart might easily allow some small
insignificant person in too far, too close. I fear for him!

       *       *       *       *       *

                                                        February 14, 1
                                         Kyleton Palace, North America

Tomorrow we begin publication! The pressroom is magnificent! I can
hardly wait. It's been a long time since I've felt such exuberance.

This afternoon I am to conduct a conference of some eight hundred
editors! His Majesty's secretary has sent me an outline on Journalistic
Standards, which I shall study after lunch.

There was a note attached, in His Majesty's handwriting--such beautiful
penmanship, too. "A mere formality," it said, "for, of course, you and I
know full well what the future of journalism shall be, Mr. Booth."

       *       *       *       *       *

                                                               Later--

How wrong can one man be in one lifetime?

I wonder now _why_ he changed the calendar. I wonder now what poor devil
he destroyed then. But _I'll_ cheat him!

I'll cheat him yet!

       *       *       *       *       *

                                       Obituary, _Trran Bacon-Sntinl_,
                                                         Fbruary 16, 1

Th unfortunat and untimly dmis of Gorg W. Booth is hrby notd with sorrow
by thos who knw and lovd him.

Mr. Booth, formr ditor and publishr of th _Bacon-Sntinl_ of Nw San
Francisco, Dirctorat of North Amrica, had apparntly bn in poor helth for
som tim. It is blivd that worry ovr th succss of his nw policy-stting
_Trran Bacon-Sntinl_ was a contributing factor in his suicid lat in th
aftrnoon of Fbruary 14.

His Most Imprial Majsty Kyl th First has ordrd a fitting monumnt to his
lat lamntd frind. A simpl shaft of granit shall b rctd in th gardn
facing th Ast Wing of Kylton Palac, whr Mr. Booth mad his residnc. On th
shaft shall b inscribd th lgnd:

    "How bautous mankind is! Oh brav nw world,
    That has much peepl in't!"

Th quotation is from _Th Tmpst_. Mr. Booth was a grat admirr of
Shakspar.

An vn mor fitting and long-livd mmorial is xprssd in th dict rlasd
through th offics of His Majsty on th vry day of Mr. Booth's dath. It
reeds in part:

    "Th nw linguistic policy on Trra, as dmonstratd in th _Trran
    Bacon-Sntinl_, shall hncforth b known as Boothtalk."

Mr. Booth bfrindd Our Imprial Rulr in His youngr days, and, as w all
know, His Majsty nvr forgts a frind.

                                                       --J. B. WOODLEY




Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from _Galaxy Science Fiction_ October 1953.
    Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed. Minor spelling and
    typographical errors have been corrected without note. Calendar
    dates remain as printed, and, based on the narrative, may be
    intentional.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of With a Vengeance, by J. B. Woodley

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WITH A VENGEANCE ***

***** This file should be named 30475.txt or 30475.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/0/4/7/30475/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
