Project Gutenberg's The Foreign Hand Tie, by Gordon Randall Garrett

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Foreign Hand Tie

Author: Gordon Randall Garrett

Illustrator: Barberis

Release Date: November 18, 2009 [EBook #30497]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE FOREIGN HAND TIE ***




Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







                         Transcriber's Note:

  This etext was produced from Analog Science Fact & Fiction December 1961.
  Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S. copyright
  on this publication was renewed.



                        _The Foreign Hand Tie_


                          _BY DAVID GORDON_


     _Just because you can "see" something doesn't mean you
      understand it--and that can mean that even perfect telepathy
      isn't perfect communication...._


                       ILLUSTRATED BY BARBERIS

       *       *       *       *       *




From Istanbul, in Turkish Thrace, to Moscow, U.S.S.R., is only a couple of
hours outing for a round trip in a fast jet plane--a shade less than
eleven hundred miles in a beeline.

Unfortunately, Mr. Raphael Poe had no way of chartering a bee.

The United States Navy cruiser _Woonsocket_, having made its placid way
across the Mediterranean, up the Aegean Sea, and through the Dardanelles
to the Bosporous, stopped overnight at Istanbul and then turned around and
went back. On the way in, it had stopped at Gibraltar, Barcelona,
Marseilles, Genoa, Naples, and Athens--the main friendly ports on the
northern side of the Mediterranean. On the way back, it performed the same
ritual on the African side of the sea. Its most famous passengers were the
American Secretary of State, two senators, and three representatives.

Its most important passenger was Mr. Raphael Poe.

During the voyage in, Mr. Raphael Poe remained locked in a stateroom, all
by himself, twiddling his thumbs restlessly and playing endless games of
solitaire, making bets with himself on how long it would be before the
ship hit the next big wave and wondering how long it would take a man to
go nuts in isolation. On the voyage back, he was not aboard the
_Woonsocket_ at all, and no one missed him because only the captain and
two other Navy men had known he was aboard, and they knew that he had been
dropped overboard at Istanbul.

The sleek, tapered cylindroid might easily have been mistaken for a Naval
torpedo, since it was roughly the same size and shape. Actually, it was a
sort of hybrid, combining the torpedo and the two-man submarine that the
Japanese had used in World War II, plus refinements contributed by such
apparently diverse arts as skin-diving, cybernetics, and nucleonics.

Inside this one-man underwater vessel, Raphael Poe lay prone, guiding the
little atomic-powered submarine across the Black Sea, past Odessa, and up
the Dnieper. The first leg, the four hundred miles from the Bosporous to
the mouth of the river, was relatively easy. The two hundred and sixty
miles from there to the Dnepropetrovsk was a little more difficult, but
not terribly so. It became increasingly more difficult as the Dnieper
narrowed and became more shallow.

On to Kiev. His course changed at Dnepropetrovsk, from northeast to
northwest, for the next two hundred fifty miles. At Kiev, the river
changed course again, heading north. Three hundred and fifty miles farther
on, at Smolensk, he was heading almost due east.

It had not been an easy trip. At night, he had surfaced to get his
bearings and to recharge the air tanks. Several times, he had had to take
to the land, using the caterpillar treads on the little machine, because
of obstacles in the river.

At the end of the ninth day, he was still one hundred eighty miles from
Moscow, but, at that point, he got out of the submarine and prepared
himself for the trip overland. When he was ready, he pressed a special
button on the control panel of the expensive little craft. Immediately,
the special robot brain took over. It had recorded the trip upstream; by
applying that information in reverse--a "mirror image," so to speak--it
began guiding itself back toward Istanbul, applying the necessary
corrective factors that made the difference between an upstream and a
downstream trip. If it had made a mistake or had been discovered, it would
have blown itself to bits. As a tribute to modern robotics and
ultra-microminiaturization, it is a fact that the little craft was picked
up five days later a few miles from Istanbul by the U.S.S. _Paducah_.

By that time, a certain Vladimir Turenski, a shambling not-too-bright deaf
mute, had made his fully documented appearance in Moscow.

       *       *       *       *       *

Spies, like fairies and other such elusive sprites, traditionally come in
rings. The reason for this circumstructural metaphor is obscure, but it
remains a fact that a single spy, all by himself, is usually of very
little use to anybody. Espionage, on any useful scale, requires
organization.

There is, as there should be, a reason for this. The purpose of espionage
is to gather information--preferably, _useful_ information--against the
wishes of, and in spite of the efforts of, a group--usually referred to
as "the enemy"--which is endeavoring to prevent that information from
getting into other hands than their own. Such activities obviously imply
communication. An espioneur, working for Side A, who finds a bit of
important information about Side B must obviously communicate that bit of
information to Side A or it is of no use whatsoever.

All of these factors pose complex problems.

To begin with, the espioneur must get himself into a position in which he
can get hold of the information he wants. Usually, that means that he must
pass himself off as something he is not, a process which requires time.
Then, when he gets the information he is after, he must get it to his
employers quickly. Information, like fish, becomes useless after a certain
amount of time, and, unlike fish, there is no known way of refrigerating
it to retard spoilage.

It is difficult to transmit information these days. It is actually easier
for the espioneur to transmit it than to get it, generally speaking, but
it is difficult for him to do both jobs at once, so the spy ring's two
major parts consist of the ones who get the information from the enemy and
the ones who transmit it back to their employers.

Without magic, it is difficult for a single spy to be of any benefit. And
"magic," in this case, can be defined as some method by which information
can be either obtained or transmitted without fear of discovery by the
enemy. During World War I, a competent spy equipped with a compact
transistorized short-wave communications system could have had himself a
ball. If the system had included a miniature full-color television camera,
he could have gone hog wild. In those days, such equipment would have been
magic.

All this is not _Ã  propos_ of nothing. Mr. Raphael Poe was, in his own
way, a magician.

It is not to be supposed that the United States of America had no spy
rings in the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics at that time. There were
plenty of them. Raphael Poe could have, if it were so ordained, availed
himself of the services of any one or all of them. He did not do so for
two reasons. In the first place, the more people who are in on a secret,
the more who can give it away. In other words, a ring, like a chain, is
only as strong as its weakest section. In the second place, Raphael Poe
didn't need any assistance in the first place.

That is, he needed no more assistance that most magicians do--a shill in
the audience. In this particular case, the shill was his brother, Leonard
Poe.

       *       *       *       *       *

Operation Mapcase was as ultra-secret as it could possibly be. Although
there were perhaps two dozen men who knew of the existence of the
operation by its code name, such as the Naval officers who had helped get
Raphael Poe to his destination, there were only five men who really knew
what Operation Mapcase was all about.

Two of these were, of course, Raphael and Leonard Poe. Two others were the
President of the United States and the Secretary of Defense. The fifth was
Colonel Julius T. Spaulding, of United States Army Intelligence.

On the seventh day after Raphael Poe's arrival in Moscow, the other four
men met in Blair House, across the street from the White House, in a room
especially prepared for the purpose. No one but the President knew the
exact purpose of the meeting, although they had an idea that he wanted
more information of some kind.

The President himself was the last to arrive. Leaving two Secret Service
men standing outside the room, he carefully closed the door and turned to
face the Secretary of Defense, Colonel Spaulding, and Leonard Poe. "Sit
down, gentlemen," he said, seating himself as he spoke.

"Gentlemen, before we go any further, I must conduct one final experiment
in order to justify Operation Mapcase. I will not explain it just yet." He
looked at Lenny Poe, a small, dark-haired man with a largish nose. "Mr.
Poe, can you contact your brother at this moment?"

Lenny Poe was a man who was not overawed by anyone, and had no inclination
to be formal, not even toward the President. "Yeah, sure," he said
matter-of-factly.

[Illustration]

The President glanced at his watch. "It is now five minutes of ten. That
makes it five minutes of six in the evening in Moscow. Is your brother
free to move around? That is, can he go to a certain place in the city?"

Lenny closed his eyes for a moment, then opened them. "Rafe says he can go
any place that the average citizen would be allowed to go."

"Excellent," said the President. He gave Lenny an address--an intersection
of two streets not far from Red Square. "Can he get there within fifteen
minutes?"

"Make it twenty," said Lenny.

"Very well. Twenty minutes. When he gets there, I'll ask you to relay
further instructions."

Lenny Poe closed his eyes, folded his arms, and relaxed in his chair. The
other three men waited silently.

Nineteen minutes later, Lenny opened his eyes and said: "O.K. He's there.
Now what?"

"There is a lamppost on that corner, I believe," said the President. "Can
your brother see it?"

Lenny closed his eyes again. "Sure. There's a guy leaning against it."

The President's eyes brightened. "Describe him!"

Lenny, eyes still closed, said: "Five feet ten, heavy set, gray hair,
dark-rimmed glasses, brown suit, flashy necktie. By the cut of his
clothes, I'd say he was either British or American, probably American.
Fifty-five or fifty-six years old."

It was obvious to the Secretary of Defense and to Colonel Spaulding that
the President was suppressing some inward excitement.

"Very good, Mr. Poe!" he said. "Now, you will find a box of colored
pencils and a sketch pad in that desk over there. Can you draw me a fairly
accurate sketch of that man?"

"Yeah, sure." Lenny opened his eyes, moved over to the desk, took out the
pencils and sketch pad, and went to work. He had to close his eyes
occasionally, but his work was incredibly rapid and, at the same time,
almost photographically accurate.

As the picture took form, the President's inward excitement increased
perceptibly. When it was finally finished, Lenny handed the sketch to the
President without a word.

The President took it eagerly and his face broke out in his famous grin.
"Excellent! Perfect!" He looked at Lenny. "Your brother hasn't attracted
the man's attention in any way, has he?"

"Nope," said Lenny.

"Fine. The experiment is over. Relay my thanks to your brother. He can go
ahead with whatever he was doing now."

"I don't quite understand," said the Secretary of State.

"I felt it necessary to make one final experiment of my own devising," the
President said. "I wanted Raphael Poe to go to a particular place at a
particular time, with no advance warning, to transmit a picture of
something he had never seen before. I arranged this test myself, and I am
positive that there could be no trickery."

"Never seen before?" the Secretary repeated bewilderedly. He gestured at
the sketch. "Why, that's obviously Bill Donovan, of the Moscow delegation.
Poe could have seen a photograph of him somewhere before."

"Even so," the President pointed out, "there would be no way of knowing
that he would be at that spot. But that's beside the point. Look at that
necktie!"

"I had noticed it," the Defense Secretary admitted.

It was certainly an outstanding piece of neckwear. As drawn by Leonard
Poe, it was a piece of brilliant chartreuse silk, fully three and a half
inches wide at its broadest. Against that background, rose-pink nude girls
were cavorting with pale mauve satyrs.

"That tie," said the President, "was sent to me fifteen years ago by on of
my constituents, when I was in Congress. I never wore it, of course, but
it would have been criminal to have thrown away such a magnificently
obscene example of bad taste as that.

"I sent it to Donovan in a sealed diplomatic pouch by special courier,
with instructions to wear it at this time. He, of course, has no idea why
he is standing there. He is merely obeying orders.

"Gentlemen, this is completely convincing to me. Absolutely no one but
myself knew what I had in mind. It would have required telepathy even to
cheat.

"Thank you very much, Mr. Poe. Colonel Spaulding, you may proceed with
Operation Mapcase as planned."

       *       *       *       *       *

"Dr. Malekrinova, will you initial these requisition forms, please."

Dr. Sonya Malekrinova, a dowdy-looking, middle-aged woman with unplucked
eyebrows and a mole on her chin, adjusted her steel-rimmed glasses, took
the proffered papers from the clerk, ran her eyes over them, and then put
her initials on the bottom of each page.

"Thank you, Comrade Doctor," said the clerk when she handed back the sheaf
of papers.

"Certainly, Comrade."

And the two of them went about their business.

Not far away, in the Cathedral of St. Basil, Vladimir Turenski, alias
Raphael Poe, was also apparently going about his business. The cathedral
had not seen nor heard the Liturgy of the Russian Orthodox Church or any
other church, for a good many decades. The Bolsheviks, in their zeal to
protect the citizens of the Soviet Unions from the pernicious influence of
religion, had converted it into a museum as soon as possible.

It was the function of _Tovarishch_ Turenski to push a broom around the
floors of the museum, and this he did with great determination and
efficiency. He also cleaned windows and polished metalwork when the
occasion demanded. He was only one of a large crew of similarly employed
men, but he was a favorite with the Head Custodian, who not only felt
sorry for the simple-minded deaf-mute, but appreciated the hard work he
did. If, on occasion, Comrade Turenski would lean on his broom and fall
into a short reverie, it was excusable because he still managed to get all
his work done.

Behind Comrade Turenski, a guide was explaining a display to a group of
tourists, but Turenski ignored the distraction and kept his mind focused
on the thoughts of Dr. Sonya Malekrinova.

After nearly ten months of patient work, Raphael Poe had hit upon
something that was, to his way of thinking, more important than all the
information he had transmitted to Washington thus far.

Picking brains telepathically was not, even for him, an easy job. He had
the knack and the training but, in addition, there was the necessity of
establishing a rapport with the other mind. Since he was a physicist and
not a politician, it was much easier to get information from the mind of
Sonya Malekrinova than to get it from the Premier. The only person with
whom he could keep in contact over any great distance was his brother, and
that only because the two of them had grown up together.

He could pick up the strongest thoughts of any nearby person very easily.
He did not need to hear the actual words, for instance, of a nearby
conversation in order to follow it perfectly, because the words of verbal
communication were strong in a person's mind.

But getting deeper than that required an increasing amount of
understanding of the functioning of the other person's mind.

His ability to eavesdrop on conversations had been of immense benefit to
Washington so far, but is was difficult for him to get close enough to the
higher-ups in the Soviet government to get all the data that the President
of the United States wanted.

But now that he had established a firm mental linkage with one of the
greatest physicists in the Soviet Union, he could begin to send
information that would be of tremendous value to the United States.

He brushed up a pile of trash, pushed it into a dust pan, and carried it
off toward the disposal chute that led to the trash cans. In the room
where the brooms were kept, he paused and closed his eyes.

_Lenny! Are picking this up?_

_Sure, Rafe. I'm ready with the drawing board anytime you are._

As Dr. Sonya Malekrinova stood in her laboratory looking over the
apparatus she was perfecting for the glory of the Soviet State, she had no
notion that someone halfway around the world was also looking at it over
her shoulder--or rather, through her own eyes.

       *       *       *       *       *

Lenny started with the fives first, and worked his way up to the larger
denominations.

"Five, ten, fifteen, twenty, twenty-five, thirty--forty, fifty, sixty...."
he muttered happily to himself. "Two fifty, three, three-fifty, four,
four-fifty."

It was all there, so he smiled benevolently at the man in the pay window.
"Thank you muchly." Then he stepped aside to let another lucky man cash a
winning ticket.

His horse had come in at fifteen, six-ten, four-fifty for Straight, Place,
and Show, and sixty bucks on the nose had paid off very nicely.

Lenny Poe took out his copy of the _Daily Racing Form_ and checked over
the listing for the next race.

_Hm-m-m, ha. Purse, $7500. Four-year-olds and up: handicap. Seven
furlongs. Turf course. Hm-m-m, ha._

Lenny Poe had a passion for throwing his money away on any unpredictable
event that would offer him odds. He had, deep down, an artistic soul, but
he didn't let that interfere with his desire to lay a bet at the drop of
an old fedora.

He had already decided, several hours before, that Ducksoup, in the next
race, would win handily and would pay off at something like twenty or
twenty-five to one. But he felt it his duty to look one last time at the
previous performance record, just to be absolutely positive.

Satisfied, he folded the _Racing Form_, shoved it back into his pocket,
and walked over to the fifty-dollar window.

"Gimmie nine tickets on Ducksoup in the seventh," he said, plonking the
handful of bills down on the counter.

But before the man behind the window grating could take the money, a huge,
hamlike, and rather hairy hand came down on top of his own hand, covering
it and the money at the same time.

"Hold it, Lenny," said a voice at the same time.

Lenny jerked his head around to his right and looked up to see a largish
man who had "cop" written all over him. Another such individual crowded
past Lenny on his left to flash a badge on the man in the betting window,
so that he would know that this wasn't a holdup.

"Hey!" said Lenny. His mind was thinking fast. He decided to play his
favorite role, that of the indignant Italian. "Whatsa da matta with you,
hah? Thisa no a free country? A man gotta no rights?"

"Come on, Mr. Poe," the big man said quietly, "this is important."

"Poe? You outta you mind? Thatsa name of a river----or a raven. I'm a
forgetta which. My namesa Manelli!"

"_Scusi, signore_," the big man said with exaggerated politeness, "_ma se
lei Ã¨ veramente italiano, non' Ã¨ l'uomo che cerchiamo._"

Lenny's Italian was limited to a handful of words. He know he was trapped,
but he faced the situation with aplomb. "Thatsa lie! I was inna Chicago
that night!"

"_Ah! CosÃ¨ credero. Avanti, saccentone._" He jerked his thumb toward the
gate. "Let's go."

Lenny muttered something that the big man didn't quite catch.

"What'd you say?"

"Upper United States--the northern United States," Lenny said calmly
shoving his four hundred fifty dollars into his pocket. "That's where
Chicago is. Never mind. Come in, boys; back to the drawing board."

The two men escorted Lenny to a big, powerful Lincoln; he climbed into the
back seat with the big one while the other one got behind the wheel.

As soon as they had left the racetrack and were well out on the highway,
the driver said: "You want to call in, Mario? This traffic is pretty
heavy."

The big man beside Lenny leaned forward, over the back of the front seat,
unhooked the receiver of the scrambler-equipped radiophone, and sat back
down. He thumbed a button on the side of the handset and said: "This is
Seven Oh Two." After a short silence, he said: "You can call off the net.
You want him brought in?" He listened for a moment. "O.K. Are we cleared
through the main gate? O.K. Off."

He leaned forward to replace the receiver, speaking to the driver as he
did so. "Straight to the Air Force base. They've got a jet waiting there
for him."

He settled back comfortably and looked at Lenny. "You could at least tell
people where you're going."

"Very well," said Lenny. He folded his arms, closed his eyes, and relaxed.
"Right now, I'm going off to dreamland."

He waited a short while to see if the other would say anything. He didn't,
so Lenny proceeded to do exactly what he had promised to do.

He went off to dreamland.

He had not been absolutely sure, when he made the promise, that he would
actually do just that, but the odds were in favor of it. It was now one
o'clock in the morning in Moscow, and Lenny's brother, Raphael, was a man
of regular habits.

Lenny reached out. When he made contact, all he got was a jumble of hash.
It was as though someone had made a movie by cutting bits and snippets
from a hundred different films, no bit more than six or seven frames long,
with a sound track that might or might not match, and projected the result
through a drifting fog, using an ever-changing lens that rippled like the
surface of a wind-ruffled pool. Sometimes one figure would come into sharp
focus for a fraction of a second, sometimes in color, sometimes not.

Sometimes Lenny was merely observing the show, sometimes he was in it.

_Rafe! Hey, Rafe! Wake up!_

The jumble of hash began to stabilize, becoming more coherent--

       *       *       *       *       *

Lenny sat behind the far desk, watching his brother come up the primrose
path in a unicycle. He pulled it to a halt in front of the desk, opened
the pilot's canopy, threw out a rope ladder, and climbed down. His gait
was a little awkward, in spite of the sponge-rubber floor, because of the
huge flowered carpetbag he was carrying. A battered top hat sat
precariously on his blond, curly hair.

"Lenny! Boy, am I glad to see you! I've got it! The whole trouble is in
the wonkler, where the spadulator comes across the trellis grid!" He
lifted the carpetbag and sat it down on the lab table. "Connect up the
groffle meter! We'll show those pentagon pickles who has the push-and-go
here!"

"Rafe," Lenny said gently, "wake up. You're dreaming. You're asleep. I
want to talk to you."

"I know." He grinned widely. "And you don't want any back talk from me!
Yok-yok-yok! Just wait'll I show you!"

In his hands, he held an object which Lenny did not at first understand.
Then Rafe's mind brought it into focus.

"This"--Rafe held it up--"is a rocket motor!"

"Rafe, wake up!" Lenny said.

The surroundings stabilized a little more.

"I will in just a minute, Lenny." Rafe was apologetic. "But let me show
you this." It did bear some resemblance to a rocket motor. It was about as
long as a man's forearm and consisted of a bulbous chamber at one end,
which narrowed down into a throat and then widened into a hornlike exhaust
nozzle. The chamber was black; the rest was shiny chrome.

Rafe grasped it by the throat with one hand. The other, he clasped firmly
around the combustion chamber. "Watch! Now watch!"

He gave the bulbous, rubbery chamber a hard squeeze--

"_SQUAWK!_" went the horn.

"Rafe!" Lenny shouted. "Wake up! WAKE UP!"

Rafe blinked as the situation clarified. "What? Just A Second. Lenny.
Just...."

       *       *       *       *       *

"... _A second._"

Raphael Poe blinked his eyes open. The moon was shining through the dirty
windows of the dingy little room that was all he could call home--for a
while, at least. Outside the window were the gray streets of Moscow.

His brother's thoughts resounded in his fully awake brain. _Rafe! You
awake?_

_Sure. Sure. What is it?_

The conversation that followed was not in words or pictures, but a weird
combination of both, plus a strong admixture of linking concepts that were
neither.

In essence, Lenny merely reported that he had taken the day off to go to
the races and that Colonel Spaulding was evidently upset for some reason.
He wondered if Rafe were in any kind of trouble.

_No trouble. Everything's fine at this end. But Dr. Malekrinova won't be
back on the job until tomorrow afternoon--or,_ this _afternoon,
rather._

_I know_, Lenny replied. _That's why I figured I could take time off for a
go at the ponies._

_I wonder why they're in such a fuss, then?_ Rafe thought.

_I'll let you know when I find out_, Lenny said. _Go back to sleep and
don't worry._

[Illustration]

       *       *       *       *       *

In a small office in the Pentagon, Colonel Julius T. Spaulding cradled the
telephone on his desk and looked at the Secretary of Defense. "That was
the airfield. Poe will be here shortly. We'll get to the bottom of this
pretty quickly."

"I hope so, Julius," the Secretary said heavily. "The president is
beginning to think we're both nuts."

The colonel, a lean, nervous man with dark, bushy eyebrows and a mustache
to match, rolled his eyes up toward the ceiling. "I'm beginning to agree
with him."

The Defense Secretary scowled at him. "What do you mean?"

"Anybody who takes telepathy seriously is considered a nut," said the
colonel.

"True," said the Secretary, "but that doesn't mean we _are_ nuts."

"Oh, yeah?" The colonel took the cigar out of his mouth a gestured with
it. "Anybody who'd do something that convinces all his friends he's nuts
must be nuts."

The Secretary smiled wanly. "I wish you wouldn't be so logical. You almost
convince me."

"Don't worry," said the colonel. "I'm not ready to have this room measured
for sponge-rubber wallpaper just yet. Operation Mapcase has helped a lot
in the past few months, and it will help even more."

"All you have to do is get the bugs out of it," said the Secretary.

"If we did that," Colonel Spaulding said flatly, "the whole operation
would fold from lack of personnel."

"Just carry on the best you can," the Secretary said gloomily as he got
up to leave. "I'll let you handle it."

"Fine. I'll call you later."

       *       *       *       *       *

Twenty minutes after the Defense Secretary had gone, Lenny Poe was shown
into Colonel Spaulding's office. The agent who had brought him in closed
the door gently, leaving him alone with the colonel.

"I told you I'd be back this evening. What were you in such a hurry
about?"

"You're supposed to stay in touch," Colonel Spaulding pointed out. "I
don't mind your penchant for ponies particularly, but I'd like to know
where to find you if I need you."

"I wouldn't mind in the least, colonel. I'd phone you every fifteen
minutes if that's what you wanted. Except for one thing."

"What's that?"

Lenny jerked a thumb over his shoulder. "Your linguistically talented
flatfeet. Did you ever try to get into a floating crap game when you were
being followed by a couple of bruisers who look more like cops than cops
do?"

"Look, Poe, I can find you plenty of action right here in Washington, if
it won't offend your tender sensibilities to shoot crap with a senator or
two. Meanwhile, sit down and listen. This is important."

Lenny sat own reluctantly. "O.K. What is it?"

"Dr. Davenport and his crew are unhappy about that last batch of drawings
you and I gave 'em."

"What's the matter? Don't they like the color scheme? I never thought
scientists had any artistic taste, anyway."

"It's got nothing to do with that. The--"

The phone rang. Colonel Spaulding scooped it up and identified himself.
Then: "What? Yeah. All right, send him in."

He hung up and looked back at Lenny. "Davenport. We can get his story
firsthand. Just sit there and look important."

Lenny nodded. He knew that Dr. Amadeus Davenport was aware that the source
of those drawings was Soviet Russia, but he did not know how they had been
obtained. As far as he knew, it was just plain, ordinary spy work.

He came in briskly. He was a tall, intelligent-looking man with a rather
craggy face and thoughtful brown eyes. He put a large brief case on the
floor, and, after the preliminaries were over, he came right to the point.

"Colonel Spaulding, I spoke to the Secretary of Defense, and he agreed
that perhaps this situation might be cleared up if I talked directly with
you."

"I hope so," the colonel said. "Just what is it that seems to be bothering
you?"

"These drawings," Davenport said, "don't make any sense. The device
they're supposed to represent couldn't do anything. Look; I'll show you."

He took from his brief case photostatic copies of some of the drawings
Lenny had made. Five of them were straight blueprint-type drawings; the
sixth was a copy of Lenny's near-photographic paintings of the device
itself.

"This component, here," he said, gesturing at the set of drawings, "simply
baffles us. We're of the opinion that your agents are known to the Soviet
government and have been handed a set of phony plans."

"What's it supposed to do?" Lenny asked.

"We don't know what it's _supposed_ to do," the scientist said, "but it's
doubtful that it would _actually_ do anything." He selected one of the
photocopies. "See that thing? The one shaped like the letter Q with an
offset tail? According to the specifications, it is supposed to be painted
emerald green, but there's no indication of what it is."

       *       *       *       *       *

Lenny Poe reached out, picked up the photocopy and looked at it. It
was--or had been--an exact copy of the drawing that was used by Dr. Sonya
Malekrinova. But, whereas the original drawing has been labeled entirely
in Cyrillic characters, these labels were now in English.

The drawings made no sense to Lenny at all. They hadn't when he'd made
them. His brother was a scientist, but Lenny understood none of it.

"Who translated the Russian into English?" he asked.

"A Mr. Berensky. He's one of our best experts on the subject. I assure you
the translations are accurate, Dr. Davenport said.

"But if you don't know what that thing is," the colonel objected, "how
can you say the device won't work? Maybe it would if that Q-shaped thing
was--"

"I know what you mean," Davenport interrupted. "But that's not the only
part of the machine that doesn't make any sense."

He went on to explain other discrepancies he had detected in the drawings,
but none of it penetrated to Lenny, although Colonel Spaulding seemed to
be able to follow the physicist's conversation fairly readily.

"Well, what's you suggestion, doctor?" the colonel asked at last.

"If you agents could get further data," the physicist said carefully, "it
might be of some use. At the same time, I'd check up on the possibility
that your agents are known to the NKVD."

"I'll see what can be done," said the colonel. "Would you mind leaving
those copies of the drawings with me for a while?"

"Go right ahead," Davenport said. "One other thing. If we assume this
device is genuine, then it must serve some purpose. It might help if we
knew what the device is supposed to _do_."

"I'll see what can be done," Colonel Spaulding repeated.

When Davenport had gone, Spaulding looked at Poe. "Got any explanation for
that one?"

"No," Lenny admitted. "All I can do is check with Rafe. He won't be awake
for a few hours yet. I'll check on it and give you an answer in the
morning."

       *       *       *       *       *

Early next morning, Colonel Spaulding walked through his outer office. He
stopped at the desk where the pretty brunette WAC sergeant was typing
industriously, leaned across the desk, and gave her his best leer. "How
about a date tonight, music lover?" he asked, "'_Das Rheingold_' is
playing tonight. A night at the opera would do you good."

"I'm sorry, sir," she said primly, "you know enlisted women aren't allowed
to date officers."

"Make out an application for OCS. I'll sign it."

She smiled at him. "But then I wouldn't have any excuse for turning you
down. And then what would my husband say?"

"I'll bribe him. I'll send _him_ to OCS."

"He's not eligible. Officers are automatically disqualified."

Colonel Spaulding sighed. "A guy can't win against competition like that.
Anything new this morning?"

"Mr. Poe is waiting in your office. Other than that, there's just the
routine things."

He went on into his office. Lenny Poe was seated behind the colonel's
desk, leaning back in the swivel chair, his feet on the top of the desk.
He was sound asleep.

The colonel walked over to the desk, took his cigar from his mouth, and
said: "_Good_ morrrning, Colonel Spaulding!"

Lenny snapped awake. "I'm not Colonel Spaulding," he said.

"Then why are you sitting in Colonel Spaulding's chair?"

"I figured if I was asleep nobody'd know the difference." Lenny got up and
walked over to one of the other chairs. "These don't lean back
comfortably. I can't sleep in 'em."

"You can sleep later. How was your session with Rafe?"

Lenny glowered glumly. "I wish you and Rafe hadn't talked me into this
job. It's a strain on the brain. I don't know how he expects anyone to
understand all that garbage."

"All what garbage?"

Lenny waved a hand aimlessly. "All this scientific guff. I'm an artist,
not a scientist. If Rafe can get me a clear picture of something, I can
copy it, but when he tries to explain something scientific, he might as
well be thinking in Russian or Old Upper Middle High Martian or
something."

"I know," said Colonel Spaulding, looking almost as glum as Lenny. "Did
you get anything at all that would help Dr. Davenport figure out what
those drawings mean?"

"Rafe says that the translations are all wrong," Lenny said, "but I can't
get a clear picture of just what _is_ wrong."

       *       *       *       *       *

Colonel Spaulding thought for a while in silence. Telepathy--at least in
so far as the Poe brothers practiced it--certainly had its limitations.
Lenny couldn't communicate mentally with anyone except his brother Rafe.
Rafe could pick up the thoughts of almost anyone if he happened to be
close by, but couldn't communicate over a long distance with anyone but
Lenny.

The main trouble lay in the fact that it was apparently impossible to
transmit a concept directly from Brain A to Brain B unless the basic
building blocks of the concept were already present in Brain B. Raphael
Poe, for instance, had spent a long time studying Russian, reading
Dostoevski, Tolstoy, and Turgenev in the original tongue, familiarizing
himself with modern Russian thought through the courtesy of _Izvestia_,
_Pravda_, and _Krokodil_, and, finally, spending time in the United
Nations building and near the Russian embassy in order to be sure that he
could understand the mental processes involved.

Now, science has a language of its own. Or, rather, a multiplicity of
languages, each derived partly from the native language of the various
scientific groups and partly of borrowings from other languages. In the
physical sciences especially, the language of mathematics is a further
addition.

More than that, the practice of the scientific method automatically
induces a thought pattern that is different from the type of thought
pattern that occurs in the mind of a person who is not scientifically
oriented.

Lenny's mind was a long way from being scientifically oriented. Worse, he
was a bigot. He not only didn't know why the light in his room went on
when he flipped the switch, he didn't _want_ to know. To him, science was
just so much flummery, and he didn't want his brain cluttered up with it.

Facts mean nothing to a bigot. He has already made up his mind, and he
doesn't intend to have his solid convictions disturbed by anything so
unimportant as a contradictory fact. Lenny was of the opinion that all
mathematics was arcane gobbledygook, and his precise knowledge of the
mathematical odds in poker and dice games didn't abate that opinion one
whit. Obviously, a mind like that is utterly incapable of understanding a
projected thought of scientific content; such a thought bounces off the
impregnable mind shield that the bigot has set up around his little area
of bigotry.

Colonel Spaulding had been aware of these circumstances since the
inception of the Operation Mapcase. Even though he, himself, had never
experienced telepathy more than half a dozen times in his life, he had
made a study of the subject and was pretty well aware of its limitations.
The colonel might have dismissed--as most men do--his own fleeting
experiences as "coincidence" or "imagination" if it had not been for the
things he had seen and felt in Africa during World War II. He had only
been a captain then, on detached duty with British Intelligence, under
crusty old Colonel Sir Cecil Haversham, who didn't believe a word of "all
that mystic nonsense." Colonel Haversham had made the mistake of
alienating one of the most powerful of the local witch doctors.

The British Government had hushed it all up afterwards, of course, but
Spaulding still shuddered when he thought of the broken-spirited,
shrunken caricature of his old self that Colonel Haversham had become
after he told the witch doctor where to get off.

Spaulding had known that there were weaknesses in the telepathic
communication linkage that was the mainspring of Operation Mapcase, but he
had thought that they could be overcome by the strengths of the system.
Lenny had no blockage whatever against receiving visual patterns and
designs. He could reproduce an electronic wiring diagram perfectly
because, to him, it was not a grouping of scientific symbols, but a design
of lines, angles, and curves.

At first, it is true, he had had a tendency to change them here and there,
to make the design balance better, to make it more aesthetically
satisfying to his artistic eye, but that tendency had been easily
overcome, and Colonel Spaulding was quite certain that that wasn't what
was wrong now.

Still--

"Lenny," he said carefully, "are you sure you didn't jigger up those
drawings to make 'em look prettier?"

Lenny Poe gave the colonel a look of disgust. "Positive. Rafe checked 'em
over every inch of the way as I was drawing them, and he rechecked again
last night--or this morning--on those photostats Davenport gave us. That's
when he said there was something wrong with the translations.

"But he couldn't make it clear just what was wrong, eh?"

Lenny shrugged. "How anybody could make any sense out of that gobbledegook
is beyond me."

The colonel blew out a cloud of cigar smoke and looked thoughtfully at the
ceiling. As long as the diagrams were just designs on paper, Lenny Poe
could pick them up fine. Which meant that everything was jim-dandy as long
as the wiring diagrams were labeled in the Cyrillic alphabet. The labels
were just more squiggles to be copied as a part of the design.

But if the labels were in English, Lenny's mind would try to "make sense"
out of them, and since scientific concepts did _not_ "make sense" to him,
the labels came out as pure nonsense. In one of his drawings, a lead wire
had been labeled "simply ground to powder," and if the original drawing
hadn't been handy to check with, it might have taken quite a bit of
thought to realize that what was meant was "to power supply ground."
Another time, a GE 2N 188A transistor had come out labeled GEZNISSA. There
were others--much worse.

Russian characters, on the other hand, didn't have to make any sense to
Lenny, so his mind didn't try to force them into a preconceived mold.

       *       *       *       *       *

Lenny unzipped the leather portfolio he had brought with him--a
specially-made carrier that looked somewhat like an oversized brief case.

"Maybe these'll help," he said.

"We managed to get two good sketches of the gadget--at least, as much of
it as that Russian lady scientist has put together so far. I kind of like
the rather abstract effect you get from all those wires snaking in and
around, with that green glass tube in the center. Pretty, isn't it?"

[Illustration]

"Very," said the colonel without conviction. "I wonder if it will help
Davenport any?" He looked at the pictures for several seconds more, then,
suddenly, his eyes narrowed. "Lenny--this piece of green glass--the
thing's shaped like the letter Q."

"Yeah, sort of. Why?"

"You said it was a tube, but you didn't make it look hollow when you drew
it."

"It isn't; it's solid. Does a tube have to be hollow? Yeah, I guess it
does, doesn't it? Well, then, it isn't a tube."

Colonel Spaulding picked up the phone and dialed a number.

"Colonel Spaulding here," he said after a moment. "Let me speak to Dr.
Davenport." And, after a wait: "This is Colonel Spaulding, doctor. I think
we may have something for you."

"Good morning, colonel. I'm glad to hear that. What is it?"

"The Q-shaped gadget--the one that you said was supposed to be painted
emerald green. Are you _sure_ that's the right translation of the
Russian?"

"Well ... uh--" Davenport hesitated. "I can't be sure on my own say-so, of
course. _I_ don't understand Russian. But I assure you that Mr. Berensky
is perfectly reliable."

"Oh, I have no doubt of that," Colonel Spaulding said easily. "But, tell
me, does Mr. Berensky know how to read a circuit diagram?"

"He does," Davenport said, somewhat testily. "Of course, he wasn't shown
the diagram itself. We had the Russian labels copied, and he translated
from a list."

"I had a sneaking suspicion that was it," said Spaulding. "Tell me,
doctor, what does L-E-A-D spell?"

"Lead," said the doctor promptly, pronouncing it _leed_. Then, after a
pause, he said: "Or lead," this time pronouncing it _led_. "It would
depend on the context."

"Suppose it was on a circuit diagram," the colonel prompted.

"Then it would probably be _leed_. What's all this leading up to,
colonel?"

"Bear with me. Suppose you had a cable coming from a storage battery, and
you wanted to make sure that the cable was reasonably resistant to
corrosion, so you order it made out of the metal, lead. It would be a _led
leed_, wouldn't it?"

"Um-m-m ... I suppose so."

"You might get pretty confused if you didn't have a circuit diagram in
front of you to tell you what the label was talking about, mightn't you?"

"I see what you mean," the scientist said slowly. "But we can't show those
circuit diagrams to Berensky. The Secretary of Defense himself has
classified them as Class Triple-A Ultra-Hyper Top Secret. That puts them
just below the Burn-The-Contents-Before-Reading class, and Berensky
doesn't have that kind of clearance."

"Then get somebody else," Colonel Spaulding said tiredly. "All you need is
a man who can understand technical Russian and has a top-level secrecy
clearance. If we haven't got at least one man in these United States with
such simple qualifications as those, them we might as well give the
country over to the Reds or back to the Redskins, since our culture is
irreprievably doomed." And he lowered the phone gently to its cradle.

"There's no such word as 'irreprievably'," Lenny pointed out.

"There is now," said Colonel Spaulding.

       *       *       *       *       *

Raphael Poe moseyed through the streets of Moscow in an apparently aimless
manner. The expression on his face was that of a reasonably happy moron.

His aimless manner was only apparent. Actually, he was heading toward the
Lenin Soviet People's Higher Research Laboratories. Dr. Sonya Borisovna
Malekrinova would be working late this evening, and he wanted to get as
close as possible in order to pick up as much information as he could.

Rafe had a great deal of admiration for that woman, he admitted to
himself. She was, granted, as plain as an unsalted _matzoh_. No. That was
an understatement. If it were possible to die of the uglies, Sonya
Borisovna would have been dangerously ill.

Her disposition did nothing to alleviate that drawback. She fancied
herself as cold, hard, analytical, and ruthless; actually she was waspish,
arrogant, overbearing, and treacherous. What she considered in herself to
be scientific detachment was really an isolation born of fear and distrust
of the entire human race.

To her, Communism was a religion; "_Das Kapital_" and "_The Communist
Manifesto_" were holy writ enshrining the dogmata of Marxism-Leninism, and
the conflict with the West was a _jehad_, a holy war in which God, in His
manifestation as Dialectic Materialism, would naturally win out in the
end.

All of which goes to show that a scientific bent, in itself, does not
necessarily keep one from being a bigot.

Rafe's admiration for the woman stemmed solely from the fact that, in
spite of all the powerful drawbacks that existed in her mind, she was
still capable of being a brilliant, if somewhat erratic scientist.

There was a more relaxed air in Moscow these days. The per capita
production of the Soviet Union still did not come up to that of the United
States, but the recent advances in technology did allow a feeling of
accomplishment, and the hard drive for superiority was softened a trifle.
It was no longer considered the height of indolence and unpatriotic
time-wasting to sit on a bench and feed pigeons. Nor was food so scarce
and costly that throwing away a few bread crumbs could be considered
sabotage.

So Rafe Poe found himself a quiet corner near the Lenin Soviet People's
Laboratories, took out a small bag of dried breadcrumbs, and was soon
surrounded by pigeons.

Dr. Malekrinova was carefully calibrating and balancing the electronic
circuits that energized and activated and controlled the output of the
newly-installed beam generator--a ring of specially-made greenish glass
that had a small cylinder of the same glass projecting out at a tangent.
Her assistant, Alexis, a man of small scientific ability but a gifted
mechanic, worked stolidly with her. It was not an easy job for Alexis;
Sonya Borisovna was by no means an easy woman to work with. There was, as
there should have been, a fifty-fifty division in all things--a proper
state of affairs in a People's Republic. Alexis Andreyevich did half the
physical work, got all the blame when things went wrong, and none of the
credit when things went right. Sonya Borisovna got the remaining fifty
percent.

Sonya Borisovna Malekrinova had been pushing herself too hard, and she
knew it. But, she told herself, for the glory of the Soviet peoples, the
work must go on.

After spending two hours taking down instrument readings, she took the
results to her office and began to correlate them.

_Have to replace that 140-9.0 micromicrofarad frequency control on stage
two with something more sensitive_, she thought. _And the field modulation
coils require closer adjustment._

She took off her glasses and rubbed at her tired eyes while she thought.
_Perhaps the 25 microfarad, 12 volt electrolytic condenser could be used
to feed the pigeons, substituting a breadcrumb capacitor in the sidewalk
circuit._

She opened her eyes suddenly and stared at the blank wall in front of her.
"Pigeons?" she said wonderingly. "_Breadcrumb_ capacitor? Am I losing my
mind? What kind of nonsense is that?"

She looked back down at her notes, then replaced her glasses so that she
could read them. Determined not to let her mind wander in that erratic
fashion again, she returned her attention to the work at hand.

She found herself wondering if it might not be better to chuck the whole
job and get out while the getting was good. _The old gal_, she thought,
_is actually tapping my mind! She's picking up everything!_

Sonya Borisovna sat bolt upright in her chair, staring at the blank wall
again. "Why am I thinking such nonsense?" she said aloud. "And why should
I be thinking in English?" When her words registered on her ears, she
realized that she was actually _speaking_ in English. She was thoroughly
acquainted with the language, of course, but it was not normal for her to
think in it unless she happened to be conversing with someone in that
tongue.

The first whisper of a suspicion began to take form in the mind of Dr.
Sonya Borisovna Malekrinova.

Half a block away, Raphael Poe emptied the last of his breadcrumbs on the
sidewalk and began walking away. He kept his mind as blank as possible,
while his brow broke out in a cold sweat.

       *       *       *       *       *

"That," said Colonel Julius Spaulding scathingly, "is as pretty a mess as
I've seen in years."

"It's a breadboard circuit, I'll admit," Dr. Davenport said defensively,
"but it's built according to the schematics you gave us."

"Doctor," said the colonel, "during the war the British dropped our group
a radio transmitter. It was the only way to get the stuff into Africa
quickly. The parachute failed to open. The transmitter fell two thousand
feet, hit the side of a mountain, and tumbled down another eight hundred
feet. When we found it, four days later, its wiring was in better shape
than that thing is in now."

"It's quite sufficient to test the operation of the device," Davenport
said coldly.

Spaulding had to admit to himself that it probably was. The thing was a
slapdash affair--the colonel had a strong feeling that Davenport had
assigned the wiring job to an apprentice and gave him half an hour to do
the job--but the soldering jobs looked tight enough, and the components
didn't look as though they'd all been pulled out of the salvage bin. What
irritated Colonel Spaulding was Davenport's notion that the whole thing
was a waste of time, energy, money, and materials, and, therefore, there
was no point in doing a decent job of testing it at all.

He was glad that Davenport didn't know how the information about the
device had been transported to the United States. As it was, he considered
the drawings a hoax on the part of the Russians; if he had been told that
they had been sent telepathically, he would probably have gone into fits
of acute exasperation over such idiocy.

The trouble with Davenport was that, since the device didn't make any
sense to him, he didn't believe it would function at all.

"Oh, it will do _something_, all right," he'd said once, "but it won't be
anything that needs all that apparatus. Look here--" He had pointed toward
the schematic. "Where do you think all that energy is going? All you're
going to get is a little light, a lot of heat, and a couple of burned out
coils. I could do the same job cheaper with a dozen 250 watt light bulbs."

To be perfectly honest with himself, Spaulding had to admit that he wasn't
absolutely positive that the device would do anything in particular,
either. His own knowledge of electronic circuitry was limited to ham radio
experience, and even that was many years out of date. He couldn't be
absolutely sure that the specifications for the gadget hadn't been garbled
in transmission.

The Q-shaped gizmo, for instance. It had taken the better part of a week
for Raphael Poe to transmit the information essential to the construction
of that enigmatic bit of glass.

Rafe had had to sit quietly in the privacy of his own room and print out
the specifications in Russian, then sit and look at the paper while Lenny
copied the "design." Then each paper had to be carefully destroyed, which
wasn't easy to do. You don't go around burning papers in a crowded
Russian tenement unless you want the people in the next room to wonder
what you're up to.

Then the drawings Lenny had made had had to be translated into English and
the piece carefully made to specifications.

Now here it was, all hooked up and, presumably, ready for action. Colonel
Spaulding fervently hoped there would _be_ some action; he didn't like the
smug look on Dr. Amadeus Davenport's face.

       *       *       *       *       *

The device was hooked up on a testing-room circuit and controlled from
outside. The operation could be watched through a heavy pane of
bulletproof glass. "With all that power going into it," Davenport said, "I
don't want anyone to get hurt by spatters of molten metal when those field
coils blow."

They went outside to the control console, and Dr. Davenport flipped the
energizing switch. After the device had warmed up on low power, Davenport
began turning knobs slowly, increasing the power flow. In the testing
room, the device just sat there, doing nothing visible, but the meters on
the control console showed that something was going on. A greenish glow
came from the housing that surrounded the Q-shaped gadget.

"Where the Russians made their mistake in trying to fool anyone with that
thing was in their design of that laser component," said Dr. Davenport.
"Or, I should say, the thing that is supposed to look like a laser
component."

"Laser?" said Colonel Spaulding uncomprehendingly.

"It means 'light amplification by stimulated emission of radiation',"
Davenport explained. "Essentially, a laser consists of a gas-filled tube
or a solid ruby bar with parallel mirrors at both ends. By exciting the
atoms from outside, light is generated within the tube, and some of it
begins to bounce back and forth between the mirrors at the ends. This
tends to have a cascade effect on the atoms which have picked up the
energy from outside, so that more and more of the light generated inside
the tube tends to be parallel to the length of the tube. One of the
mirrors is only partially silvered, and eventually the light bouncing back
and forth becomes powerful enough to flash through the half-silvered end,
giving a coherent beam of light."

"Maybe that's what this is supposed to be," said the colonel.

Davenport chuckled dryly. "Not a chance. Not with an essentially circular
tube that isn't even silvered."

Lenny Poe, the colonel noticed, wasn't the only person around who didn't
care whether the thing he referred to as a "tube" was hollow or not.

"Is it doing anything?" Colonel Spaulding asked anxiously, trying to read
the meters over Davenport's shoulder.

"It's heating up," Davenport said dryly.

Spaulding looked back at the apparatus. A wisp of smoke was rising slowly
from a big coil.

A relay clicked minutely.

_WHAP!_

For a confused second, everything seemed to happen at once.

But it didn't; there was a definite order to it.

First, a spot on the ceramic tile wall of the room became suddenly
red, orange, white hot. Then there was a little crater of incandescent
fury, as though a small volcano had erupted in the wall. Following that,
there was a sputtering and crackling from the innards of the device
itself, and a cloud of smoke arose suddenly, obscuring things in the room.
Finally, there was the crash of circuit-breakers as they reacted to the
overload from the short circuit.

There was silence for a moment, then the hiss of the automatic fire
extinguishers in the testing room as they poured a cloud of carbon dioxide
snow on the smoldering apparatus.

"There," said Davenport with utter satisfaction. "What did I tell you?"

"You didn't tell me this thing was a heat-ray projector," said Colonel
Spaulding.

"What are you talking about?" Dr. Davenport said disdainfully.

"Develop the film in those automatic cameras," Spaulding said, "and I'll
show you what I'm talking about!"

As far as Colonel Spaulding was concerned, the film showed clearly what
had happened. A beam of energy had leaped from the "tail" of the Q-tube,
hit the ceramic tile of the wall, and burned its way through in half a
second or so. The hole in the wall, surrounded by fused ceramic, was mute
evidence of the occurrence of what Spaulding had seen.

But Dr. Davenport pooh-poohed the whole thing. Evidence to the contrary,
he was quite certain that no such thing had happened. A piece of hot glass
from a broken vacuum tube had done it, he insisted.

A piece of hot glass had burned its way through half an inch of tile? And
a wall?

Davenport muttered something about the destructive effects of shaped
charges. He was more willing to believe that something as wildly
improbable as that had happened than admit that the device had done what
Colonel Spaulding was quite certain it had done.

Within three hours, Davenport had three possible explanations of what had
happened, each of which required at least four unlikely things to happen
coincidentally.

Colonel Spaulding stalked back to his office in a state of angry disgust.
Just because the thing was foreign to Davenport's notions, he had
effectively tied his own hands--and Colonel Spaulding's, too.

"Where's Lenny Poe?" he asked the WAC sergeant. "I want to talk to him."

She shook her head. "I don't know, sir. Lieutenant Fesner called in half
an hour ago. Mr. Poe has eluded them again."

[Illustration]

Colonel Spaulding gazed silently at the ceiling for a long moment. Then:
"Sergeant Nugget, take a letter. To the President of the United States,
1600 Pennsylvania Avenue, Washington, D.C.

"Dear Sir. Consider this my resignation. I have had so much experience
with jackasses lately that I have decided to change my name to Hackenbush
and become a veterinarian. Yours truly, et cetera. Got that?"

"Yes, sir," said the sergeant.

"Burn it. When Fumblefingers Fesner and his boys find Lenny Poe again, I
want to know immediately."

He stalked on into his office.

       *       *       *       *       *

Raphael Poe was beginning to feel distinctly uncomfortable. Establishing a
close rapport with another mind can be a distinct disadvantage at times. A
spy is supposed to get information without giving any; a swapping of
information is not at all to his advantage.

It was impossible to keep his mind a perfect blank. What he had to do was
keep his strongest surface thoughts entirely on innocuous things. The
trouble with that was that it made it extremely difficult to think about
some way to get out of the jam he was in. Thinking on two levels at once,
while not impossible, required a nicety of control that made wire-walking
over Niagara look easy.

The thing to do was to make the surface thoughts automatically repetitive.
A song.

    "_In a hall of strange description (Antiquarian Egyptian),
        Figuring his monthly balance sheet, a troubled monarch sat
      With a frown upon his forehead, hurling interjections horrid
        At the state of his finances, for his pocketbook was flat._"

Simultaneously, he kept a picture in his mind's eye. It had to be
something vivid that would be easy to concentrate on. The first thing that
came to mind was the brilliant necktie that the President had used in his
test several months before. He conjured it up in all its chartreuse glory,
then he animated it. Mauve satyrs danced with rose-pink nymphs and chased
them over the yellow-green landscape.

    "_Not a solitary single copper cent had he to jingle
        In his pocket, and his architects had gone off on a strike,
      Leaving pyramids unfinished, for their wages had diminished,
        And their credit vanished likewise, in a way they didn't like._"

Rafe could tell that Dr. Malekrinova's mind was trying to reject the alien
ideas that were coming into her mind. She wasn't consciously trying to
pick up Rafe's thoughts. But the rejection was ineffective because of its
fascination. The old business about the horse's tail. If you see a white
horse, you'll soon get rich if you can keep from thinking about the
horse's tail until it's out of sight. The first thought that comes to mind
is: "I mustn't think about the horse's tail." A self-defeating
proposition.

If Sonya Borisovna had been certain that she was receiving the thoughts
telepathically, she might have been able to reject them. But her mind
rejected the idea of telepathy instead, so she was susceptible to the
thoughts because she thought they were her own.

The cavorting of the nymphs and satyrs became somewhat obscene, but Rafe
didn't bother to correct it. He had more to worry about than offending the
rather prim mind of Dr. Malekrinova.

    "_It was harder for His Royal Highness than for sons of toil,
        For the horny-handed workmen only ate three figs per day,
      While the King liked sweet potatoes, puddings, pies, and canned
          tomatoes,
        Boneless ham, and Bluepoint oysters cooked some prehistoric way._"

What to do now? Should he try to get out of Russia? Was there any quick
way out?

He had all the information he needed on the heat-beam projector that Dr.
Malekrinova was building. The theory behind it was perfectly clear; all it
needed was further experimentation. If it worked out according to theory,
it would be an almost perfect defense against even the fastest
intercontinental ballistic missiles.

    "_As he growled, the Royal grumbler spied a bit of broken tumbler
        In a long undusted corner just behind the chamber door.
      When his hungry optics spied it, he stood silently and eyed it,
        Then he smote his thigh with ecstasy and danced about the floor._"

Maybe he should try to make a run for the American Embassy. No. No one
there knew him, and they probably couldn't get him out of the country,
anyway. Besides, it would take him too long to explain the situation to
them.

    "_'By the wit Osiris gave me! This same bit of glass shall save me!
         I shall sell it as a diamond at some stupendous price!
       And whoe'er I ask to take it will find, for his own sweet sake, it
         Will be better not to wait until I have to ask him twice!'_"

The theory behind the heat projector was simply an extension of the laser
theory, plus a few refinements. Inside a ring made of the proper material,
the light, acted upon by exterior magnetic fields, tended to move in a
circle, so that the photon cascade effect was all in one direction instead
of bouncing back and forth between a pair of mirrors. That light could be
bent around corners by making it travel through a glass rod was well
known, and the Malekrinova Q-tube took advantage of that effect.

In a way, the principle was similar to that of the cyclotron, except that
instead of spinning ions around in a circle to increase their velocity a
beam of coherent light was circulated to increase its intensity.

Then, at the proper moment, a beam of intense coherent light shot out of
the tangent that formed the tail of the Q-tube. If the material of the Q
was properly constructed and contained atoms that fluoresced strongly in
the infra red, you had a heat beam that delivered plenty of power. And,
since the radiation was linear and "in step," the Q-tube didn't heat up
much at all. The cascade effect took most of the energy out as radiation.

    "_Then a Royal Proclamation was dispatched throughout the nation,
        Most imperatively calling to appear before the King.
      Under penalties most cruel, every man who sold a jewel
        Or who bought and bartered precious stones, and all that sort of
          thing._"

But knowing all that didn't help Raphael Poe or the United States of
America one whit if the information couldn't be gotten out of Russia and
into Colonel Spaulding's hands. Lenny had told him of the trouble the
colonel was having with Dr. Davenport.

If he could only communicate with Lenny! But if he did, Dr. Malekrinova
would pick up every bit of it, and that would be the end of that. No, he
had to figure out some way to get himself and the information both out of
the country.

Meanwhile, he had to keep thinking of an animated necktie. And he had to
keep singing.

    "_Thereupon, the jewelers' nether joints all quaked and knocked
          together,
        As they packed their Saratogas in lugubrious despair.
      It was ever their misfortune to be pillaged by extortion,
        And they thought they smelled a rodent on the sultry desert air._"

Lenny Poe shoved open the door of Colonel Spaulding's outer office with a
violence that startled Sergeant Nugget.

"Is Spaulding in?" he barked.

"I think he's expecting you," she said. There was no time to buzz the
colonel; Poe was already opening the door.

"Rafe's in trouble!" Lenny said hurriedly, slamming the door behind him.

"Where have you been?" snapped the colonel.

"Never mind that! Rafe's in trouble, I said! We've gotta figure a way to
get him out of it!"

Colonel Spaulding dropped all thought of bawling out Poe. "What'd he say?
What's the trouble?"

"All he's doing is broadcasting that necktie--like an animated cartoon in
technicolor. And he's singing."

"Singing? Singing what?"

    "_As they faced the Great Propylon, with an apprehensive smile on,
        Sculptured there in heiroglyphics six feet wide and nine feet high
      Was the threat of King Rameses to chop every man to pieces
        Who, when shown the Royal diamond, would dare refuse to buy._"

Colonel Spaulding blinked. "That's pretty. What does it mean?"

"Nothing; it's a song, that's all. That female Russian scientist can read
Rafe's mind, and he's broadcasting this stuff to cover up!"

Quickly, he told Spaulding what the situation was as he had been able to
piece it together from Rafe's secondary thoughts.

"Ye Gods!" Colonel Spaulding slapped at his brow. Then he grabbed for the
telephone and started dialing.

Lenny dropped into one of the chairs, closed his eyes, and concentrated.

_Rafe! Rafe! Listen to me! Rafe!_

    "_Then the richest dealer, Mulai Hassan, eyed the gem and coolly
        Said, 'The thing is but a common tumbler-bottom, nothing more!'
      Whereupon, the King's Assassin drew his sword, and Mulai Hassan
        Never peddled rings again upon the Nile's primeval shore._"

But below the interference came Rafe's thoughts. And the one thing of
primary importance to him was to get the information on the heat-beam
generator to the United States.

No bigotry, no matter how strong, is totally impregnable. Even the most
narrow-minded racial bigot will make an exception if a person of the
despised race risks his own life to save the life of the bigot or someone
the bigot loves. The bigotry doesn't collapse--not by a long shot. But an
exception is made in that one case.

Lenny Poe made an exception. Any information that was worth his brother's
life was _Important_! Therefore, it was not, could not be, scientific
gobbledegook, no matter how it sounded.

_Rafe, give it to me! Try me! I can copy it!_

    "_Then Abdullah abd Almahdi faintly said the stone was shoddy,
        But he thought that, in a pinch, he might bid fifty cents himself.
      There ensued a slight commotion where he could repent the notion,
        And Abdullah was promoted to the Oriental Shelf._"

_Rafe! Stop singing that stupid song and give me the stuff! She can't
learn anything if you just think about that theory stuff. She already
knows that! Come on! Give!_

Lenny Poe grabbed a pencil and a sheaf of paper from the colonel's desk
and began writing frantically as the _Song of the Egyptian Diamond_
stopped suddenly.

       *       *       *       *       *

Words. Nonsense words. That's all most of the stuff was to Lenny. It
didn't matter. He spelled them as he thought they should be, and if he
made a mistake, Rafe would correct him.

Rafe tried to keep a picture of the words as they would look if printed
while he thought them verbally, and that helped. The information came
across in the only way it could come across--not as concepts, but as
symbols.

Lenny hardly noticed that the Secretary of Defense and the President had
come into the room. He didn't even realize that Colonel Spaulding was
feeding him fresh sheets of paper.

Lenny didn't seem to notice the time passing, nor the pain in his hand as
the muscles tired. He kept writing. The President left with the Defense
Secretary and came back again after a while, but Lenny ignored them.

And when it was over, he pushed pencil and paper aside and, massaging his
right hand with his left, sat there with his eyes closed. Then, slowly, a
smile spread over his face.

"Well, I'll be damned," he said slowly and softly.

"Mr. Poe," said the President, "is there any danger that your brother will
be captured within the next hour?"

Lenny looked up with a startled grin. "Oh. Hi. I didn't notice you, Mr.
President. What'd you say?"

The President repeated his question.

"Oh. No. There's nothing to worry about. The little men in white coats
came after Dr. Malekrinova. She started screaming that telepathic spies
were stealing her secret. She smashed all her apparatus and burned all her
papers on top of the wreckage before they could stop her. She keeps
shouting about a pink-and-purple orgy and singing a song about glass
diamonds and Egyptian kings. I wouldn't say she was actually insane, but
she is _very_ disturbed."

"Then your brother is safe?"

"As safe as he ever was, Mr. President."

"Thank Heaven for that," said the President. "If they'd ever captured him
and made him talk--" He stopped. "I forgot," he said lamely after a
moment.

Lenny grinned. "That's all right, Mr. President. I sometimes forget it
myself. But it was his handicap, I guess, that made him concentrate on
telepathy, so that he doesn't need his ears to hear what people are
saying. Maybe I could read minds the way he does if I'd been born that
way.

"Come to think of it, I doubt if the Russians would have believed he was a
spy if they'd caught him, unless they really did believe he was
telepathic. A physical examination would show immediately that he was born
without eardrums and that the inner ear bones are fused. They wouldn't try
to make a man talk if an examination showed that he really was a
deaf-mute."

The buzzer on the colonel's intercom sounded. "Yes?" said Spaulding.

"Dr. Davenport is here," said Sergeant Nugget. "He wants to talk to you."

"Send him in," said Colonel Spaulding gleefully. "I have a nice scientific
theory I want to shove down his throat."

       *       *       *       *       *






End of Project Gutenberg's The Foreign Hand Tie, by Gordon Randall Garrett

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE FOREIGN HAND TIE ***

***** This file should be named 30497-8.txt or 30497-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/0/4/9/30497/

Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
