The Project Gutenberg EBook of Where There's Hope, by Jerome Bixby

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Where There's Hope

Author: Jerome Bixby

Illustrator: Kelly Freas

Release Date: December 19, 2009 [EBook #30715]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WHERE THERE'S HOPE ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









[Illustration]


    _The women had made up their minds, and nothing--repeat,
    nothing--could change them. But _something_ had to give...._


WHERE THERE'S HOPE

By Jerome Bixby

Illustrated by Kelly Freas


"If you called me here to tell me to have a child," Mary Pornsen said,
"you can just forget about it. We girls have made up our minds."

Hugh Farrel, Chief Medical Officer of the Exodus VII, sighed and leaned
back in his chair. He looked at Mary's husband. "And you, Ralph," he
said. "How do you feel?"

Ralph Pornsen looked at Mary uncomfortably, started to speak and then
hesitated.

Hugh Farrel sighed again and closed his eyes. It was that way with all
the boys. The wives had the whip hand. If the husbands put up an
argument, they'd simply get turned down flat: no sex at all, children or
otherwise. The threat, Farrel thought wryly, made the boys softer than
watered putty. His own wife, Alice, was one of the ringleaders of the
"no babies" movement, and since he had openly declared warfare on the
idea, she wouldn't even let him kiss her good-night. (For fear of losing
her determination, Farrel liked to think.)

He opened his eyes again to look past the Pornsens, out of the curving
port of his office-lab in the Exodus VII's flank, at the scene outside
the ship.

At the edge of the clearing he could see Danny Stern and his crew, tiny
beneath the cavernous sunbeam-shot overhang of giant leaves. Danny was
standing up at the controls of the 'dozer, waving his arms. His crew was
struggling to get a log set so he could shove it into place with the
'dozer. They were repairing a break in the barricade--the place where
one of New Earth's giant saurians had come stamping and whistling
through last night to kill three colonists before it could be blasted
out of existence.

It was difficult. Damned difficult. A brand-new world here, all ready
to receive the refugees from dying Earth. Or rather, all ready to be
_made_ ready, which was the task ahead of the Exodus VII's personnel.

An Earth-like world. Green, warm, fertile--and crawling, leaping,
hooting and snarling with ferocious beasts of every variety. Farrel
could certainly see the women's point in banding together and refusing
to produce children. Something inside a woman keeps her from wanting to
bring life into peril--at least, when the peril seems temporary, and
security is both remembered and anticipated.

Pornsen said, "I guess I feel just about like Mary does. I--I don't see
any reason for having a kid until we get this place ironed out and safe
to live in."

"That's going to take time, Ralph." Farrel clasped his hands in front of
him and delivered the speech he had delivered so often in the past few
weeks. "Ten or twelve years before we really get set up here. We've got
to build from the ground up, you know. We'll have to find and mine our
metals. Build our machines to build shops to build more machines.
There'll be resources that we _won't_ find, and we'll have to learn what
this planet has to offer in their stead. Colonizing New Earth isn't
simply a matter of landing and throwing together a shining city. I only
wish it were.

"Six weeks ago we landed. We haven't yet dared to venture more than a
mile from this spot. We've cut down trees and built the barricade and
our houses. After protecting ourselves we have to eat. We've planted
gardens. We've produced test-tube calves and piglets. The calves are
doing fine, but the piglets are dying one by one. We've got to find out
why.

"It's going to be a long, long time before we have even a minimum of
security, much less luxury. Longer than you think.... So much longer
that waiting until the security arrives before having children is out of
the question. There are critters out there--" he nodded toward the port
and the busy clearing beyond--"that we haven't been able to kill. We've
thrown everything we have at them, and they come back for more. We'll
have to find out what _will_ kill them--how they differ from those we
_are_ able to kill. We are six hundred people and a spaceship, Ralph. We
have techniques. That's _all_. Everything else we've got to dig up out
of this planet. We'll need people, Mary; we'll need the children. We're
counting on them. They're vital to the plans we've made."

Mary Pornsen said, "Damn the plans. I won't have one. Not now. You've
just done a nice job of describing all my reasons. And all the other
girls feel the same way."

       *       *       *       *       *

She looked out the window at the 'dozer and crew. Danny Stern was still
waving his arms; the log was almost in place. "George and May Wright
were killed last night. So was Farelli. If George and May had had a
child, the monster would have trampled it too--it went right through
their cabin like cardboard. It isn't fair to bring a baby into--"

Farrel said, "Fair, Mary? Maybe it isn't fair _not_ to have one. _Not_
to bring it into being and give it a chance. Life's always a gamble--"

"_It_ doesn't exist," Mary said. She smiled. "Don't try circumlocution
on me, Doc. I'm not religious. I don't believe that spermatozoa and an
ovum, if not allowed to cuddle up together, add up to murder."

"That isn't what I meant--"

"You were getting around to it--which means you've run out of good
arguments."

"No. I've a few left." Farrel looked at the two stubborn faces: Mary's,
pleasant and pretty, but set as steel; Ralph's, uncomfortable,
thoughtful, but mirroring his definite willingness to follow his wife's
lead.

Farrel cleared his throat. "You know how important it is that this
colony be established? You know that, don't you? In twenty years or so
the ships will start arriving. Hundreds of them. Because we sent a
message back to Earth saying we'd found a habitable planet. Thousands of
people from Earth, coming here to the new world we're supposed to get
busy and carve out for them. We were selected for that task--first of
judging the right planet, then of working it over. Engineers, chemists,
agronomists, all of us--we're the task force. We've got to do the job.
We've got to test, plant, breed, re-balance, create. There'll be a lot
of trial and error. We've got to work out a way of life, so the
thousands who will follow can be introduced safely and painlessly into
the--well, into the organism. And we'll need new blood for the jobs
ahead. We'll need young people--"

Mary said, "A few years one way or the other won't matter much, Doc.
Five or six years from now this place will be a lot safer. Then we women
will start producing. But not now."

"It won't work that way," Farrel said. "We're none of us kids any
longer. I'm fifty-five. Ralph, you're forty-three. I realize that I must
be getting old to think of you as young. Mary, you're thirty-seven. We
took a long time getting here. Fourteen years. We left an Earth that's
dying of radioactive poisoning, and we all got a mild dose of that. The
radiation we absorbed in space, little as it was, didn't help any. And
that sun up there--" again he nodded at the port--"isn't any help
either. Periodically it throws off some pretty damned funny stuff.

"Frankly, we're worried. We don't know whether or not we _can_ have
children. Or _normal_ children. We've got to find out. If our genes have
been bollixed up, we've got to find out why and how and get to work on
it immediately. It may be unpleasant. It may be heart-breaking. But
those who will come here in twenty years will have absorbed much more of
Earth's radioactivity than we did, and an equal amount of the space
stuff, and this sun will be waiting for them.... We'll have to know what
we can do for them."

"I'm not a walking laboratory, Doc," Mary said.

"I'm afraid you are, Mary. All of you are."

Mary set her lips and stared out the port.

"It's got to be done, Mary."

She didn't answer.

"It's going to be done."

"Choose someone else," she said.

"That's what they all say."

She said, "I guess this is one thing you doctors and psychologists
didn't figure on, Doc."

"Not at first," Farrel said. "But we've given it some thought."

MacGuire had installed the button convenient to Farrel's right hand,
just below the level of the desk-top. Farrel pressed it. Ralph and Mary
Pornsen slumped in their chairs. The door opened, and Doctor John J.
MacGuire and Ted Harris, the Exodus VII's chief psychologist, came in.

       *       *       *       *       *

When it was over, and the after-play had been allowed to run its course,
Farrel told the Pornsens to go into the next room and shower. They came
back soon, looking refreshed. Farrel ordered them to get back into their
clothes. Under the power of the hypnotic drug which their chairs had
injected into them at the touch of the button, they did so. Then he told
them to sit down in the chairs again.

MacGuire and Harris had gathered up their equipment, piling it on top of
the operating table.

MacGuire smiled. "I'll bet that's the best-monitored, most hygienic sex
act ever committed. I think I've about got the space radiations effect
licked."

Farrel nodded. "If anything goes wrong, it certainly won't be our fault.
But let's face it--the chances are a thousand to one that something
_will_ go wrong. We'll just have to wait. And work." He looked at the
Pornsens. "They're very much in love, aren't they? And she was receptive
to the suggestion--beneath it all, she was burning to have a child, just
like the others."

MacGuire wheeled out the operating table, with its load of serums,
pressure-hypos and jury-rigged thingamabobs which he was testing on
alternate couples. Ted Harris stopped at the door a moment. He said, "I
think the suggestions I planted will turn the trick when they find out
she's pregnant. They'll come through okay--won't even be too angry."

Farrel sighed. They'd been over it in detail several times, of course,
but apparently Harris needed the reassurance as much as he did. He said:
"Sure. Now scram so I can go back into my act."

Harris closed the door. Farrel sat down at his desk and studied the pair
before him. They looked back contentedly, holding hands, their eyes
dull.

Farrel said, "How do you feel?"

Ralph Pornsen said, "I feel fine."

Mary Pornsen said, "Oh, I feel _wonderful_!"

Deliberately Farrel pressed another button below his desk-top.

The dull eyes cleared instantly.

"Oh, you've given it some thought, Doc?" Mary said sweetly. "And what
have you decided?"

"You'll see," Farrel said. "Eventually."

He rose. "That's all for now, kids. I'd like to see you again in one
month--for a routine check-up."

Mary nodded and got up. "You'll still have to wait, Doc. Why not admit
you're licked?"

Ralph got up too, and looked puzzled.

"Wow," he said. "I'm tired."

"Perhaps just coming here," Farrel said, "discharged some of the tension
you've been carrying around."

The Pornsens left.

Farrel brought out some papers from his desk and studied them. Then,
from the file drawer, he selected the record of Hugh and Alice Farrel.
Alice would be at the perfect time of her menstrual cycle tomorrow....

Farrel flipped his communicator.

"MacGuire," he said. "Tomorrow it's me."

MacGuire chuckled. Farrel could have kicked him. He put his chin in his
hands and stared out the port. Danny Stern had the log in place in the
barricade. The bulldozer was moving on to a new task. His momentary
doubt stilled, Farrel went back to work.

       *       *       *       *       *

Twenty-one years later, when the ships from Earth began arriving, the
log had been replaced by a stone monument erected to the memory of the
Exodus VII, which had been cut apart for its valuable steel. Around the
monument was a park, and on three sides of the park was a shining
town--not really large enough to be called a city--of plastic and stone,
for New Earth had no iron ore, only zinc and a little copper. This was
often cause for regret.

Still it was a pretty good world. The monster problem had been licked by
high-voltage cannon. Now in their third generation since the landing,
the monsters kept their distance. And things grew--things good to eat.

And even without steel, the graceful, smoothly-functioning town looked
impressive--quite a thing to have been built by a handful of beings with
two arms and two legs each.

It hadn't been, entirely. But nobody thought much about that any more.
Even the newcomers got used to it. Things change.


THE END




Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from _If Worlds of Science Fiction_ November
    1953. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed. Minor spelling and
    typographical errors have been corrected without note.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Where There's Hope, by Jerome Bixby

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WHERE THERE'S HOPE ***

***** This file should be named 30715.txt or 30715.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/0/7/1/30715/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
