Project Gutenberg's New Apples in the Garden, by Kris Ottman Neville

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: New Apples in the Garden

Author: Kris Ottman Neville

Illustrator: George Schelling

Release Date: December 26, 2009 [EBook #30767]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NEW APPLES IN THE GARDEN ***




Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







                         Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from Analog Science Fact & Fiction July 1963.
    Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed.


                              NEW APPLES

                            IN THE GARDEN


                          Some problems are
                    perfectly predictable--yet not
                      in the sense that allows a
                preprogrammed machine to handle them--


                           BY KRIS NEVILLE


                   Illustrated by George Schelling

       *       *       *       *       *




Eddie Hibbs reported for work and was almost immediately called out on
an emergency. It was the third morning in succession for emergencies.

This time a section of distribution cable had blown in West Los
Angeles. Blown cable was routine, but each instance merited the
attention of an assistant underground supervisor.

Eddie climbed down the manhole with the foreman of the maintenance
crew. There were deep pull marks on the lead sheath above where the
cable had blown.

"Where'd they get it?" he asked.

"It came in from a job on the East Side."

"Sloppy work," Eddie said. "Water got in the splice?"

"These new guys...." the foreman said.

Eddie fingered the pull marks. "I think she's about shot anyway. How
much is like this?"

"A couple of hundred feet."

"All this bad?"

"Yep."

Eddie whistled. "About fifteen thousand dollars worth. Well. Cut her
back to here and make splices. Stand over them while they do it."

"I'll need two men for a week."

"I'll try to find them for you. Send through the paper."

"I can probably find maybe another thousand miles or so that's about
this bad."

"Don't bother," Eddie said.

That was Eddie's productive work during the morning. With traffic and
two sections of street torn up by the water people, he did not get
back to his office until just before lunch. He listened to the Stock
Market reports while he drove.

He learned that spiraling costs had retarded the modernization program
of General Electronics and much of their present equipment was
obsolete in terms of current price factors. He was also told to
anticipate that declining sales would lead to declining production,
thereby perpetuating an unfortunate cycle. And finally he was warned
that General Electronics was an example of the pitfalls involved in
investing in the so-called High Growth stocks.

Eddie turned off the radio in the parking lot as the closing
Dow-Jones' report was starting.

During lunch, he succeeded in reading two articles in a six-week-old
issue of _Electrical World_, the only one of the dozen technical
journals he found time for now.

At 12:35 word filtered into the department that one of the maintenance
crew, Ramon Lopez, had been killed. A forty-foot ladder broke while
atop it Lopez was hosing down a pothead, and he was driven backward
into the concrete pavement by the high-pressure water.

Eddie tried to identify the man. The name was distantly familiar but
there was no face to go with it. Finally the face came. He smoked two
cigarettes in succession. He stubbed the last one out angrily.

"That was a tough one," his supervisor, Forester, said, sitting on the
side of Eddie's desk. Normally exuberant, he was left melancholy and
distracted by the accident. "You know the guy?"

"To speak to."

"Good man."

"After I thought about it a little bit," Eddie said, "I remembered he
was transferring tomorrow. Something like this brings a man up short,
doesn't it?"

"A hell of a shame. Just a hell of a shame."

They were silent for a minute.

"How was the market this morning?" Forester asked.

"Up again. I didn't catch the closing averages."

"I guess that makes a new high."

"Third straight day," Eddie said.

"Hell of a shame," Forester said.

"Yeah, Lopez was a nice guy."

"Well...." Forester's voice trailed off in embarrassment.

"Yeah, well...."

"I wanted to remind you about the budget meeting."

Eddie glanced at his watch. "Hour and a half?"

"Yeah. You know, I feel like ... never mind. What about the burial
transformers, you get on it yet?"

"The ones we're running in the water mains for cooling? They're out of
warranty. None of the local shops can rewind them until the
manufacturer sends out a field engineer to set them up for the
encapsulation process."

"How long is that going to take?" Forester asked.

"They tell me several months. Still doesn't leave us with anything.
The plant says they've fixed the trouble, but between them and the
rewind shop, they can buck it back and forth forever."

"I guess we'll have to go back to the pad-mounted type."

"People with the Gold Medallion Homes aren't going to like the pads by
their barbecues."

Forester uncoiled a leg. "Draw up a memorandum on it, will you,
Eddie?" He stood up. "That thing sure got me today. There's just
entirely too many of these accidents. A ladder breaking. I don't
know."

Eddie tried to find something intelligent to say. Finally he said, "It
was a rough one, all right."

       *       *       *       *       *

After Forester left, Eddie picked up, listlessly from the top of the
stack one of the preliminary reports submitted for his approval.

The report dealt with three thousand capacitors purchased last year
from an Eastern firm, now bankrupt. The capacitors were beginning to
leak. Eddie called the electrical laboratory to see what progress was
being made on the problem.

The supervisor refreshed his memory from the records. He reported: "I
don't have any adhesive man to work on it. Purchasing has half a dozen
suppliers lined up--but none have any test data. I don't know when
we'll get the time. We're on a priority program checking out these
new, low-cost terminations."

"Can't we certify the adhesive to some AIEE spec or something?" Eddie
asked.

"I don't know of any for sealing capacitors, Eddie. Not on the
maintenance end, at least."

"Maybe Purchasing can get a guarantee from one of the suppliers?"

"For the hundred dollars of compound that's involved? What good would
that do us?"

Eddie thanked him and hung up. He signed the preliminary report.

He turned to the next one.

At 2:30 Forester came by and the two of them made their way between
the jig-saw projections of maple and mahogany to the Conference Room.

Fourteen men were involved in the conference, all from operating
departments. They shuffled in over a five minute period, found seats,
lit cigarettes, talked and joked with one another.

When one of the assistants to the manager came in, they fell silent.

"Gentlemen," he said, "I think I'd better get right to the point
today. The Construction Program in the Valley has now used up two bond
issues. The voters aren't going to approve a third one."

He paused for effect then continued briskly:

"I see by the morning's _Times_ that the mayor is appointing a
watch-dog commission. I guess you all saw it, too. The Department of
Water and Power of the City of Los Angeles is going to be badly--and I
mean badly--in the red at the end of the fiscal year.

"We're in hot water.

"We do not seem to be getting through to the operating departments
regarding the necessity for cost reduction. I have here last month's
breakdown on the Bunker Hill substation 115 KV installation. Most of
you have seen it already, I think. I had it sent around. Now--"

The analysis continued for some ten minutes to conclude with an
explosion:

"We've got to impose a ten per cent across the board cut on operating
expenses."

One of the listeners, more alert than the rest, asked, "That go for
salaries?"

"For personnel making more than eight hundred dollars a month it
does."

There was a moment of shocked silence.

"You can't make that stick," one of the supervisors said. "Half my
best men will be out tomorrow looking for better offers--and finding
them, too."

"I'm just passing on what I was told."

The men in the room shuffled and muttered under their breaths.

"O.K., that's the way they want it," one of the supervisors said.

"I've brought along the notices for the affected personnel. Please see
they're distributed when you leave."

After the meeting, Forester walked with Eddie back to his desk.

"You be in tomorrow, Eddie?"

"I guess I will, Les. I really don't know, yet."

"I'd hate to lose you."

"It's going to make it pretty rough. A man's fixed expenses don't come
down."

"I'll see what I can do for you, maybe upgrade the classification--"

"Thanks, Les."

Back at his desk, Eddie looked at his watch. Nearly time for the
Safety Meeting. Lost-time injuries had been climbing for the last four
months.

While waiting, he signed a sixty-three page preliminary report
recommending a program for the orderly replacement of all transmission
and distribution cable installed prior to 1946. It was estimated that
the savings, in the long run, would total some quarter of a billion
dollars. The initial expense, however, was astronomical.

After the Safety Meeting, Eddie prepared another memorandum indicating
the acute need for a better training program and an increase in
maintenance personnel. Shortage of qualified technicians was chronic.

At four twenty-five, the night supervisor phoned in to say he was
having engine trouble with his new car and would be delayed until
about six o'clock. Eddie agreed to wait for him.

Eddie dialed home to let his wife, Lois, know he would be late again.
A modulated low-frequency note told him the home phone was out of
order.

Ray Morely, one of the night-shift engineers, came in with coffee.
"You still here, Eddie?"

"Yeah, until Wheeler makes it. His car's down."

"Market hit a new high."

"Yeah. I guess you heard about the meeting today?"

Ray sipped coffee. "Budget again? I missed the day crew. I got hung up
in traffic and was a little late."

"A pay cut goes with it, this time."

"You're kidding?"

"Been by your desk yet?"

"No."

"I'm not kidding. Ten per cent for those making above eight hundred."

"Nobody's going to put up with that," Ray said. "We're in an engineering
shortage. We've got ICBMs rusting in their silos all over the country
because we can't afford the engineering maintenance--that's how bad it is.
Everybody'll quit."

"I don't think they'll make it stick. Ramon Lopez, one of the truck
crew, was killed today hosing down a high-voltage pothead."

"No kidding?"

Eddie told him about the accident.

"That was a rough one to lose, wasn't it?"

The phone rang.

Ray said, "I'll get it."

He listened for a minute and hung up. "There's an outage in the Silver
Lake Area. The brakes on a bus failed and took out an overhead
section."

Eddie sat back. "No sense in you going. With work traffic on the
surface streets until the freeway gets fixed, they won't get the truck
there until 6:30 or so."

"Right." Ray drank coffee reflectively. "You going looking?"

"I'm an old-timer. I got a lot of seniority. How about you?"

"I got bills. It's going to cost me near a hundred a month--that's a
steep bite."

"I still think they'll back off."

"They'll have to," Ray said. "If not right now, when the pressure gets
on. You ask me, we've got them by the short hair." He settled into the
chair. "I see it as an organic phenomenon. When society gets as
complex as ours, it has to grow more and more engineers. But there's a
feedback circuit in effect. The more engineers we grow, the more
complex society becomes. Each new one creates the need for two more.
I get a sort of feeling of--I don't know--vitality, I guess, when I
walk into, say, an automated factory. All that machinery and all that
electronic gear is like a single cell in a living organism--an
organism that's growing every day, multiplying like bacteria. And it's
always sick, and we're the doctors. That's job security. We're riding
the wave of the future. I don't think they'll make a salary cut
stick."

"I hope you're right," Eddie said.

       *       *       *       *       *

Eddie checked out at 7:15, when the night supervisor finally arrived.
As he left the building, he noted that a burglar alarm down the street
had gone off; probably because of a short circuit. The clanking set
his nerves on edge. Apprehensively he felt a rising wind against his
cheeks.

At home, he was greeted with a perfunctory kiss at the door.

"Honey," Lois told him, "you took the check book, and I didn't have
any money."

"Something come up? I'm sorry."

"We're all out of milk. The milk man didn't come today. Their
homogenizing machinery broke down. I phoned the dairy about nine; and
then, of course, the phone has been on the blink since about eleven or
a little before, so I couldn't ask you to bring some home."

"I kept trying to get you."

"I figured you had to work late again, when you weren't here at six,
and I knew you'd be here when you got here."

Eddie sat down and she sat on the chair arm beside him. "How did it go
today?"

He started to tell her about the wage cut and Ramon Lopez; but then he
didn't want to talk about it. "So-so," he said. "There was an outage
over in the Silver Lake Area just before I left."

"Fixed yet?"

"I doubt it," he said. "Probably a couple of more hours."

"Gee," she said, "when I think of all that meat in the deep
freezer...."

"I wouldn't stock so much," he said. "I really wouldn't."

She twisted away from him. "Honey. I'm jittery. Something's ... I
don't know. In the air, I guess."

The wind rattled the windows.

       *       *       *       *       *

While Lois was warming dinner, his son came in.

"Hi, Eddie."

"Hi, Larry."

"Eddie, when we gonna get the TV fixed?"

Eddie put down the newspaper. "We just don't have a hundred dollars or
so right now." He searched for matches on the table by the chair.
"Lois, oh, Lois, where're the matches?"

She came in. "They were all out Friday at the store, and I keep
forgetting to lay in a supply. Use my lighter over there."

"About the TV--"

Lois was wiping her hands on the paper towel she had brought with her.
"Replacement parts are hard to find for the older sets," she said.
"Anyway. I read today Channel Three finally went off the air. That
leaves only Two and Seven. And the programs aren't any good, now, are
they? All those commercials and all?"

"They do use a lot of old stuff I've already seen," the son admitted,
"but every once in a while there's something new."

"Let's talk about it some other time, Larry, O.K.?" Eddie said. "How's
that? It's almost your bed-time. Studies done?"

"All but the Library report."

"Well, finish it, and--"

"I got to read the book down there. Two classes assigned it and they
don't have the copies to let us check out. And I want to ask you about
something, Eddie."

"Daddy's tired. His dinner's on. Come on, Eddie. I'll set it right
now. And Larry, you've already eaten...."

       *       *       *       *       *

After dinner, Eddie got back to the paper, the evening _Times_. It was
down to eight pages, mostly advertising. There was a front-page
editorial reluctantly announcing a price increase.

"They raise the price once more, and we'll just quit taking it," Lois
said. "You read about the airplane crash in Florida? Wasn't that
terrible? What do you think caused it?"

"Metal fatigue, probably," Eddie said. "It was a twenty-year-old jet."

"The company said it wasn't that at all."

"They always do," Eddie said.

"I don't guess the payroll check came today or you'd have mentioned
it."

"Payroll's still all balled up. Somebody pressed a wrong button on the
new machine and some fifty thousand uncoded cards got scattered all
over the office."

"Oh, no! What do the poor people, who don't have bank accounts, do?"

"Just wait, like we wait."

"You had a bad day," Lois said. "I can tell."

"No...." Eddie said. "Not really, I guess."

"Still working on Saturday?"

"I guess so. Nothing was said. Maybe it'll get easier after the end of
the month."

"You said it was all that new construction work in the Valley that's
making you so shorthanded."

"That's part of it."

"They're not scheduled to finish until ... when, sometime next year,
isn't it?"

"The end of '81 right now."

"Eddie! Listen to me! I hardly ever see you any more. You're not going
to have to put in all this overtime for the next two years!"

"Of course not," Eddie said. "Maybe after this month, that's all, and
the work load will level off."

       *       *       *       *       *

Larry, dressed for bed, came in. "Eddie?"

"Your father's tired."

"I want to ask him something."

"What is it, Larry?" Eddie asked.

"Eddie, you know the little culture I was running for science class?
Something's wrong. Will you look at it?"

"Daddy's...."

"I'll look at it, Lois." Eddie accompanied his son to his son's room.

"What do you think is wrong, Dad?"

"Well, let's see...."

"What is it?" Larry asked. "What made it stop growing?"

Eddie did not answer for a minute. Then: "You start with one or two ...
well, it's like this, Larry. I'm afraid it's dead. They grow
exponentially. Figure out how much money you'd have at the end of a month
if you started with just a penny and doubled your money every day. In just
a little while, you'd have all the money in the world. Figure it out
sometime. Things that grow exponentially, they just don't know when to
quit. And your culture, here, it grew until the environment could no
longer support it and all at once the food was eaten up and it died."

"I ... see.... Something like that could just grow until it took over
the whole world, couldn't it?"

Again Eddie was silent for a moment. Then he rumpled his son's hair.
"That's science fiction, Larry."

       *       *       *       *       *

Later, while they were listening to FM, there was a news break
reporting a fire out of control in South Los Angeles.

"That's near Becky's, I'll bet," she said. "I better phone."

The phone was still out of order.

"I sure feel cut off without a phone."

After an interlude of music, Lois said, "Larry wants to be an
engineer, now. I guess after what you said, maybe that's a pretty good
thing."

Eddie looked up from his cigarette. "Why this all of a sudden?"

"One of his teachers told him what you said--there's a growing
engineering shortage."

"I thought he wanted to be an astronaut."

"You know Larry. That was last week. His teacher said we're not going
to start up the space program again. It's too expensive. We just don't
have the technical man-power and materials to spare."

"We are in.... But these kids, young kids they're turning out--they
aren't getting the education today. And if anything, I sometimes think
it almost makes our jobs even worse, correcting their mistakes. I
sometimes wonder where it's all going to stop."

There was more news from the fire front.

Fire fighters were having a very difficult time. Two water mains had
broken and the pressure was dropping. The fire was reported to have
been caused by the explosion of a gas main. Rising winds did not
promise to abate until dawn.

[Illustration]

"I sure wish I could get through to Beck," Lois said. "Oh, I guess I
told you, did I? Her sister has hypoglycemia, they found out. That's
why she's been tired all the time."

"Never heard of it."

"Low blood sugar. It's caused by an overactive gland on the pancreas.
And treatment is just the opposite of what you'd think, too. I'll bet
you'd never guess. If you increase the amount of sugar in the diet,
the gland becomes just that much more active to get rid of it and the
hypoglycemia gets worse. It's what I'll bet you engineers call a
feedback. Isn't that what you call it? Well ... the way doctors treat
it is to _reduce_ the amount of sugar you eat. And after a little bit,
the pancreas gets back its normal function, and the patient gets well.
I told you you'd never guess!"

After a long time, Eddie said, very softly, "Oh."

       *       *       *       *       *

Just after midnight, they went to bed.

"I've been ..." Lois began and then stopped. "I don't know. Jumpy. The
market was up again today. Another all-time high. Do you think
there'll be another Crash? Like 'way back in 1929."

She could feel him lying tense beside her in the darkness. "No," he
said slowly, "I don't think so. I don't think there'll be a Crash."

In spite of the warmth of the room, she could not suppress an
involuntary shudder whose cause was nameless. Suddenly, she did not
want to ask any more questions.

The wind was rattling the windows.

       *       *       *       *       *






End of Project Gutenberg's New Apples in the Garden, by Kris Ottman Neville

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NEW APPLES IN THE GARDEN ***

***** This file should be named 30767.txt or 30767.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/0/7/6/30767/

Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
