The Project Gutenberg EBook of Step IV, by Rosel George Brown

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Step IV

Author: Rosel George Brown

Illustrator: Varga

Release Date: January 7, 2010 [EBook #30884]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK STEP IV ***




Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







                         Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from Amazing Stories June 1960. Extensive
    research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed.


                            [Illustration]

                   _Steps 1, 2 and 3 went according
                    to plan. Then she moved on to...._


                               STEP IV


                        By ROSEL GEORGE BROWN


                          ILLUSTRATOR VARGA

       *       *       *       *       *




The first time Juba saw him, she couldn't help recalling the
description of Ariovistus in _Julius Caesar_: _Hominem esse barbarum,
iracundum, temerarium._

She unpinned the delicate laesa from her hair, for Terran spacemen are
educated, and if they have a choice, or seem to have, prefer seduction
to rape.

Step. I. A soft answer turneth away wrath, leaving time for making
plans.

He caught the flower, pleased with himself, Juba saw, for not
fumbling, pleased with his manhood, pleased with his morality in
deciding not to rape her.

Rule a--A man pleased with himself is off guard.

       *       *       *       *       *

He was big, even for a Man, and all hair, and in his heavy arms the
veins were knotted and very blue. He had taken off his shirt, letting
the air blow shamelessly over him.

It was true he was wonderful to see. And Juba knew that such is the
nature of our violences, if she had been born into such a body, she
too, would be a thing of wars and cruelty, a burner of cities, a
carrier of death and desolation.

His face softened, as though the hand of Juno had passed over it.
Softly he gazed at the flower, softly at Juba.

Rule b--This is the only time they are tractable.

"Vene mecum," she bade him, retreating into the glade--what was left
of it after his ship burned a scar into it. She ran lightly, so as to
give the impression that if he turned, only so far as to pick up the
weapon on the ground by his shirt, she would disappear.

"I follow," he said in her own language, and she stopped, surprise
tangling her like a net. For she had been taught that Men speak only
New-language in our time, all soft tongues having been scorned to
death.

She should not have stopped. He looked back toward his gun. "Wait a
moment," he said. His "a"'s were flat and harsh, his words awkwardly
sequenced.

"Come with me," she said, and ran off again. She had been caught off
guard.

Would he follow her? "Wait!" he cried, hesitated, and came after her
again. "I want to get my gun." He reached for Juba's hand.

She shrank back from him. "Mulier enim sum." Would he get the force of
the particle? What could he fear from a mere woman?

When he had followed her far enough, when he had gone as far as he
would, for fear of losing his way from his ship, she let him take her
hand.

"Terran sum," he said. And then, with meaning, "Homino sum."

"Then you are, naturally, hungry," Juba said. "You have no need to
come armed. Let me take you to my home. There are only my sisters and
I and the mother."

"Yes," he said, and took her other hand.

She blushed, because he was strangely attractive, and because the
thought came to her that his ways were gentle, and that if he spoke a
soft tongue, perhaps he was not like other Men.

Rule c--They are all alike.

"Come," Juba said, turning, "We are not far from the cottages."

       *       *       *       *       *

She watched, during the meal, to see how he impressed the sisters and
the mother. The little sisters--all bouncy blond curls and silly with
laughter--their reaction to everything was excitement. And the
mother--how could she seem so different from her daughters when they
were so completely of her? They had no genes but her genes. And yet,
there she sat, so dignified, offering a generous hospitality, but so
cold Juba could feel it at the other end of the table. So cold--but
the Man would not know, could not read the thin line of her taut lips
and the faint lift at the edges of her eyes.

Juba brought him back to the ship that night, knowing he would not
leave the planet.

"Mother," Juba said, kneeling before the mother and clasping her knees
in supplication. "Mother ... isn't he ... different?"

"Juba," the mother said, "there is blood on his hands. He has killed.
Can't you see it in his eyes?"

"Yes. He has a gun and he has used it. But mother--there is a
gentleness in him. Could he not change? Perhaps I, myself...."

"Beware," the mother said sternly, "that you do not fall into your own
traps."

"But you have never really known a man, have you? I mean, except for
servants?"

"I have also," she said, "never had an intimate conversation with a
lion, nor shared my noonday thoughts with a spider."

"But lions and spiders can't talk. That's the difference. They have no
understanding."

"Neither have men. They are like your baby sister, Diana, who is
reasonable until it no longer suits her, and then the only difference
between her and an animal is that she has more cunning."

"Yes," Juba said resignedly, getting to her feet. "If thus it is
Written. Thank you, Mother. You are a wellspring of knowledge."

"Juba," Mother said with a smile, pulling the girl's cloak, for she
liked to please them, "would you like him for a pet? Or your personal
servant?"

"No," she said, and she could feel the breath sharp in her lungs. "I
would rather.... He would make a good spectacle in the gladiatorial
contests. He would look well with a sword through his heart."

She would not picture him a corpse. She put the picture from her mind.
But even less would she picture him unmanned.

He would rather die strong than live weak. And Juba--why should she
have this pride for him? For she felt pride, pangs as real as the
pangs of childbirth. There are different kinds of pride, but the worst
kind of pride is pride in strength, pride in power. And she _knew_
that was what she felt. She was sinning with full knowledge and she
could not put her sin from her.

Juba ran straight to the altar of Juno, and made libation with her own
tears. "Mother Juno," she prayed, "take from me my pride. For pride is
the wellspring whence flow all sins."

But even as she prayed, her reason pricked at her. For she was taught
from childhood to be reasonable above all things. And, having spoken
with this Man, having found him courteous and educated, she could not
believe he was beyond redemption simply because he was a Man. It was
true that in many ways he was strange and different. But were they not
more alike than different?

And as for his violences--were they much better, with their
gladiatorial combats? Supposed to remind them, of course, of the
bloodshed they had abhorred and renounced. But who did not secretly
enjoy it? And whose thumbs ever went up when the Moment came? And this
making of pets and servants out of Men--what was that but the worst
pride of all? Glorying that a few incisions in the brain and elsewhere
gave them the power to make forever absurd what came to them with the
seeds at least of sublimity.

Juba stood up. Who was she to decide what is right and what is wrong?

She faced the world and its ways were too dark for her, so she faced
away.

       *       *       *       *       *

There was a sound in the brush near her, and she wished the stars
would wink out, for the sound had the rhythm of her Mother's
approach, and Juba wanted to hide her face from her mother.

The mother frowned at Juba, a little wearily. "You have decided to
forsake the world and become a Watcher of the Holy Flame. Am I not
right?"

"You are right, mother."

"You think that way you avoid decision, is that not right?"

"That is right," Juba answered.

She motioned the girl to the edge of the raised, round stone and sat.
"It is impossible to avoid decision. The decision is already made.
What you will not do, someone else will do, and all you will have
accomplished is your own failure."

"It is true," Juba said. "But why must this be done, Mother? This is a
silly ceremony, a thing for children, this symbolic trial. Can we not
just say, 'Now Juba is a woman,' without having to humiliate this poor
Man, who after all doesn't...."

"Look into your heart, Juba," the mother interrupted. "Are your
feelings silly? Is this the play of children?"

"No," she admitted. For never before had she been thus tormented
within herself.

"You think that this Man is different, do you not? Or perhaps that all
men are not so savage of soul as you have been taught. Well, I tell
you that a Man's nature is built into his very chromosomes, and you
should know that."

"I know, mother." For Juba was educated.

"There was a reason once, why men should be as they are. Nature is not
gentle and if nature is left to herself, the timid do not survive. But
if bloodlust was once a virtue, it is no longer a virtue, and if men
will end up killing each other off, let us not also be killed."

"No," Juba said. For who would mind the hearths?

"All that," the mother said, rising and dusting off her robe, "is
theory, and ideas touch not the heart. Let me but remind you that the
choice is yours, and when the choice is made I shall not yea or nay
you, but think on this--a woman, too, must have her quiet strength,
and you spring of a race of queens. How shall the people look to the
Tanaids for strength in times of doubt and trouble, if a Tanaid cannot
meet the Trial? The choice is yours. But think on who you are."

       *       *       *       *       *

The mother slipped away and left Juba alone in the quiet precinct of
Juno, watching how the little fire caught at the silver backs of
turned leaves when the wind blew.

Yes, Juba knew who she was, though they had never made it an important
thing to be a ruler. But ruler or not, she loved her land and her home
and her people, and even this ringed space of quiet where the spirit
of Juno burned safely. Life somehow had chosen for her to be born and
had made room for her in this particular place. Now _she_ must choose
_it_, freely. Otherwise she would never have in her hands the threads
of her own life, and there would be no life for her. Only the complete
loss of self that comes to the Watchers of the Holy Flame. And that is
a holy thing, and an honor to one's house, if it is chosen from the
heart. But if it is chosen from fear of crossing the passageways of
life--then it is no honor but a shame.

And Juba knew she could not bear such a shame, either for her house or
within the depths of her soul.

"Mother Juno," she prayed, "make clear the vision of my soul, and let
me not, in my vanity, think I find good what the goddesses see to be
evil."

So she rose with a strong and grateful heart, as though she had
already faced her trial and had been equal to it.

The rest of the night she slept warmly, so unaware are we of the
forces within us.

       *       *       *       *       *

The first fingers of the sun pulled Juba from her cot, as they pull
the dew from the green things of the earth, and she pinned in her hair
the first Laesa she saw that the sun's fingers had forced.

The Man was standing beside his space ship again. It was a small
ship--indeed, from the angle of Juba's approach, and from the
glancings of the sun, it looked smaller than the Man.

Juba's decision held firm within her, for she saw there was no
humility in him. He stood there laughing at the dawn, as though he
were a very god, and were allowing the earth and sky to draw off their
shadows for him, instead of standing in awe and full gratitude for the
gift of life, and feeling, as one should, the smallness of a person
and the weakness of a person's power, compared with the mighty forces
that roll earth and sky into another day.

It is in this way, Juba thought, that men seem strong, because they
have no knowledge of their own weaknesses. But it is only a seeming
strength, since it stems from ignorance, and the flower of it falls
early from the bush.

Juba did not, however, say all this.

Rule d--A man's ego is his most precious possession.

"You are very strong," Juba said, her eyes downcast, for he was bare
again to the waist, and it had come to her that she would like to
string her fingers through the hair on his chest.

"Runs in the family," he said carelessly. "But come, I had dinner with
you yesterday. Let's have breakfast in my ship today."

"I...." What was she afraid of? If he'd meant to do her any violence,
he'd have done it already. And this would provide Juba's
opportunity--"Yes," she said. "I would be delighted."

       *       *       *       *       *

There had to be some talk, and perhaps something else, before she
could make her request of him. They had to be friends of some sort
before he was at all likely to agree.

It is difficult to make conversation with a man.

Finally Juba gave up trying to think of something interesting to say
and asked, "What is your way of life, that you should be going around
by yourself in a space ship?"

"My way of life?" He laughed. "It becomes a way of life, doesn't it?
Whatever we do ends up enveloping us, doesn't it?"

For a man he was thoughtful.

"I'm a scout," he said. "I don't know that I chose it as a way of
life. I was born into the Solar Federation and I was born male and I
grew up healthy and stable and as patriotic as any reasonable person
can be expected to be. When war came I was drafted. I volunteered for
scouting because the rest of it is dull. War is dull. It is
unimaginably dull."

"Then why," Juba asked, for she was amazed at this, "do you fight
wars?"

Again he laughed. Is there anything these men don't laugh at? "That's
the riddle of the sphinx."

That is _not_ the riddle of the sphinx, but Juba did not correct him.

"When you're attacked," he went on, "you fight back."

"It could not possibly," Juba said, "be as simple as you make it
sound."

"Of course, it isn't," he said, and he took two square sheets that
looked like papyrus, and put them each in a bowl. "There is the
question of what you did, or did not do, that you should be attacked."

"And what did you do, or not do, that you should be attacked?"

He was pouring a bluish-looking milk over the papyrus thing. His hands
were too large for everything he handled, and Juba wondered, if his
hand were on her wrist, if he could crush it. Or, being able to crush
it, if he would take care not to.

"Oh--trade agreements, immigration agreements, how many space ships
can go where--who can say what either side did when or where to begin
it all? Nobody is _making_ it happen. Sometimes, perhaps. But not as
far as this war is concerned. All I can say now is--O.K., for whatever
reason I'm in a war. At this point, what can I do but kill or be
killed?"

Juba mashed the papyrus into the milk with her spoon, as the man was
doing. She took a bite. It tasted just like it looked.

"You could," Juba said, "refuse to have anything to do with it at all.
You could simply go away and...." She stood up and the spoon clattered
to the floor and she could feel the bowl of milk spill cold and sticky
along her thigh. Because that's just what you can't do. You can't pull
the thread of your life out of the general weaving.

       *       *       *       *       *

She looked at her adversary, and he was as close to her as the
darkness is to the evening.

"No," he said. "Life flows. A person's life or a civilization's life
or all humanity's life. If it cannot flow forward it flows backward.
Isn't that true? _Isn't_ it?"

But she turned away from him, to recover herself a little. For she
felt that he was right and her country and her foremothers were wrong
and she was wrong and yet--she had made her choice last night, at the
altar of Juno, and though she felt herself possessed by new
understanding, she had to go on in spite of it, as though she fought
wounded or blinded.

"You are perhaps right," Juba said. "I am only a woman and I do not
know. But still, can you not take a few days from your war? Must you
think always on that and never on anything else?"

He ate another of the paper things, not melting it first, and drank
from the container.

"Look, Juba," he said, "I've been thinking on other things ever since
I got here, but first I want to...."

"First," Juba interrupted, for here was her moment, "I ask one thing
of you. Only that you radio incorrect coordinates back to your base.
Say you have moved on, that this is a barren world."

"Let me talk to you first," he said. "I want to...."

"Please," Juba begged, moving toward him. "It is no loss to you. Only
a small favor, to protect our planet from outsiders, in return for ...
for whatever pleasures I can provide for you, or my sisters, if I do
not please you."

"All right," he said, turning to his communication equipment. "If
that's the only way you're going to let me speak to you."

"Your tape," Juba said. "Turn on your tape."

"Tape!"

"I do not speak New-language. I will have to have it translated."

       *       *       *       *       *

The man looked at Juba hard and worked at the corner of his mouth with
his tongue.

"All right," he said, flipping a switch. He turned to his equipment
and spoke his strange language into it. It was rough and she liked it.

"Now," he began.

"Give me the tape," Juba interrupted.

He jostled a flat box out of the wall, held the tape up to the light
and snapped off a small portion and handed it to Juba.

"Come outside," she said, taking his hand. "My world is more beautiful
than your space ship."

"Can't deny that," he said, watching the branches of the Untouchable
Bush draw away as they walked through it.

"Now," he said, when he was stretched out on the undulant moss. He
felt at the patch of moss sprouting under the warmth of his palm, and
watched while an exploratory tendril curled around his little finger.
"Now--do you know what it is I want of you?"

"I have," Juba said, "some idea." She hadn't known they talked about
it. She thought they just did it.

"Well, you're wrong."

"Oh," she said, and stood up and walked over to the brook so he would
not see her face. For she wondered wherein she was lacking and she was
embarrassed. "Then," she asked, "what _do_ you want of me?"

"There is, as I said, a war on. I am, as I said, a scout. I'm looking
for a communications base halfway between a certain strategic enemy
outpost and a certain strategic allied outpost."

"Why?"

"Why? I don't know why. Does the grain of sand know where the beach
ends? And if I did know, what would it matter?"

"But why _this_ planet? There are other systems. Even other planets in
this system." The moss curled under her feet and pricked at her. She
was not doing this right. What did she care about his war? But she did
not know what to do. She had been prepared for Seduction, Step II, and
had even thought up a few things to say, though conversation is not
included in the manual, because there is usually a language barrier.
It was his speaking the language that made the difference.

"This is the only immediately habitable planet. You don't realize how
expensive and cumbersome and logistically difficult it is to set up
the simplest station on an abnormal planet. Tons of equipment are
needed just to compensate for a few degrees too much temperature, or a
few degrees too little, or excessive natural radiation, or a slight
off balance of atmosphere. Or even if a planet is _apparently_
habitable, there's no way of being absolutely sure until there have
been people actually living on it for a while. There isn't time for
all this. Can't you just believe me?"

"I believe you," Juba said, "and the answer is no. It is not my
decision to make. I cannot decide for my people. And if I could, the
answer would still be no. That is exactly why we cut ourselves off
from the rest of civilization. To stay out of your wars, to carry on
civilization when you have laid it waste. That is why we are a planet
of parthenogenetic women."

"Is it?" he asked. "Was it to carry on the torch for civilization or
to flee from it? Life flows, Juba. If it doesn't flow forward, it
flows backward. Which way does your world go?"

Which way? The little stream scrambled over its bright rocks, flashing
the sunlight like teeth laughing.

Which way? The servants, the pets, the gladiatorial contests. The old
goddesses. Were we becoming weary with time? Juba wondered. What sense
did it make? What future did it mold?

       *       *       *       *       *

The Man got up and came to put his arms around Juba, crossing his
arms over her chest and putting his hands on her shoulders. He leaned
down until she could feel his breath on the back of her neck.

Then it was that Juba could feel from his strength that everything he
said must be right, because he said it, and that he was the name for
all those things inside her which had no name.

"I cannot bring you in for the Ceremonies," Juba said. "Whatever you
are and whatever I am--these futures must lie with the goddesses. But
sacrifice you I cannot." She turned in his arms. "Go," she said. "And
quickly."

He kissed her. "I will not go," he said, and she wanted very much for
him to stay, but not for the Ceremonies.

"I was to draw you into the gladiatorial contests," she said, "with
rich promises. But I cannot. For those who die it is bad. But for
those who live it is worse."

"Well, now you have told me and I will not be drawn," he said with
that grin. "Who said women are not barbarous? It is up to you," he
went on, "to free your world from its deadly isolation."

He kissed her by the vein in her neck, the heavy one, where the blood
beats through. And there flashed through her head the instructions for
Seduction, Step II, and she wondered that other women had been able to
remember printed pages when this happened.

"You must go," Juba said, holding him so that he would not. "What do
you want me to do?"

       *       *       *       *       *

He lost his fingers in her hair, "I like blondes," he said. "And I
like a slender waist." There was a tension in the muscles of his lower
lip and his eyes seemed to lengthen, and by this Juba knew what he
felt at that moment.

But he said, "I want you to switch off your planetary directional
diverter. Even if you had let me radio in the coordinates I had they
would have been wrong, wouldn't they?"

"Yes," Juba said. "But the directional diverter diverts only in
certain patterns, so that it might be possible to figure out...."

"I know. Maybe and maybe not. I want you to turn it off long enough
for me to get up beyond your whole system and have my instruments take
a fix on your orbit. Then we can planet in blind, if necessary, to set
up our station."

"But as soon as you take off," Juba said, wondering if she would
really do such a thing or if she would suddenly wake as from a dream
and find her wits again, "they'll be on me with their questions. And
what could I say to them?"

"You won't have to say anything to them," the Man said. "You'll be on
the ship with me."

"With _you_!" The thought went all through Juba, as ice water does
sometimes, and bubbled up into her ears. "With you." When she looked
at him she really couldn't see what he looked like any more. Only a
sort of shine. "You mean you'll take me away with you?"

"Do you think I could leave you?" he asked, all shiny. "Smash the
thing," he said. "They'll repair it, but by that time it'll be too
late."

She sat down on the moss, and he was over her, his face urgent, as for
Step III. But he said, "Go ahead. Go now. And hurry."

She got up hastily, planning in her mind how she would arrange her
face, so as to appear calm if anyone should see her and what excuses
she would make if there were anyone about the Machine House. They had
no guards and kept no watches, for why should they?

       *       *       *       *       *

It was at the market place, near the fish stalls, that she met her
mother.

The mother tugged at Juba's robe as she went by. "It is not easy for
you, is it?" she asked, low, so that no one could hear.

"No," the girl said. "It is not easy." Was it not written all over
her? Was it not on her breath and shaken out of her hair?

The mother looked closely at Juba and felt at her forehead. "Perhaps
it is forcing you too soon," she said with a hesitant frown which for
a moment made her look like someone else. "It is not too late, Juba,
to get someone else. Even now...."

"It is too late," Juba said, and pulled away, afraid to talk more. But
although the mother's face, Juba knew, was set, and her mind winding
unhappily through surmises, she would not follow the girl, out of
pride.

Pride.

       *       *       *       *       *

The machine was alone. Juba cut it off and pulled the handle of the
switch out. She then opened up the face plate and jerked out all the
wires in sight. She reached in and broke off all the fine points of
the compass settings and pulled out everything loose she could reach.

Then she walked back quickly through the market place, so as not to
seem to be skulking.

"Juba ..." the mother said, standing in her path.

"Later," Juba said. "It will soon be done. Mother ... I love you. All
of you." And she went around the mother, quickly.

       *       *       *       *       *

"It is done," Juba said, giving him the switch key as though it meant
something all by itself. "You have at least several hours, even if
they find out at this moment. And they won't. There will be no real
suspicion until your ... our ship takes off."

       *       *       *       *       *

After he had made love to Juba, she could see the sun was wheeling
high, and in the temple they would begin to wonder a little. "We must
hurry," she said, and she broke a budded branch off a laesa bush, so
that later, when everything was strange, this bit of what she had been
would be with her to surprise her. In strange places, but with this
man.

She turned to smile at him, for her heart was full of love, and she
felt that he was as much within her as he was within himself.

It was then that he grabbed her hands and tied them, and he tied her
feet, and he lit a cigarette and stood for a moment, looking at her
and laughing a little with his eyes.

Juba's mind was dark, very dark, as dimness after bright sunlight in
the eyes. She spoke to him with her brows, afraid to ask out loud why
he had done this, though there could be only one reason.

"Thanks," he said, "for all of it." Then, seeing her tears, he said,
"Well, really, what did you expect?"

There was a sharp stone beneath her shoulder, and she moved against
it, so that it would cut through her pain. And, feeling the blood warm
on her skin her tears stopped, for it was the stone that had hurt her,
and not the Man.

"You act," she said with a sneer, "as I would expect a man to act."

"And you," he said, walking off with his heavy steps, "have very
kindly acted as I would expect a woman to act."

Thus it was that she opened her veins on the sharp rock. Not out of
love. Not out of sorrow. Not even out of fear. Out of pride.

THE END

       *       *       *       *       *







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Step IV, by Rosel George Brown

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK STEP IV ***

***** This file should be named 30884.txt or 30884.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/0/8/8/30884/

Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
