Project Gutenberg's Industrial Revolution, by Poul William Anderson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Industrial Revolution

Author: Poul William Anderson

Illustrator: Leo Summers

Release Date: January 15, 2010 [EBook #30971]
[This file last updated January 29, 2011]


Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION ***




Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







                         Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from Analog Science Fact & Fiction September
    1963. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed.


                            [Illustration]


                        INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION


                 Ever think how deadly a thing it is
                      if a machine has amnesia--
                 or how easily it can be arranged....


                        BY WINSTON P. SANDERS


                      ILLUSTRATED BY LEO SUMMERS

       *       *       *       *       *




"Well, yes," Amspaugh admitted, "it was a unique war in many ways,
including its origin. However, there are so many analogies to other
colonial revolutions--" His words trailed off as usual.

"I know. Earth's mercantile policies and so forth," said Lindgren. He
fancies himself a student of interplanetary history. This has led to
quite a few arguments since Amspaugh, who teaches in that field,
joined the Club. Mostly they're good. I went to the bar and got myself
another drink, listening as the mine owner's big voice went on:

"But what began it? When did the asterites first start realizing they
weren't pseudopods of a dozen Terrestrial nations, but a single nation
in their own right? There's the root of the revolution. And it can be
pinned down, too."

"'Ware metaphor!" cried someone at my elbow. I turned and saw Missy
Blades. She'd come quietly into the lounge and started mixing a gin
and bitters.

The view window framed her white head in Orion as she moved toward the
little cluster of seated men. She took a fat cigar from her pocket,
struck it on her shoe sole, and added her special contribution to the
blue cloud in the room after she sat down.

"Excuse me," she said. "I couldn't help that. Please go on." Which I
hope relieves you of any fear that she's an Unforgettable Character.
Oh, yes, she's old as Satan now; her toil and guts and conniving make
up half the biography of the Sword; she manned a gun turret at Ceres,
and was mate of the _Tyrfing_ on some of the earliest Saturn runs when
men took their lives between their teeth because they needed both
hands free; her sons and grandsons fill the Belt with their brawling
ventures; she can drink any ordinary man to the deck; she's one of the
three women ever admitted to the Club. But she's also one of the few
genuine ladies I've known in my life.

"Uh, well," Lindgren grinned at her. "I was saying, Missy, the germ of
the revolution was when the Stations armed themselves. You see, that
meant more than police powers. It implied a degree of sovereignty.
Over the years, the implication grew."

"Correct." Orloff nodded his bald head. "I remember how the Governing
Commission squalled when the Station managers first demanded the
right. They foresaw trouble. But if the Stations belonging to one
country put in space weapons, what else could the others do?"

"They should have stuck together and all been firm about refusing to
allow it," Amspaugh said. "From the standpoint of their own best
interests, I mean."

"They tried to," Orloff replied. "I hate to think how many
communications we sent home from our own office, and the others must
have done the same. But Earth was a long way off. The Station bosses
were close. Inverse square law of political pressure."

"I grant you, arming each new little settlement proved important,"
Amspaugh said. "But really, it expressed nothing more than the first
inchoate stirrings of asteroid nationalism. And the origins of that
are much more subtle and complex. For instance ... er...."

"You've got to have a key event somewhere," Lindgren insisted. "I say
that this was it."

A silence fell, as will happen in conversation. I came back from the
bar and settled myself beside Missy. She looked for a while into her
drink, and then out to the stars. The slow spin of our rock had now
brought the Dippers into view. Her faded eyes sought the Pole
Star--but it's Earth's, not our own any more--and I wondered what
memories they were sharing. She shook herself the least bit and said:

"I don't know about the sociological ins and outs. All I know is, a
lot of things happened, and there wasn't any pattern to them at the
time. We just slogged through as best we were able, which wasn't
really very good. But I can identify one of those wriggling roots for
you, Sigurd. I was there when the question of arming the Stations
first came up. Or, rather, when the incident occurred that led
directly to the question being raised."

Our whole attention went to her. She didn't dwell on the past as often
as we would have liked.

A slow, private smile crossed her lips. She looked beyond us again.
"As a matter of fact," she murmured, "I got my husband out of it."
Then quickly, as if to keep from remembering too much:

"Do you care to hear the story? It was when the Sword was just getting
started. They'd established themselves on SSC 45--oh, never mind the
catalogue number. Sword Enterprises, because Mike Blades' name
suggested it--what kind of name could you get out of Jimmy Chung, even
if he was the senior partner? It'd sound too much like a collision
with a meteorite--so naturally the asteroid also came to be called the
Sword. They began on the borrowed shoestring that was usual in those
days. Of course, in the Belt a shoestring has to be mighty long, and
finances got stretched to the limit. The older men here will know how
much had to be done by hand, in mortal danger, because machines were
too expensive. But in spite of everything, they succeeded. The Station
was functional and they were ready to start business when--"

       *       *       *       *       *

It was no coincidence that the Jupiter craft were arriving steadily
when the battleship came. Construction had been scheduled with this in
mind, that the Sword should be approaching conjunction with the king
planet, making direct shuttle service feasible, just as the chemical
plant went into service. We need not consider how much struggle and
heartbreak had gone into meeting that schedule. As for the battleship,
she appeared because the fact that a Station in just this orbit was
about to commence operations was news important enough to cross the
Solar System and push through many strata of bureaucracy. The heads of
the recently elected North American government became suddenly, fully
aware of what had been going on.

Michael Blades was outside, overseeing the installation of a receptor,
when his earplug buzzed. He thrust his chin against the tuning plate,
switching from gang to interoffice band. "Mike?" said Avis Page's
voice, "You're wanted up front."

"Now?" he objected. "Whatever for?"

"Courtesy visit from the NASS _Altair_. You've lost track of time, my
boy."

"What the ... the jumping blue blazes are you talking about? We've had
our courtesy visit. Jimmy and I both went over to pay our respects,
and we had Rear Admiral Hulse here to dinner. What more do they
expect, for Harry's sake?"

"Don't you remember? Since there wasn't room to entertain his
officers, you promised to take them on a personal guided tour later. I
made the appointment the very next watch. Now's the hour."

"Oh, yes, it comes back to me. Yeah. Hulse brought a magnum of
champagne with him, and after so long a time drinking recycled water,
my capacity was shot to pieces. I got a warm glow of good fellowship
on, and offered--Let Jimmy handle it, I'm busy."

"The party's too large, he says. You'll have to take half of them.
Their gig will dock in thirty minutes."

"Well, depute somebody else."

"That'd be rude, Mike. Have you forgotten how sensitive they are about
rank at home?" Avis hesitated. "If what I believe about the mood back
there is true, we can use the good will of high-level Navy personnel.
And any other influential people in sight."

Blades drew a deep breath. "You're too blinking sensible. Remind me to
fire you after I've made my first ten million bucks."

"What'll you do for your next ten million, then?" snipped his
secretary-file clerk-confidante-adviser-et cetera.

"Nothing. I'll just squander the first."

"Goody! Can I help?"

"Uh ... I'll be right along." Blades switched off. His ears felt hot,
as often of late when he tangled with Avis, and he unlimbered only a
few choice oaths.

"Troubles?" asked Carlos Odonaju.

Blades stood a moment, looking around, before he answered. He was on
the wide end of the Sword, which was shaped roughly like a truncated
pyramid. Beyond him and his half dozen men stretched a vista of pitted
rock, jutting crags, gulf-black shadows, under the glare of
floodlamps. A few kilometers away, the farthest horizon ended, chopped
off like a cliff. Beyond lay the stars, crowding that night which
never ends. It grew very still while the gang waited for his word. He
could listen to his own lungs and pulse, loud in the spacesuit; he
could even notice its interior smell, blend of plastic and oxygen
cycle chemicals, flesh and sweat. He was used to the sensation of
hanging upside down on the surface, grip-soled boots holding him
against that fractional gee by which the asteroid's rotation overcame
its feeble gravity. But it came to him that this was an eerie
bat-fashion way for an Oregon farm boy to stand.

Oregon was long behind him, though, not only the food factory where he
grew up but the coasts where he had fished and the woods where he had
tramped. No loss. There'd always been too many tourists. You couldn't
escape from people on Earth. Cold and vacuum and raw rock and
everything, the Belt was better. It annoyed him to be interrupted
here.

Could Carlos take over as foreman? N-no, Blades decided, not yet. A
gas receptor was an intricate piece of equipment. Carlos was a good
man of his hands. Every one of the hundred-odd in the Station
necessarily was. But he hadn't done this kind of work often enough.

"I have to quit," Blades said. "Secure the stuff and report back to
Buck Meyers over at the dock, the lot of you. His crew's putting in
another recoil pier, as I suppose you know. They'll find jobs for you.
I'll see you here again on your next watch."

       *       *       *       *       *

He waved--being half the nominal ownership of this place didn't
justify snobbery, when everyone must work together or die--and stepped
off toward the nearest entry lock with that flowing spaceman's pace
which always keeps one foot on the ground. Even so, he didn't
unshackle his inward-reeling lifeline till he was inside the chamber.

On the way he topped a gaunt ridge and had a clear view of the balloons
that were attached to the completed receptors. Those that were still
full bulked enormous, like ghostly moons. The Jovian gases that
strained their tough elastomer did not much blur the stars seen
through them; but they swelled high enough to catch the light of the
hidden sun and shimmer with it. The nearly discharged balloons hung
thin, straining outward. Two full ones passed in slow orbit against
the constellations. They were waiting to be hauled in and coupled
fast, to release their loads into the Station's hungry chemical plant.
But there were not yet enough facilities to handle them at once--and
the _Pallas Castle_ would soon be arriving with another--Blades found
that he needed a few extra curses.

Having cycled through the air lock, he removed his suit and stowed it,
also the heavy gloves which kept him from frostbite as he touched its
space-cold exterior. Tastefully clad in a Navy surplus Long John, he
started down the corridors.

Now that the first stage of burrowing within the asteroid had been
completed, most passages went through its body, rather than being
plastic tubes snaking across the surface. Nothing had been done thus
far about facing them. They were merely shafts, two meters square,
lined with doorways, ventilator grilles, and fluoropanels. They had no
thermocoils. Once the nickel-iron mass had been sufficiently warmed
up, the waste heat of man and his industry kept it that way. The dark,
chipped-out tunnels throbbed with machine noises. Here and there a
girlie picture or a sentimental landscape from Earth was posted. Men
moved busily along them, bearing tools, instruments, supplies. They
were from numerous countries, those men, though mostly North
Americans, but they had acquired a likeness, a rangy leathery look and
a free-swinging stride, that went beyond their colorful coveralls.

"Hi, Mike.... How's she spinning?... Hey, Mike, you heard the latest
story about the Martian and the bishop?... Can you spare me a minute?
We got troubles in the separator manifolds.... What's the hurry, Mike,
your batteries overcharged?" Blades waved the hails aside. There was
need for haste. You could move fast indoors, under the low weight
which became lower as you approached the axis of rotation, with no
fear of tumbling off. But it was several kilometers from the gas
receptor end to the people end of the asteroid.

He rattled down a ladder and entered his cramped office out of breath.
Avis Page looked up from her desk and wrinkled her freckled snub nose
at him. "You ought to take a shower, but there isn't time," she said.
"Here, use my antistinker." She threw him a spray cartridge with a
deft motion. "I got your suit and beardex out of your cabin."

"Have I no privacy?" he grumbled, but grinned in her direction. She
wasn't much to look at--not ugly, just small, brunette, and
unspectacular--but she was a supernova of an assistant. Make somebody
a good wife some day. He wondered why she hadn't taken advantage of
the situation here to snaffle a husband. A dozen women, all but two of
them married, and a hundred men, was a ratio even more lopsided than
the norm in the Belt. Of course with so much work to do, and with
everybody conscious of the need to maintain cordial relations, sex
didn't get much chance to rear its lovely head. Still--

She smiled back with the gentleness that he found disturbing when he
noticed it. "Shoo," she said. "Your guests will be here any minute.
You're to meet them in Jimmy's office."

       *       *       *       *       *

Blades ducked into the tiny washroom. He wasn't any 3V star himself,
he decided as he smeared cream over his face: big, homely, red-haired.
_But not something you'd be scared to meet in a dark alley, either,_
he added smugly. In fact, there had been an alley in Aresopolis....
Things were expected to be going so smoothly by the time they
approached conjunction with Mars that he could run over to that sinful
ginful city for a vacation. Long overdue ... whooee! He wiped off his
whiskers, shucked the zipskin, and climbed into the white pants and
high-collared blue tunic that must serve as formal garb.

Emerging, he stopped again at Avis' desk. "Any message from the
_Pallas_?" he asked.

"No," the girl said. "But she ought to be here in another two watches,
right on sked. You worry too much, Mike."

"Somebody has to, and I haven't got Jimmy's Buddhist
ride-with-the-punches attitude."

"You should cultivate it." She grew curious. The brown eyes lingered
on him. "Worry's contagious. You make me fret about you."

"Nothing's going to give me an ulcer but the shortage of booze on this
rock. Uh, if Bill Mbolo should call about those catalysts while I'm
gone, tell him--" He ran off a string of instructions and headed for
the door.

Chung's hangout was halfway around the asteroid, so that one chief or
the other could be a little nearer the scene of any emergency. Not
that they spent much time at their desks. Shorthanded and
undermechanized, they were forever having to help out in the actual
construction. Once in a while Blades found himself harking wistfully
back to his days as an engineer with Solar Metals: good pay,
interesting if hazardous work on flying mountains where men had never
trod before, and no further responsibilities. But most asterites had
the dream of becoming their own bosses.

When he arrived, the _Altair_ officers were already there, a score of
correct young men in white dress uniforms. Short, squat, and placid
looking, Jimmy Chung stood making polite conversation. "Ah, there," he
said, "Lieutenant Ziska and gentlemen, my partner, Michael Blades,
Mike, may I present--"

Blades' attention stopped at Lieutenant Ziska. He heard vaguely that
she was the head quartermaster officer. But mainly she was tall and
blond and blue-eyed, with a bewitching dimple when she smiled, and
filled her gown the way a Cellini Venus doubtless filled its casting
mold.

"Very pleased to meet you, Mr. Blades," she said as if she meant it.
Maybe she did! He gulped for air.

"And Commander Leibknecht," Chung said across several light-years.
"Commander Leibknecht. _Commander Leibknecht._"

"Oh. Sure. 'Scuse." Blades dropped Lieutenant Ziska's hand in
reluctant haste. "Hardjado, C'mander Leibfraumilch."

Somehow the introductions were gotten through. "I'm sorry we have to
be so inhospitable," Chung said, "but you'll see how crowded we are.
About all we can do is show you around, if you're interested."

"Of course you're interested," said Blades to Lieutenant Ziska. "I'll
show you some gimmicks I thought up myself."

Chung scowled at him. "We'd best divide the party and proceed along
alternate routes," he said, "We'll meet again in the mess for coffee,
Lieutenant Ziska, would you like to--"

"Come with me? Certainly," Blades said.

Chung's glance became downright murderous. "I thought--" he began.

"Sure." Blades nodded vigorously. "You being the senior partner,
you'll take the highest ranking of these gentlemen, and I'll be in
Scotland before you. C'mon, let's get started. May I?" He offered the
quartermistress his arm. She smiled and took it. He supposed that
eight or ten of her fellows trailed them.

       *       *       *       *       *

The first disturbing note was sounded on the verandah.

[Illustration]

They had glanced at the cavelike dormitories where most of the
personnel lived; at the recreation dome topside which made the life
tolerable; at kitchen, sick bay, and the other service facilities; at
the hydroponic tanks and yeast vats which supplied much of the
Station's food; at the tiny cabins scooped out for the top engineers
and the married couples. Before leaving this end of the asteroid,
Blades took his group to the verandah. It was a clear dome jutting
from the surface, softly lighted, furnished as a primitive officers'
lounge, open to a view of half the sky.

"Oh-h," murmured Ellen Ziska. Unconsciously she moved closer to
Blades.

Young Lieutenant Commander Gilbertson gave her a somewhat jaundiced
look. "You've seen deep space often enough before," he said.

"Through a port or a helmet." Her eyes glimmered enormous in the dusk.
"Never like this."

The stars crowded close in their wintry myriads. The galactic belt
glistened, diamond against infinite darkness. Vision toppled endlessly
outward, toward the far mysterious shimmer of the Andromeda Nebula;
silence was not a mere absence of noise, but a majestic presence, the
seething of suns.

"What about the observation terrace at Leyburg?" Gilbertson
challenged.

"That was different," Ellen Ziska said. "Everything was safe and
civilized. This is like being on the edge of creation."

Blades could see why Goddard House had so long resisted the inclusion of
female officers on ships of the line, despite political pressure at home
and the Russian example abroad. He was glad they'd finally given in. Now
if only he could build himself up as a dashing, romantic type ... But how
long would the _Altair_ stay? Her stopover seemed quite extended already,
for a casual visit in the course of a routine patrol cruise. He'd have to
work fast.

"Yes, we are pretty isolated," he said. "The Jupiter ships just unload
their balloons, pick up the empties, and head right back for another
cargo."

"I don't understand how you can found an industry here, when your raw
materials only arrive at conjunction," Ellen said.

"Things will be different once we're in full operation," Blades
assured her. "Then we'll be doing enough business to pay for a steady
input, transshipped from whatever depot is nearest Jupiter at any
given time."

"You've actually built this simply to process ... gas?" Gilbertson
interposed. Blades didn't know whether he was being sarcastic or
asking a genuine question. It was astonishing how ignorant
Earthsiders, even space-traveling Earthsiders, often were about such
matters.

"Jovian gas is rich stuff," he explained. "Chiefly hydrogen and
helium, of course; but the scoopships separate out most of that during
a pickup. The rest is ammonia, water, methane, a dozen important
organics, including some of the damn ... doggonedest metallic
complexes you ever heard of. We need them as the basis of a
chemosynthetic industry, which we need for survival, which we need if
we're to get the minerals that were the reason for colonizing the Belt
in the first place." He waved his hand at the sky. "When we really get
going, we'll attract settlement. This asteroid has companions, waiting
for people to come and mine them. Homeships and orbital stations will
be built. In ten years there'll be quite a little city clustered
around the Sword."

"It's happened before," nodded tight-faced Commander Warburton of
Gunnery Control.

"It's going to happen a lot oftener," Blades said enthusiastically.
"The Belt's going to grow!" He aimed his words at Ellen. "This is the
real frontier. The planets will never amount to much. It's actually
harder to maintain human-type conditions on so big a mass, with a
useless atmosphere around you, than on a lump in space like this. And
the gravity wells are so deep. Even given nuclear power, the energy
cost of really exploiting a planet is prohibitive. Besides which, the
choice minerals are buried under kilometers of rock. On a metallic
asteroid, you can find almost everything you want directly under your
feet. No limit to what you can do."

"But your own energy expenditure--" Gilbertson objected.

"That's no problem." As if on cue, the worldlet's spin brought the sun
into sight. Tiny but intolerably brilliant, it flooded the dome with
harsh radiance. Blades lowered the blinds on that side. He pointed in
the opposite direction, toward several sparks of equal brightness that
had manifested themselves.

"Hundred-meter parabolic mirrors," he said. "Easy to make; you spray a
thin metallic coat on a plastic backing. They're in orbit around us,
each with a small geegee unit to control drift and keep it aimed
directly at the sun. The focused radiation charges heavy-duty
accumulators, which we then collect and use for our power source in
all our mobile work."

"Do you mean you haven't any nuclear generator?" asked Warburton.

He seemed curiously intent about it. Blades wondered why, but nodded.
"That's correct. We don't want one. Too dangerous for us. Nor is it
necessary. Even at this distance from the sun, and allowing for
assorted inefficiencies, a mirror supplies better than five hundred
kilowatts, twenty-four hours a day, year after year, absolutely free."

"Hm-m-m. Yes." Warburton's lean head turned slowly about, to rake
Blades with a look of calculation. "I understand that's the normal
power system in Stations of this type. But we didn't know if it was
used in your case, too."

_Why should you care?_ Blades thought.

He shoved aside his faint unease and urged Ellen toward the dome
railing. "Maybe we can spot your ship, Lieutenant, uh, Miss Ziska.
Here's a telescope. Let me see, her orbit ought to run about so...."

       *       *       *       *       *

He hunted until the _Altair_ swam into the viewfield. At this distance
the spheroid looked like a tiny crescent moon, dully painted; but he
could make out the sinister shapes of a rifle turret and a couple of
missile launchers. "Have a look," he invited. Her hair tickled his
nose, brushing past him. It had a delightful sunny odor.

"How small she seems," the girl said, with the same note of wonder as
before. "And how huge when you're aboard."

Big, all right, Blades knew, and loaded to the hatches with nuclear
hellfire. But not massive. A civilian spaceship carried meteor
plating, but since that was about as useful as wet cardboard against
modern weapons, warcraft sacrificed it for the sake of mobility. The
self-sealing hull was thin magnesium, the outer shell periodically
renewed as cosmic sand eroded it.

"I'm not surprised we orbited, instead of docking," Ellen remarked.
"We'd have butted against your radar and bellied into your control
tower."

"Well, actually, no," said Blades. "Even half finished, our dock's big
enough to accommodate you, as you'll see today. Don't forget, we
anticipate a lot of traffic in the future. I'm puzzled why you didn't
accept our invitation to use it."

"Doctrine!" Warburton clipped.

The sun came past the blind and touched the officers' faces with
incandescence. Did some look startled, one or two open their mouths as
if to protest and then snap them shut again at a warning look? Blades'
spine tingled. _I never heard of any such doctrine,_ he thought,
_least of all when a North American ship drops in on a North American
Station._

"Is ... er ... is there some international crisis brewing?" he
inquired.

"Why, no." Ellen straightened from the telescope. "I'd say relations
have seldom been as good as they are now. What makes you ask?"

"Well, the reason your captain didn't--"

"Never mind," Warburton said. "We'd better continue the tour, if you
please."

Blades filed his misgivings for later reference. He might have fretted
immediately, but Ellen Ziska's presence forbade that. A sort of Pauli
exclusion principle. One can't have two spins simultaneously, can one?
He gave her his arm again. "Let's go on to Central Control," he
proposed. "That's right behind the people section."

"You know, I can't get over it," she told him softly. "This miracle
you've wrought. I've never been more proud of being human."

"Is this your first long space trip?"

"Yes, I was stationed at Port Colorado before the new Administration
reshuffled armed service assignments."

"They did? How come?"

"I don't know. Well, that is, during the election campaign the Social
Justice Party did talk a lot about old-line officers who were too
hidebound to carry out modern policies effectively. But it sounded
rather silly to me."

Warburton compressed his lips. "I do not believe it is proper for
service officers to discuss political issues publicly," he said like a
machine gun.

Ellen flushed. "S-sorry, commander."

Blades felt a helpless anger on her account. He wasn't sure why. What
was she to him? He'd probably never see her again. A hell of an
attractive target, to be sure; and after so much celibacy he was
highly vulnerable; but did she really matter?

He turned his back on Warburton and his eyes on her--a five thousand
per cent improvement--and diverted her from her embarrassment by
asking, "Are you from Colorado, then, Miss Ziska?"

"Oh, no. Toronto."

"How'd you happen to join the Navy, if I may make so bold?"

"Gosh, that's hard to say. But I guess mostly I felt so crowded at
home. So, pigeonholed. The world seemed to be nothing but neat little
pigeonholes."

"Uh-huh. Same here. I was also a square pigeon in a round hole." She
laughed. "Luckily," he added, "Space is too big for compartments."

Her agreement lacked vigor. The Navy must have been a disappointment
to her. But she couldn't very well say so in front of her shipmates.

Hm-m-m ... if she could be gotten away from them--"How long will you
be here?" he inquired. His pulse thuttered.

"We haven't been told," she said.

"Some work must be done on the missile launchers," Warburton said.
"That's best carried out here, where extra facilities are available if
we need them. Not that I expect we will." He paused. "I hope we won't
interfere with your own operations."

"Far from it." Blades beamed at Ellen. "Or, more accurately, this kind
of interference I don't mind in the least."

She blushed and her eyelids fluttered. Not that she was a fluffhead,
he realized. But to avoid incidents, Navy regulations enforced an
inhuman correctness between personnel of opposite sexes. After weeks
in the black, meeting a man who could pay a compliment without risking
court-martial must be like a shot of adrenalin. Better and better!

"Are you sure?" Warburton persisted. "For instance, won't we be in the
way when the next ship comes from Jupiter?"

"She'll approach the opposite end of the asteroid," Blades said.
"Won't stay long, either."

"How long?"

"One watch, so the crew can relax a bit among those of us who're off
duty. It'd be a trifle longer if we didn't happen to have an empty bag
at the moment. But never very long. Even running under thrust the
whole distance, Jupe's a good ways off. They've no time to waste."

"When is the next ship due?"

"The _Pallas Castle_ is expected in the second watch from now."

"Second watch. I see." Warburton stalked on with a brooding expression
on his Puritan face.

       *       *       *       *       *

Blades might have speculated about that, but someone asked him why the
Station depended on spin for weight. Why not put in an internal field
generator, like a ship? Blades explained patiently that an Emett large
enough to produce uniform pull through a volume as big as the Sword
was rather expensive. "Eventually, when we're a few megabucks ahead of
the game--"

"Do you really expect to become rich?" Ellen asked. Her tone was awed.
No Earthsider had that chance any more, except for the great
corporations. "_Individually_ rich?"

"We can't fail to. I tell you, this is a frontier like nothing since
the Conquistadores. We could very easily have been wiped out in the
first couple of years--financially or physically--by any of a thousand
accidents. But now we're too far along for that. We've got it made,
Jimmy and I."

"What will you do with your wealth?"

"Live like an old-time sultan," Blades grinned. Then, because it was
true as well as because he wanted to shine in her eyes: "Mostly,
though, we'll go on to new things. There's so much that needs to be
done. Not simply more asteroid mines. We need farms; timber; parks;
passenger and cargo liners; every sort of machine. I'd like to try
getting at some of that water frozen in the Saturnian System.
Altogether, I see no end to the jobs. It's no good our depending on
Earth for anything. Too expensive, too chancy. The Belt has to be made
completely self-sufficient."

"With a nice rakeoff for Sword Enterprises," Gilbertson scoffed.

"Why, sure. Aren't we entitled to some return?"

"Yes. But not so out of proportion as the Belt companies seem to
expect. They're only using natural resources that rightly belong to
the people, and the accumulated skills and wealth of an entire
society."

"Huh! The People didn't do anything with the Sword. Jimmy and I and
our boys did. No Society was around here grubbing nickel-iron and
riding out gravel storms; we were."

"Let's leave politics alone," Warburton snapped. But it was mostly
Ellen's look of distress which shut Blades up.

To everybody's relief, they reached Central Control about then. It was
a complex of domes and rooms, crammed with more equipment than Blades
could put a name to. Computers were in Chung's line, not his. He
wasn't able to answer all of Warburton's disconcertingly sharp
questions.

But in a general way he could. Whirling through vacuum with a load of
frail humans and intricate artifacts, the Sword must be at once
machine, ecology, and unified organism. Everything had to mesh. A
failure in the thermodynamic balance, a miscalculation in supply
inventory, a few mirrors perturbed out of proper orbit, might spell
Ragnarok. The chemical plant's purifications and syntheses were
already a network too large for the human mind to grasp as a whole,
and it was still growing. Even where men could have taken charge,
automation was cheaper, more reliable, less risky of lives. The
computer system housed in Central Control was not only the brain, but
the nerves and heart of the Sword.

"Entirely cryotronic, eh?" Warburton commented. "That seems to be the
usual practice at the Stations. Why?"

"The least expensive type for us," Blades answered. "There's no
problem in maintaining liquid helium here."

Warburton's gaze was peculiarly intense. "Cryotronic systems are
vulnerable to magnetic and radiation disturbances."

"Uh-huh. That's one reason we don't have a nuclear power plant. This
far from the sun, we don't get enough emission to worry about. The
asteroid's mass screens out what little may arrive. I know the TIMM
system is used on ships; but if nothing else, the initial cost is more
than we want to pay."

"What's TIMM?" inquired the _Altair's_ chaplain.

"Thermally Integrated Micro-Miniaturized," Ellen said crisply.
"Essentially, ultraminiaturized ceramic-to-metal-seal vacuum tubes
running off thermionic generators. They're immune to gamma ray and
magnetic pulses, easily shielded against particule radiation, and
economical of power." She grinned. "Don't tell me there's nothing
about them in Leviticus, Padre!"

"Very fine for a ship's autopilot," Blades agreed. "But as I said, we
needn't worry about rad or mag units here, we don't mind sprawling a
bit, and as for thermal efficiency, we want to waste some heat. It
goes to maintain internal temperature."

"In other words, efficiency depends on what you need to effish," Ellen
bantered. She grew grave once more and studied him for a while before
she mused, "The same person who swung a pick, a couple of years ago,
now deals with something as marvelous as this...." He forgot about
worrying.

       *       *       *       *       *

But he remembered later, when the gig had left and Chung called him to
his office. Avis came too, by request. As she entered, she asked why.

"You were visiting your folks Earthside last year," Chung said.
"Nobody else in the Station has been back as recently as that."

"What can I tell you?"

"I'm not sure. Background, perhaps. The feel of the place. We don't
really know, out in the Belt, what's going on there. The beamcast news
is hardly a trickle. Besides, you have more common sense in your left
little toe than that big mick yonder has on his entire copperplated
head."

They seated themselves in the cobwebby low-gee chairs around Chung's
desk. Blades took out his pipe and filled the bowl with his tobacco
ration for today. Wouldn't it be great, he thought dreamily, if this
old briar turned out to be an Aladdin's lamp, and the smoke condensed
into a blonde she-Canadian--?

"Wake up, will you?" Chung barked.

"Huh?" Blades started. "Oh. Sure. What's the matter? You look like a
fish on Friday."

"Maybe with reason. Did you notice anything unusual with that party
you were escorting?"

"Yes, indeed."

"What?"

"About one hundred seventy-five centimeters tall, yellow hair, blue
eyes, and some of the smoothest fourth-order curves I ever--"

"Mike, stop that!" Avis sounded appalled. "This is serious."

"I agree. She'll be leaving in a few more watches."

The girl bit her lip. "You're too old for that mooncalf rot and you
know it."

"Agreed again. I feel more like a bull." Blades made pawing motions on
the desktop.

"There's a lady present," Chung said.

Blades saw that Avis had gone quite pale. "I'm sorry," he blurted. "I
never thought ... I mean, you've always seemed like--"

"One of the boys," she finished for him in a brittle tone. "Sure.
Forget it. What's the problem, Jimmy?"

Chung folded his hands and stared at them. "I can't quite define
that," he answered, word by careful word. "Perhaps I've simply gone
spacedizzy. But when we called on Admiral Hulse, and later when he
called on us, didn't you get the impression of, well, wariness? Didn't
he seem to be watching and probing, every minute we were together?"

"I wouldn't call him a cheerful sort," Blades nodded. "Stiff as
molasses on Pluto. But I suppose ... supposed he's just naturally that
way."

Chung shook his head. "It wasn't a normal standoffishness. You've
heard me reminisce about the time I was on Vesta with the North
American technical representative, when the Convention was
negotiated."

"Yes, I've heard that story a few times," said Avis dryly.

"Remember, that was right after the Europa Incident. We'd come close
to a space war--undeclared, but it would have been nasty. We were
still close. Every delegate went to that conference cocked and primed.

"Hulse had the same manner."

       *       *       *       *       *

A silence fell. Blades said at length, "Well, come to think of it, he
did ask some rather odd questions. He seemed to twist the conversation
now and then, so he could find things out like our exact layout,
emergency doctrine, and so forth. It didn't strike me as significant,
though."

"Nor me," Chung admitted. "Taken in isolation, it meant nothing. But
these visitors today--Sure, most of them obviously didn't suspect
anything untoward. But that Liebknecht, now. Why was he so interested
in Central Control? Nothing new or secret there. Yet he kept asking
for details like the shielding factor of the walls."

"So did Commander Warburton," Blades remembered. "Also, he wanted to
know exactly when the _Pallas_ is due, how long she'll stay ...
hm-m-m, yes, whether we have any radio linkage with the outside, like
to Ceres or even the nearest Commission base--"

"Did you tell him that we don't?" Avis asked sharply.

"Yes. Shouldn't I have?"

"It scarcely makes any difference," Chung said in a resigned voice.
"As thoroughly as they went over the ground, they'd have seen what we
do and do not have installed so far."

He leaned forward. "Why are they hanging around?" he asked. "I was
handed some story about overhauling the missile system."

"Me, too," Blades said.

"But you don't consider a job complete till it's been tested. And you
don't fire a test shot, even a dummy, this close to a Station.
Besides, what could have gone wrong? I can't see a ship departing
Earth orbit for a long cruise without everything being in order. And
they didn't mention any meteorites, any kind of trouble, en route.
Furthermore, why do the work here? The Navy yard's at Ceres. We can't
spare them any decent amount of materials or tools or help."

Blades frowned. His own half-formulated doubts shouldered to the fore,
which was doubly unpleasant after he'd been considering Ellen Ziska.
"They tell me the international situation at home is O.K.," he
offered.

Avis nodded. "What newsfaxes we get in the mail indicate as much," she
said. "So why this hanky-panky?" After a moment, in a changed voice:
"Jimmy, you begin to scare me a little."

"I scare myself," Chung said.

"Every morning when you debeard," Blades said; but his heart wasn't
in it. He shook himself and protested: "Damnation, they're our own
countrymen. We're engaged in a lawful business. Why should they do
anything to us?"

"Maybe Avis can throw some light on that," Chung suggested.

The girl twisted her fingers together. "Not me," she said. "I'm no
politician."

"But you were home not so long ago. You talked with people, read the
news, watched the 3V. Can't you at least give an impression?"

"N-no--Well, of course the preliminary guns of the election campaign
were already being fired. The Social Justice Party was talking a lot
about ... oh, it seemed so ridiculous that I didn't pay much
attention."

"They talked about how the government had been pouring billions and
billions of dollars into space, while overpopulation produced crying
needs in America's back yard," Chung said. "We know that much, even in
the Belt. We know the appropriations are due to be cut, now the
Essjays are in. So what?"

"We don't need a subsidy any longer," Blades remarked. "It'd help a
lot, but we can get along without if we have to, and personally, I
prefer that. Less government money means less government control."

"Sure," Avis said. "There was more than that involved, however. The
Essjays were complaining about the small return on the investment. Not
enough minerals coming back to Earth."

"Well, for Jupiter's sake," Blades exclaimed, "what do they expect? We
have to build up our capabilities first."

"They even said, some of them, that enough reward never would be
gotten. That under existing financial policies, the Belt would go in
for its own expansion, use nearly everything it produced for itself
and export only a trickle to America. I had to explain to several of
my parents' friends that I wasn't really a socially irresponsible
capitalist."

"Is that all the information you have?" Chung asked when she fell
silent.

"I ... I suppose so. Everything was so vague. No dramatic events. More
of an atmosphere than a concrete thing."

       *       *       *       *       *

"Still, you confirm my own impression," Chung said. Blades jerked his
undisciplined imagination back from the idea of a Thing, with bug eyes
and tentacles, cast in reinforced concrete, and listened as his
partner summed up:

"The popular feeling at home has turned against private enterprise.
You can hardly call a corporate monster like Systemic Developments a
private enterprise! The new President and Congress share that mood. We
can expect to see it manifested in changed laws and regulations. But
what has this got to do with a battleship parked a couple of hundred
kilometers from us?"

"If the government doesn't want the asterites to develop much
further--" Blades bit hard on his pipestem. "They must know we have a
caviar mine here. We'll be the only city in this entire sector."

"But we're still a baby," Avis said. "We won't be important for years
to come. Who'd have it in for a baby?"

"Besides, we're Americans, too," Chung said. "If that were a foreign
ship, the story might be different--Wait a minute! Could they be
thinking of establishing a new base here?"

"The Convention wouldn't allow," said Blades.

"Treaties can always be renegotiated, or even denounced. But first you
have to investigate quietly, find out if it's worth your while."

"Hoo hah, what lovely money that'd mean!"

"And lovely bureaucrats crawling out of every file cabinet," Chung
said grimly. "No, thank you. We'll fight any such attempt to the last
lawyer. We've got a good basis, too, in our charter. If the suit is
tried on Ceres, as I believe it has to be, we'll get a sympathetic
court as well."

"Unless they ring in an Earthside judge," Avis warned.

"Yeah, that's possible. Also, they could spring proceedings on us
without notice. We've got to find out in advance, so we can prepare.
Any chance of pumping some of those officers?"

"'Fraid not," Avis said. "The few who'd be in the know are safely back
on shipboard."

"We could invite 'em here individually," said Blades. "As a matter of
fact, I already have a date with Lieutenant Ziska."

"What?" Avis' mouth fell open.

"Yep," Blades said complacently. "End of the next watch, so she can
observe the _Pallas_ arriving. I'm to fetch her on a scooter." He blew
a fat smoke ring. "Look, Jimmy, can you keep everybody off the porch
for a while then? Starlight, privacy, soft music on the piccolo--who
knows what I might find out?"

"You won't get anything from _her_," Avis spat. "No secrets or, or
anything."

"Still, I look forward to making the attempt. C'mon, pal, pass the
word. I'll do as much for you sometime."

"Times like that never seem to come for me," Chung groaned.

"Oh, let him play around with his suicide blonde," Avis said
furiously. "We others have work to do. I ... I'll tell you what,
Jimmy. Let's not eat in the mess tonight. I'll draw our rations and
fix us something special in your cabin."

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration]

A scooter was not exactly the ideal steed for a knight to convey his
lady. It amounted to little more than three saddles and a locker, set
atop an accumulator-powered gyrogravitic engine, sufficient to lift
you off an asteroid and run at low acceleration. There were no
navigating instruments. You locked the autopilot's radar-gravitic
sensors onto your target object and it took you there, avoiding any
bits of debris which might pass near; but you must watch the distance
indicator and press the deceleration switch in time. If the 'pilot was
turned off, free maneuver became possible, but that was a dangerous
thing to try before you were almost on top of your destination.
Stereoscopic vision fails beyond six or seven meters, and the human
organism isn't equipped to gauge cosmic momenta.

Nevertheless, Ellen was enchanted. "This is like a dream," her voice
murmured in Blades' earplug. "The whole universe, on every side of us.
I could almost reach out and pluck those stars."

"You must have trained in powered spacesuits at the Academy," he said
for lack of a more poetic rejoinder.

"Yes, but that's not the same. We had to stay near Luna's night side,
to be safe from solar particles, and it bit a great chunk out of the
sky. And then everything was so--regulated, disciplined--we did what
we were ordered to do, and that was that. Here I feel free. You can't
imagine how free." Hastily: "Do you use this machine often?"

"Well, yes, we have about twenty scooters at the Station. They're the
most convenient way of flitting with a load: out to the mirrors to
change accumulators, for instance, or across to one of the companion
rocks where we're digging some ores that the Sword doesn't have. That
kind of work." Blades would frankly rather have had her behind him on
a motorskimmer, hanging on as they careened through a springtime
countryside. He was glad when they reached the main forward air lock
and debarked.

He was still gladder when the suits were off. Lieutenant Ziska in
dress uniform was stunning, but Ellen in civvies, a fluffy low-cut
blouse and close-fitting slacks, was a hydrogen blast. He wanted to
roll over and pant, but settled for saying, "Welcome back" and holding
her hand rather longer than necessary.

With a shy smile, she gave him a package. "I drew this before
leaving," she said. "I thought, well, your life is so austere--"

"A demi of Sandeman," he said reverently. "I won't tell you you
shouldn't have, but I will tell you you're a sweet girl."

"No, really." She flushed. "After we've put you to so much trouble."

"Let's go crack this," he said. "The _Pallas_ has called in, but she
won't be visible for a while yet."

       *       *       *       *       *

They made their way to the verandah, picking up a couple of glasses
enroute. Bless his envious heart, Jimmy had warned the other boys off
as requested. _I hope Avis cooks him a Cordon Bleu dinner_, Blades
thought. _Nice kid, Avis, if she'd quit trying to ... what? ... mother
me?_ He forgot about her, with Ellen to seat by the rail.

The Milky Way turned her hair frosty and glowed in her eyes. Blades
poured the port with much ceremony and raised his glass. "Here's to
your frequent return," he said.

Her pleasure dwindled a bit. "I don't know if I should drink to that.
We aren't likely to be back, ever."

"Drink anyway. Gling, glang, gloria!" The rims tinkled together.
"After all," said Blades, "this isn't the whole universe. We'll both
be getting around. See you on Luna?"

"Maybe."

He wondered if he was pushing matters too hard. She didn't look at
ease. "Oh, well," he said, "if nothing else, this has been a grand
break in the monotony for us. I don't wish the Navy ill, but if
trouble had to develop, I'm thankful it developed here."

"Yes--"

"How's the repair work progressing? Slowly, I hope."

"I don't know."

"You should have some idea, being in QM."

"No supplies have been drawn."

Blades stiffened.

"What's the matter?" Ellen sounded alarmed.

"Huh?" _A fine conspirator I make, if she can see my emotions on me in
neon capitals!_ "Nothing. Nothing. It just seemed a little strange,
you know. Not taking any replacement units."

"I understand the work is only a matter of making certain
adjustments."

"Then they should've finished a lot quicker, shouldn't they?"

"Please," she said unhappily. "Let's not talk about it. I mean, there
are such things as security regulations."

Blades gave up on that tack. But Chung's idea might be worth probing a
little. "Sure," he said. "I'm sorry, I didn't mean to pry." He took
another sip as he hunted for suitable words. A beautiful girl, a
golden wine ... and vice versa ... why couldn't he simply relax and
enjoy himself? Did he have to go fretting about what was probably a
perfectly harmless conundrum?... Yes. However, recreation might still
combine with business.

"Permit me to daydream," he said, leaning close to her. "The Navy's
going to establish a new base here, and the _Altair_ will be assigned
to it."

"Daydream indeed!" she laughed, relieved to get back to a mere
flirtation. "Ever hear about the Convention of Vesta?"

"Treaties can be renegotiated," Blades plagiarized.

"What do we need an extra base for? Especially since the government
plans to spend such large sums on social welfare. They certainly don't
want to start an arms race besides."

       *       *       *       *       *

Blades nodded. _Jimmy's notion did seem pretty thin_, he thought with
a slight chill, _and now I guess it's completely whiffed._ Mostly to
keep the conversation going, he shrugged and said, "My partner--and
me, too, aside from the privilege of your company--wouldn't have
wanted it anyhow. Not that we're unpatriotic, but there are plenty of
other potential bases, and we'd rather keep government agencies out of
here."

"Can you, these days?"

"Pretty much. We're under a new type of charter, as a private
partnership. The first such charter in the Belt, as far as I know,
though there'll be more in the future. The Bank of Ceres financed us.
We haven't taken a nickel of federal money."

"Is that possible?"

"Just barely. I'm no economist, but I can see how it works. Money
represents goods and labor. Hitherto those have been in mighty short
supply out here. Government subsidies made up the difference, enabling
us to buy from Earth. But now the asterites have built up enough
population and industry that they have some capital surplus of their
own, to invest in projects like this."

"Even so, frankly, I'm surprised that two men by themselves could get
such a loan. It must be huge. Wouldn't the bank rather have lent the
money to some corporation?"

"To tell the truth, we have friends who pulled wires for us. Also, it
was done partly on ideological grounds. A lot of asterites would like
to see more strictly home-grown enterprises, not committed to anyone
on Earth. That's the only way we can grow. Otherwise our profits--our
net production, that is--will continue to be siphoned off for the
mother country's benefit."

"Well," Ellen said with some indignation, "that was the whole reason
for planting asteroid colonies. You can't expect us to set you up in
business, at enormous cost to ourselves--things we might have done at
home--and get nothing but 'Ta' in return."

"Never fear, we'll repay you with interest," Blades said. "But
whatever we make from our own work, over and above that, ought to stay
here with us."

She grew angrier. "Your kind of attitude is what provoked the voters
to elect Social Justice candidates."

"Nice name, that," mused Blades. "Who can be against social justice?
But you know, I think I'll go into politics myself. I'll organize the
North American Motherhood Party."

"You wouldn't be so flippant if you'd go see how people have to live
back there."

"As bad as here? _Whew!_"

"Nonsense. You know that isn't true. But bad enough. And you aren't
going to stick in these conditions. Only a few hours ago, you were
bragging about the millions you intend to make."

"Millions _and_ millions, if my strength holds out," leered Blades,
thinking of the alley in Aresopolis. But he decided that that was then
and Ellen was now, and what had started as a promising little party
was turning into a dismal argument about politics.

"Let's not fight," he said. "We've got different orientations, and we'd
only make each other mad. Let's discuss our next bottle instead ... at the
Coq d'Or in Paris, shall we say? Or Morraine's in New York."

She calmed down, but her look remained troubled. "You're right, we are
different," she said low. "Isolated, living and working under
conditions we can hardly imagine on Earth--and you can't really
imagine our problems--yes, you're becoming another people. I hope it
will never go so far that--No. I don't want to think about it." She
drained her glass and held it out for a refill, smiling. "Very well,
sir, when do you next plan to be in Paris?"

       *       *       *       *       *

An exceedingly enjoyable while later, the time came to go watch the
_Pallas Castle_ maneuver in. In fact, it had somehow gotten past that
time, and they were late; but they didn't hurry their walk aft. Blades
took Ellen's hand; and she raised no objection. Schoolboyish, no
doubt--however, he had reached the reluctant conclusion that for all
his dishonorable intentions, this affair wasn't likely to go beyond
the schoolboy stage. Not that he wouldn't keep trying.

As they glided through the refining and synthesizing section, which
filled the broad half of the asteroid, the noise of pumps and
regulators rose until it throbbed in their bones. Ellen gestured at
one of the pipes which crossed the corridor overhead. "Do you really
handle that big a volume at a time?" she asked above the racket.

"No," he said. "Didn't I explain before? The pipe's thick because it's
so heavily armored."

"I'm glad you don't use that dreadful word 'cladded.' But why the
armor? High pressure?"

"Partly. Also, there's an inertrans lining. Jupiter gas is hellishly
reactive at room temperature. The metallic complexes especially; but
think what a witch's brew the stuff is in every respect. Once it's
been refined, of course, we have less trouble. That particular pipe is
carrying it raw."

They left the noise behind and passed on to the approach control dome
at the receptor end. The two men on duty glanced up and immediately
went back to their instruments. Radio voices were staccato in the air.
Blades led Ellen to an observation port.

She drew a sharp breath. Outside, the broken ground fell away to space
and the stars. The ovoid that was the ship hung against them, lit by
the hidden sun, a giant even at her distance but dwarfed by the
balloon she towed. As that bubble tried ponderously to rotate, rainbow
gleams ran across it, hiding and then revealing the constellations.
Here, on the asteroid's axis, there was no weight, and one moved with
underwater smoothness, as if disembodied. "Oh, a fairy tale," Ellen
sighed.

Four sparks flashed out of the boat blisters along the ship's hull.
"Scoopships," Blades told her. "They haul the cargo in, being so much
more maneuverable. Actually, though, the mother vessel is going to
park her load in orbit, while those boys bring in another one ... see,
there it comes into sight. We still haven't got the capacity to keep
up with our deliveries."

"How many are there? Scoopships, that is."

"Twenty, but you don't need more than four for this job. They've got
terrific power. Have to, if they're to dive from orbit down into the
Jovian atmosphere, ram themselves full of gas, and come back. There
they go."

The _Pallas Castle_ was wrestling the great sphere she had hauled from
Jupiter into a stable path computed by Central Control. Meanwhile the
scoopships, small only by comparison with her, locked onto the other
balloon as it drifted close. Energy poured into their drive fields.
Spiraling downward, transparent globe and four laboring spacecraft
vanished behind the horizon. The _Pallas_ completed her own task,
disengaged her towbars, and dropped from view, headed for the dock.

The second balloon rose again, like a huge glass moon on the opposite
side of the Sword. Still it grew in Ellen's eyes, kilometer by
kilometer of approach. So much mass wasn't easily handled, but the
braking curve looked disdainfully smooth. Presently she could make out
the scoopships in detail, elongated teardrops with the intake gates
yawning in the blunt forward end, cockpit canopies raised very
slightly above.

Instructions rattled from the men in the dome. The balloon veered
clumsily toward the one free receptor. A derricklike structure
released one end of a cable, which streamed skyward. Things that Ellen
couldn't quite follow in this tricky light were done by the four tugs,
mechanisms of their own extended to make their tow fast to the cable.

They did not cast loose at once, but continued to drag a little,
easing the impact of centrifugal force. Nonetheless a slight shudder
went through the dome as slack was taken up. Then the job was over.
The scoopships let go and flitted off to join their mother vessel. The
balloon was winched inward. Spacesuited men moved close, preparing to
couple valves together.

"And eventually," Blades said into the abrupt quietness, "that cargo
will become food, fabric, vitryl, plastiboard, reagents, fuels, a
hundred different things. That's what we're here for."

"I've never seen anything so wonderful," Ellen said raptly. He laid an
arm around her waist.

The intercom chose that precise moment to blare: "Attention!
Emergency! All hands to emergency stations! Blades, get to Chung's
office on the double! All hands to emergency stations!"

Blades was running before the siren had begun to howl.

Rear Admiral Barclay Hulse had come in person. He stood as if on
parade, towering over Chung. The asterite was red with fury. Avis Page
crouched in a corner, her eyes terrified.

Blades barreled through the doorway and stopped hardly short of a
collision. "What's the matter?" he puffed.

"Plenty!" Chung snarled. "These incredible thumble-fumbed oafs--" His
voice broke. _When he gets mad, it means something!_

Hulse nailed Blades with a glance. "Good day, sir," he clipped. "I
have had to report a regrettable accident which will require you to
evacuate the Station. Temporarily, I hope."

"Huh?"

"As I told Mr. Chung and Miss Page, a nuclear missile has escaped us.
If it explodes, the radiation will be lethal, even in the heart of the
asteroid."

"What ... what--" Blades could only gobble at him.

"Fortunately, the _Pallas Castle_ is here. She can take your whole
complement aboard and move to a safe distance while we search for the
object."

"How the _devil_?"

Hulse allowed himself a look of exasperation. "Evidently I'll have to
repeat myself to you. Very well. You know we have had to make some
adjustments on our launchers. What you did not know was the reason.
Under the circumstances, I think it's permissible to tell you that
several of them have a new and secret, experimental control system.
One of our missions on this cruise was to carry out field tests. Well,
it turned out that the system is still full of, ah, bugs. Gunnery
Command has had endless trouble with it, has had to keep tinkering the
whole way from Earth.

"Half an hour ago, while Commander Warburton was completing a
reassembly--lower ranks aren't allowed in the test turrets--something
happened. I can't tell you my guess as to what, but if you want to
imagine that a relay got stuck, that will do for practical purposes. A
missile was released under power. Not a dummy--the real thing. And
release automatically arms the war head."

       *       *       *       *       *

The news was like a hammerblow. Blades spoke an obscenity. Sweat
sprang forth under his arms and trickled down his ribs.

"No such thing was expected," Hulse went on. "It's an utter disaster,
and the designers of the system aren't likely to get any more
contracts. But as matters were, no radar fix was gotten on it, and it
was soon too far away for gyrogravitic pulse detection. The thrust
vector is unknown. It could be almost anywhere now.

"Well, naval missiles are programmed to reverse acceleration if they
haven't made a target within a given time. This one should be back in
less than six hours. If it first detects our ship, everything is all
right. It has optical recognition circuits that identify any North
American warcraft by type, disarm the war head, and steer it home.
But, if it first comes within fifty kilometers of some other
mass--like this asteroid or one of the companion rocks--it will
detonate. We'll make every effort to intercept, but space is big.
You'll have to take your people to a safe distance. They can come back
even after a blast, of course. There's no concussion in vacuum, and
the fireball won't reach here. It's principally an anti-personnel
weapon. But you must not be within the lethal radius of radiation."

"The hell we can come back!" Avis cried.

[Illustration]

"I beg your pardon?" Hulse said.

"You imbecile! Don't you know Central Control here is cryotronic?"

Hulse did not flicker an eyelid. "So it is," he said expressionlessly.
"I had forgotten."

       *       *       *       *       *

Blades mastered his own shock enough to grate: "Well, we sure haven't.
If that thing goes off, the gamma burst will kick up so many minority
carriers in the transistors that the _p_-type crystals will act
_n_-type, and the _n_-type act _p_-type, for a whole couple of
microseconds. Every one of 'em will flip simultaneously! The
computers' memory and program data systems will be scrambled beyond
hope of reorganization."

"Magnetic pulse, too," Chung said. "The fireball plasma will be full
of inhomogeneities moving at several per cent of light speed. Their
electromagnetic output, hitting our magnetic core units, will turn
them from super to ordinary conduction. Same effect, total computer
amnesia. We haven't got enough shielding against it. Your TIMM systems
can take that kind of a beating. Ours can't!"

"Very regrettable," Hulse said. "You'd have to reprogram everything--"

"Reprogram what?" Avis retorted. Tears started forth in her eyes.
"We've told you what sort of stuff our chemical plant is handling. We
can't shut it down on that short notice. It'll run wild. There'll be
sodium explosions, hydrogen and organic combustion, n-n-nothing left
here but wreckage!"

Hulse didn't unbend a centimeter. "I offer my most sincere apologies.
If actual harm does occur, I'm sure the government will indemnify you.
And, of course, my command will furnish what supplies may be needed
for the _Pallas Castle_ to transport you to the nearest Commission
base. At the moment, though, you can do nothing but evacuate and hope
we will be able to intercept the missile."

Blades knotted his fists. A sudden comprehension rushed up in him and
he bellowed, "There isn't going to be an interception! This wasn't an
accident!"

Hulse backed a step and drew himself even straighter. "Don't get
overwrought," he advised.

"You louse-bitten, egg-sucking, bloated faggot-porter! How stupid do
you think we are? As stupid as your Essjay bosses? By heaven, we're
staying! Then see if you have the nerve to murder a hundred people!"

"Mike ... Mike--" Avis caught his arm.

Hulse turned to Chung. "I'll overlook that unseemly outburst," he
said. "But in light of my responsibilities and under the provisions of
the Constitution, I am hereby putting this asteroid under martial law.
You will have all personnel aboard the _Pallas Castle_ and at a
minimum distance of a thousand kilometers within four hours of this
moment, or be subject to arrest and trial. Now I have to get back and
commence operations. The _Altair_ will maintain radio contact with
you. Good day." He bowed curtly, spun on his heel, and clacked from
the room.

Blades started to charge after him. Chung caught his free arm.
Together he and Avis dragged him to a stop. He stood cursing the air
ultraviolet until Ellen entered.

"I couldn't keep up with you," she panted. "What's happened, Mike?"

The strength drained from Blades. He slumped into a chair and covered
his face.

       *       *       *       *       *

Chung explained in a few harsh words. "Oh-h-h," Ellen gasped. She went
to Blades and laid her hands on his shoulders. "My poor Mike!"

After a moment she looked at the others. "I should report back, of
course," she said, "but I won't be able to before the ship
accelerates. So I'll have to stay with you till afterward. Miss Page,
we left about half a bottle of wine on the verandah. I think it would
be a good idea if you went and got it."

Avis bridled. "And why not you?"

"This is no time for personalities," Chung said. "Go on, Avis. You can
be thinking what records and other paper we should take, while you're
on your way. I've got to organize the evacuation. As for Miss Ziska,
well, Mike needs somebody to pull him out of his dive."

"Her?" Avis wailed, and fled.

Chung sat down and flipped his intercom to Phone Central. "Get me
Captain Janichevski aboard the _Pallas_," he ordered. "Hello, Adam?
About that general alarm--"

Blades raised a haggard countenance toward Ellen's. "You better clear
out, along with the women and any men who don't want to stay," he
said. "But I think most of them will take the chance. They're on a
profit-sharing scheme, they stand to lose too much if the place is
ruined."

"What do you mean?"

"It's a gamble, but I don't believe Hulse's sealed orders extend to
murder. If enough of us stay put, he'll have to catch that thing. He
jolly well knows its exact trajectory."

"You forget we're under martial law," Chung said, aside to him. "If we
don't go freely, he'll land some PP's and march us off at gunpoint.
There isn't any choice. We've had the course."

"I don't understand," Ellen said shakily.

Chung went back to his intercom. Blades fumbled out his pipe and
rolled it empty between his hands. "That missile was shot off on
purpose," he said.

"What? No, you must be sick, that's impossible!"

"I realize you didn't know about it. Only three or four officers have
been told. The job had to be done very, very secretly, or there'd be a
scandal, maybe an impeachment. But it's still sabotage."

She shrank from him. "You're not making sense."

"Their own story doesn't make sense. It's ridiculous. A new missile
system wouldn't be sent on a field trial clear to the Belt before it'd
had enough tests closer to home to get the worst bugs out. A war-head
missile wouldn't be stashed anywhere near something so unreliable, let
alone be put under its control. The testing ship wouldn't hang around
a civilian Station while her gunnery chief tinkered. And Hulse,
Warburton, Liebknecht, they were asking in _such_ detail about how
radiation-proof we are."

"I can't believe it. Nobody will."

"Not back home. Communication with Earth is so sparse and garbled. The
public will only know there was an accident; who'll give a hoot about
the details? We couldn't even prove anything in an asteroid court. The
Navy would say, 'Classified information!' and that'd stop the
proceedings cold. Sure, there'll be a board of inquiry--composed of
naval officers. Probably honorable men, too. But what are they going
to believe, the sworn word of their Goddard House colleague, or the
rantings of an asterite bum?"

"Mike, I know this is terrible for you, but you've let it go to your
head." Ellen laid a hand over his. "Suppose the worst happens. You'll
be compensated for your loss."

"Yeah. To the extent of our personal investment. The Bank of Ceres
still has nearly all the money that was put in. We didn't figure to
have them paid off for another ten years. They, or their insurance
carrier, will get the indemnity. And after our fiasco, they won't make
us a new loan. They were just barely talked into it, the first time
around. I daresay Systemic Developments will make them a nice juicy
offer to take this job over."

Ellen colored. She stamped her foot. "You're talking like a paranoiac.
Do you really believe the government of North America would send a
battleship clear out here to do you dirt?"

"Not the whole government. A few men in the right positions is all
that's necessary. I don't know if Hulse was bribed or talked into
this. But probably he agreed as a duty. He's the prim type."

"A duty--to destroy a North American business?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Chung finished at the intercom in time to answer: "Not permanent
physical destruction, Miss Ziska. As Mike suggested, some corporation
will doubtless inherit the Sword and repair the damage. But a private,
purely asterite business ... yes, I'm afraid Mike's right. We are the
target."

"In mercy's name, why?"

"From the highest motives, of course," Chung sneered bitterly. "You
know what the Social Justice Party thinks of private capitalism.
What's more important, though, is that the Sword is the first Belt
undertaking not tied to Mother Earth's apron strings. We have no
commitments to anybody back there. We can sell our output wherever we
like. It's notorious that the asterites are itching to build up their
own self-sufficient industries. Quite apart from sentiment, we can
make bigger profits in the Belt than back home, especially when you
figure the cost of sending stuff in and out of Earth's gravitational
well. So certainly we'd be doing most of our business out here.

"Our charter can't simply be revoked. First a good many laws would
have to be revised, and that's politically impossible. There is still
a lot of individualist sentiment in North America, as witness the
fact that businesses do get launched and that the Essjays did have a
hard campaign to get elected. What the new government wants is
something like the Eighteenth Century English policy toward America.
Keep the colonies as a source of raw materials and as a market for
manufactured goods, but don't let them develop a domestic industry.
You can't come right out and say that, but you can let the situation
develop naturally.

"Only ... here the Sword is, obviously bound to grow rich and expand
in every direction. If we're allowed to develop, to reinvest our
profits, we'll become the nucleus of independent asterite enterprise.
If, on the other hand, we're wiped out by an unfortunate accident,
there's no nucleus; and a small change in the banking laws is all
that's needed to prevent others from getting started. Q.E.D."

"I daresay Hulse does think he's doing his patriotic duty," said
Blades. "He wants to guarantee North America our natural resources--in
the long run, maybe, our allegiance. If he has to commit sabotage, too
bad, but it won't cost him any sleep."

"No!" Ellen almost screamed.

Chung sagged in his chair. "We're very neatly trapped," he said like
an old man. "I don't see any way out. Think you can get to work now,
Mike? You can assign group leaders for the evacuation--"

Blades jumped erect. "I can fight!" he growled.

"With what? Can openers?"

"You mean you're going to lie down and let them break us?"

Avis came back. She thrust the bottle into Blades' hands as he paced
the room. "Here you are," she said in a distant voice.

He held it out toward Ellen. "Have some," he invited.

"Not with you ... you subversive!"

Avis brightened noticeably, took the bottle and raised it. "Then
here's to victory," she said, drank, and passed it to Blades.

He started to gulp; but the wine was too noble, and he found himself
savoring its course down his throat. _Why,_ he thought vaguely, _do
people always speak with scorn about Dutch courage? The Dutch have
real guts. They fought themselves free of Spain and free of the ocean
itself; when the French or Germans came, they made the enemy sea their
ally_--

The bottle fell from his grasp. In the weak acceleration, it hadn't
hit the floor when Avis rescued it. "Gimme that, you big
butterfingers," she exclaimed. Her free hand clasped his arm.
"Whatever happens, Mike," she said to him, "we're not quitting."

Still Blades stared beyond her. His fists clenched and unclenched. The
noise of his breathing filled the room. Chung looked around in
bewilderment; Ellen watched with waxing horror; Avis' eyes kindled.

"Holy smoking seegars," Blades whispered at last. "I really think we
can swing it."

Captain Janichevski recoiled. "You're out of your skull!"

"Probably," said Blades. "Fun, huh?"

"You can't do this."

"We can try."

"Do you know what you're talking about? Insurrection, that's what.
Quite likely piracy. Even if your scheme worked, you'd spend the next
ten years in Rehab--at least."

"Maybe, provided the matter ever came to trial. But it won't."

"That's what you think. You're asking me to compound the felony, and
misappropriate the property of my owners to boot." Janichevski shook
his head. "Sorry, Mike. I'm sorry as hell about this mess. But I won't
be party to making it worse."

"In other words," Blades replied, "you'd rather be party to sabotage.
I'm proposing an act of legitimate self-defense."

"_If_ there actually is a conspiracy to destroy the Station."

"Adam, you're a spaceman. You know how the Navy operates. Can you
swallow that story about a missile getting loose by accident?"

Janichevski bit his lip. The sounds from outside filled the captain's
cabin, voices, footfalls, whirr of machines and clash of doors, as the
_Pallas Castle_ readied for departure. Blades waited.

"You may be right," said Janichevski at length, wretchedly. "Though
why Hulse should jeopardize his career--"

"He's not. There's a scapegoat groomed back home, you can be sure.
Like some company that'll be debarred from military contracts for a
while ... and get nice fat orders in other fields. I've kicked around
the System enough to know how that works."

"If you're wrong, though ... if this is an honest blunder ... then you
risk committing treason."

"Yeah. I'll take the chance."

"Not I. No. I've got a family to support," Janichevski said.

Blades regarded him bleakly. "If the Essjays get away with this stunt,
what kind of life will your family be leading, ten years from now?
It's not simply that we'll be high-class peons in the Belt. But tied
hand and foot to a shortsighted government, how much progress will we
be able to make? Other countries have colonies out here too, remember,
and some of them are already giving their people a freer hand than
we've got. Do you want the Asians, or the Russians, or even the
Europeans, to take over the asteroids?"

"I can't make policy."

"In other words, mama knows best. Believe, obey, anything put out by
some bureaucrat who never set foot beyond Luna. Is that your idea of
citizenship?"

"You're putting a mighty fine gloss on bailing yourself out!"
Janichevski flared.

"Sure, I'm no idealist. But neither am I a slave," Blades hesitated.
"We've been friends too long, Adam, for me to try bribing you. But if
worst comes to worst, we'll cover for you ... somehow ... and if
contrariwise we win, then we'll soon be hiring captains for our own
ships and you'll get the best offer any spaceman ever got."

"No. Scram. I've work to do."

Blades braced himself. "I didn't want to say this. But I've already
informed a number of my men. They're as mad as I am. They're waiting
in the terminal. A monkey wrench or a laser torch makes a pretty fair
weapon. We can take over by force. That'll leave you legally in the
clear. But with so many witnesses around, you'll have to prefer
charges against us later on."

Janichevski began to sweat.

"We'll be sent up," said Blades. "But it will still have been worth
it."

"Is it really that important to you?"

"Yes. I admit I'm no crusader. But this is a matter of principle."

Janichevski stared at the big red-haired man for a long while.
Suddenly he stiffened. "O.K. On that account, and no other, I'll go
along with you."

Blades wobbled on his feet, near collapse with relief. "Good man!" he
croaked.

"But I will not have any of my officers or crew involved."

Blades rallied and answered briskly, "You needn't. Just issue orders
that my boys are to have access to the scoopships. They can install
the equipment, jockey the boats over to the full balloons, and even
couple them on."

Janichevski's fears had vanished once he made his decision, but now a
certain doubt registered. "That's a pretty skilled job."

"These are pretty skilled men. It isn't much of a maneuver, not like
making a Jovian sky dive."

"Well, O.K., I'll take your word for their ability. But suppose the
_Altair_ spots those boats moving around?"

"She's already several hundred kilometers off, and getting farther
away, running a search curve which I'm betting my liberty--and my
honor; I certainly don't want to hurt my own country's Navy--I'm
betting that search curve is guaranteed not to find the missile in
time. They'll spot the _Pallas_ as you depart--oh, yes, our people
will be aboard as per orders--but no finer detail will show in so
casual an observation."

"Again, I'll take your word. What else can I do to help?"

"Nothing you weren't doing before. Leave the piratics to us. I'd
better get back." Blades extended his hand. "I haven't got the words
to thank you, Adam."

Janichevski accepted the shake. "No reason for thanks. You dragooned
me." A grin crossed his face. "I must confess though, I'm not sorry
you did."

       *       *       *       *       *

Blades left. He found his gang in the terminal, two dozen engineers
and rockjacks clumped tautly together.

"What's the word?" Carlos Odonaju shouted.

"Clear track," Blades said. "Go right aboard."

"Good. Fine. I always wanted to do something vicious and destructive,"
Odonaju laughed.

"The idea is to prevent destruction," Blades reminded him, and
proceeded toward the office.

Avis met him in Corridor Four. Her freckled countenance was distorted
by a scowl. "Hey, Mike, wait a minute," she said, low and hurriedly.
"Have you seen La Ziska?"

"The leftenant? Why, no. I left her with you, remember, hoping you
could calm her down."

"Uh-huh. She was incandescent mad. Called us a pack of bandits
and--But then she started crying. Seemed to break down completely. I
took her to your cabin and went back to help Jimmy. Only, when I
checked there a minute ago, she was gone."

"What? Where?"

"How should I know? But that she-devil's capable of anything to wreck
our chances."

"You're not being fair to her. She's got an oath to keep."

"All right," said Avis sweetly. "Far be it from me to prevent her
fulfilling her obligations. Afterward she may even write you an
occasional letter. I'm sure that'll brighten your Rehab cell no end."

"What can she do?" Blades argued, with an uneasy sense of whistling in
the dark. "She can't get off the asteroid without a scooter, and I've
already got Sam's gang working on all the scooters."

"Is there no other possibility? The radio shack?"

"With a man on duty there. That's out." Blades patted the girl's arm.

"O.K., I'll get back to work. But ... I'll be so glad when this is
over, Mike!"

Looking into the desperate brown eyes, Blades felt a sudden impulse to
kiss their owner. But no, there was too much else to do. Later,
perhaps. He cocked a thumb upward. "Carry on."

_Too bad about Ellen_, he thought as he continued toward his office.
_What an awful waste, to make a permanent enemy of someone with her
kind of looks. And personality--Come off that stick, you clabberhead!
She's probably the marryin' type anyway._

_In her shoes, though, what would I do? Not much; they'd pinch my
feet. But--damnation, Avis is right. She's not safe to have running
around loose. The radio shack? Sparks is not one of the few who've
been told the whole story and co-opted into the plan. She could_--

Blades cursed, whirled, and ran.

His way was clear. Most of the men were still in their dorms,
preparing to leave. He traveled in huge low-gravity leaps.

The radio shack rose out of the surface near the verandah. Blades
tried the door. It didn't budge. A chill went through him. He backed
across the corridor and charged. The door was only plastiboard--

He hit with a thud and a grunt, and rebounded with a numbed shoulder.
But it looked so easy for the cops on 3V!

No time to figure out the delicate art of forcible entry. He hurled
himself against the panel, again and again, heedless of the pain that
struck in flesh and bone. When the door finally, splinteringly gave
way, he stumbled clear across the room beyond, fetched up against an
instrument console, recovered his balance, and gaped.

The operator lay on the floor, swearing in a steady monotone. He had
been efficiently bound with his own blouse and trousers, which
revealed his predilection for maroon shorts with zebra stripes. There
was a lump on the back of his head, and a hammer lay close by. Ellen
must have stolen the tool and come in here with the thing behind her
back. The operator would have had no reason to suspect her.

She had not left the sender's chair, not even while the door was under
attack. Only a carrier beam connected the Sword with the _Altair_. She
continued doggedly to fumble with dials and switches, trying to
modulate it and raise the ship.

"Praises be ... you haven't had advanced training ... in radio,"
Blades choked. "That's ... a long-range set ... pretty special
system--" He weaved toward her. "Come along, now."

She spat an unladylike refusal.

Theoretically, Blades should have enjoyed the tussle that followed.
But he was in poor shape at the outset. And he was a good deal worse
off by the time he got her pinioned.

"O.K.," he wheezed. "Will you come quietly?"

She didn't deign to answer, unless you counted her butting him in the
nose. He had to yell for help to frog-march her aboard ship.

       *       *       *       *       *

"_Pallas Castle_ calling NASS _Altair_. Come in, _Altair_."

The great ovoid swung clear in space, among a million cold stars. The
asteroid had dwindled out of sight. A radio beam flickered across
emptiness. Within the hull, the crew and a hundred refugees sat jammed
together. The air was thick with their breath and sweat and waiting.

Blades and Chung, seated by the transmitter, felt another kind of
thickness, the pull of the internal field. Earth-normal weight dragged
down every movement; the enclosed cabin began to feel suffocatingly
small. _We'd get used to it again pretty quickly,_ Blades thought.
_Our bodies would, that is. But our own selves, tied down to Earth
forever--no._

The vision screen jumped to life. "NASS _Altair_ acknowledging _Pallas
Castle_," said the uniformed figure within.

"O.K., Charlie, go outside and don't let anybody else enter," Chung
told his own operator.

The spaceman gave him a quizzical glance, but obeyed. "I wish to
report that evacuation of the Sword is now complete," Chung said
formally.

"Very good, sir," the Navy face replied. "I'll inform my superiors."

"Wait, don't break off yet. We have to talk with your captain."

"Sir? I'll switch you over to--"

"None of your damned chains of command," Blades interrupted. "Get me
Rear Admiral Hulse direct, toot sweet, or I'll eat out whatever
fraction of you he leaves unchewed. This is an emergency. I've got to
warn him of an immediate danger only he can deal with."

The other stared, first at Chung's obvious exhaustion, then at the
black eye and assorted bruises, scratches, and bites that adorned
Blades' visage. "I'll put the message through Channel Red at once,
sir." The screen blanked.

"Well, here we go," Chung said. "I wonder how the food in Rehab is
these days."

"Want me to do the talking?" Blades asked. Chung wasn't built for
times as hectic as the last few hours, and was worn to a nubbin. He
himself felt immensely keyed up. He'd always liked a good fight.

"Sure." Chung pulled a crumpled cigarette from his pocket and began to
fill the cabin with smoke. "You have a larger stock of rudeness than
I."

[Illustration]

Presently the screen showed Hulse, rigid at his post on the bridge.
"Good day, gentlemen," he said. "What's the trouble?"

"Plenty," Blades answered. "Clear everybody else out of there; let
your ship orbit free a while. And seal your circuit."

Hulse reddened. "Who do you think you are?"

"Well, my birth certificate says Michael Joseph Blades. I've got some
news for you concerning that top-secret gadget you told us about. You
wouldn't want unauthorized personnel listening in."

Hulse leaned forward till he seemed about to fall through the screen.
"What's this about a hazard?"

"Fact. The _Altair_ is in distinct danger of getting blown to bits."

"Have you gone crazy? Get me the captain of the _Pallas_."

"Very small bits."

Hulse compressed his lips. "All right, I'll listen to you for a short
time. You had better make it worth my while."

He spoke orders. Blades scratched his back while he waited for the
bridge to be emptied and wondered if there was any chance of a hot
shower in the near future.

"Done," said Hulse. "Give me your report."

Blades glanced at the telltale. "You haven't sealed your circuit,
admiral."

Hulse said angry words, but complied. "Now will you talk?"

"Sure. This secrecy is for your own protection. You risk court-martial
otherwise."

Hulse suppressed a retort.

       *       *       *       *       *

"O.K., here's the word." Blades met the transmitted glare with an
almost palpable crash of eyeballs. "We decided, Mr. Chung and I, that
any missile rig as haywire as yours represents a menace to navigation
and public safety. If you can't control your own nuclear weapons, you
shouldn't be at large. Our charter gives us local authority as peace
officers. By virtue thereof and so on and so forth, we ordered certain
precautionary steps taken. As a result, if that war head goes off, I'm
sorry to say that NASS _Altair_ will be destroyed."

"Are you ... have you--" Hulse congealed. In spite of everything, he
was a competent officer, Blades decided. "Please explain yourself," he
said without tone.

"Sure," Blades obliged. "The Station hasn't got any armament, but
trust the human race to juryrig that. We commandeered the scoopships
belonging to this vessel and loaded them with Jovian gas at maximum
pressure. If your missile detonates, they'll dive on you."

Something like amusement tinged Hulse's shocked expression. "Do you
seriously consider that a weapon?"

"I seriously do. Let me explain. The ships are orbiting free right
now, scattered through quite a large volume of space. Nobody's aboard
them. What is aboard each one, though, is an autopilot taken from a
scooter, hooked into the drive controls. Each 'pilot has its sensors
locked onto your ship. You can't maneuver fast enough to shake off
radar beams and mass detectors. You're the target object, and there's
nothing to tell those idiot computers to decelerate as they approach
you.

"Of course, no approach is being made yet. A switch has been put in
every scooter circuit, and left open. Only the meteorite evasion units
are operative right now. That is, if anyone tried to lay alongside one
of those scoopships, he'd be detected and the ship would skitter away.
Remember, a scoopship hasn't much mass, and she does have engines
designed for diving in and out of Jupe's gravitational well. She can
out-accelerate either of our vessels, or any boat of yours, and
out-dodge any of your missiles. You can't catch her."

Hulse snorted. "What's the significance of this farce?"

"I said the autopilots were switched off at the moment, as far as
heading for the target is concerned. But each of those switches is
coupled to two other units. One is simply the sensor box. If you
withdraw beyond a certain distance, the switches will close. That is,
the 'pilots will be turned on if you try to go beyond range of the
beams now locked onto you. The other unit we've installed in every
boat is an ordinary two-for-a-dollar radiation meter. If a nuclear
weapon goes off, anywhere within a couple of thousand kilometers, the
switches will also close. In either of those cases, the scoopships
will dive on you.

"You might knock out a few with missiles, before they strike.
Undoubtedly you can punch holes in them with laser guns. But that
won't do any good, except when you're lucky enough to hit a vital
part. Nobody's aboard to be killed. Not even much gas will be lost, in
so short a time.

"So to summarize, chum, if that rogue missile explodes, your ship will
be struck by ten to twenty scoopships, each crammed full of
concentrated Jovian air. They'll pierce that thin hull of yours, but
since they're already pumped full beyond the margin of safety, the
impact will split them open and the gas will whoosh out. Do you know
what Jovian air does to substances like magnesium?

"You can probably save your crew, take to the boats and reach a
Commission base. But your nice battleship will be _ganz kaput_. Is
your game worth that candle?"

"You're totally insane! Releasing such a thing--"

"Oh, not permanently. There's one more switch on each boat, connected
to the meteorite evasion unit and controlled by a small battery. When
those batteries run down, in about twenty hours, the 'pilots will be
turned off completely. Then we can spot the scoopships by radar and
pick 'em up. And you'll be free to leave."

"Do you think for one instant that your fantastic claim of acting
legally will stand up in court?"

"No, probably not. But it won't have to. Obviously you can't make
anybody swallow your yarn if a _second_ missile gets loose. And as for
the first one, since it's failed in its purpose, your bosses aren't
going to want the matter publicized. It'd embarrass them to no end,
and serve no purpose except revenge on Jimmy and me--which there's no
point in taking, since the Sword would still be privately owned. You
check with Earth, admiral, before shooting off your mouth. They'll
tell you that both parties to this quarrel had better forget about
legal action. Both would lose.

"So I'm afraid your only choice is to find that missile before it goes
off."

"And yours? What are your alternatives?" Hulse had gone gray in the
face, but he still spoke stoutly.

Blades grinned at him. "None whatsoever. We've burned our bridges. We
can't do anything about those scoopships now, so it's no use trying to
scare us or arrest us or whatever else may occur to you. What we've
done is establish an automatic deterrent."

"Against an, an attempt ... at sabotage ... that only exists in your
imagination!"

Blades shrugged. "That argument isn't relevant any longer. I do
believe the missile was released deliberately. We wouldn't have done
what we did otherwise. But there's no longer any point in making
charges and denials. You'd just better retrieve the thing."

Hulse squared his shoulders. "How do I know you're telling the truth?"

"Well, you can send a man to the Station. He'll find the scooters
lying gutted. Send another man over here to the _Pallas_. He'll find
the scoopships gone. I also took a few photographs of the autopilots
being installed and the ships being cast adrift. Go right ahead.
However, may I remind you that the fewer people who have an inkling of
this little intrigue, the better for all concerned."

Hulse opened his mouth, shut it again, stared from side to side, and
finally slumped the barest bit. "Very well," he said, biting off the
words syllable by syllable. "I can't risk a ship of the line. Of
course, since the rogue is still farther away than your deterrent
allows the _Altair_ to go, we shall have to wait in space a while."

"I don't mind."

"I shall report the full story to my superiors at home ... but
unofficially."

"Good. I'd like them to know that we asterites have teeth."

"Signing off, then."

Chung stirred. "Wait a bit," he said. "We have one of your people
aboard, Lieutenant Ziska. Can you send a gig for her?"

"She didn't collaborate with us," Blades added. "You can see the
evidence of her loyalty, all over my mug."

"Good girl!" Hulse exclaimed savagely. "Yes, I'll send a boat. Signing
off."

       *       *       *       *       *

The screen blanked. Chung and Blades let out a long, ragged breath.
They sat a while trembling before Chung muttered, "That skunk as good
as admitted everything."

"Sure," said Blades, "But we won't have any more trouble from him."

Chung stubbed out his cigarette. Poise was returning to both men.
"There could be other attempts, though, in the next few years." He
scowled. "I think we should arm the Station. A couple of laser guns,
if nothing else. We can say it's for protection in case of war. But
it'll make our own government handle us more carefully, too."

"Well, you can approach the Commission about it." Blades yawned and
stretched, trying to loosen his muscles. "Better get a lot of other
owners and supervisors to sign your petition, though." The next order
of business came to his mind. He rose. "Why don't you go tell Adam the
good news?"

"Where are you bound?"

"To let Ellen know the fight is over."

"Is it, as far as she's concerned?"

"That's what I'm about to find out. Hope I won't need an armored
escort." Blades went from the cubicle, past the watchful radioman, and
down the deserted passageway beyond.

The cabin given her lay at the end, locked from outside. The key hung
magnetically on the bulkhead. Blades unlocked the door and tapped it
with his knuckles.

"Who's there?" she called.

"Me," he said. "May I come in?"

"If you must," she said freezingly.

He opened the door and stepped through. The overhead light shimmered
off her hair and limned her figure with shadows. His heart bumped.
"You, uh, you can come out now," he faltered. "Everything's O.K."

She said nothing, only regarded him from glacier-blue eyes.

"No harm's been done, except to me and Sparks, and we're not mad," he
groped. "Shall we forget the whole episode?"

"If you wish."

"Ellen," he pleaded, "I had to do what seemed right to me."

"So did I."

He couldn't find any more words.

"I assume that I'll be returned to my own ship," she said. He nodded.
"Then, if you will excuse me, I had best make myself as presentable as
I can. Good day, Mr. Blades."

"What's good about it?" he snarled, and slammed the door on his way
out.

Avis stood outside the jampacked saloon. She saw him coming and ran to
meet him. He made swab-O with his fingers and joy blazed from her.
"Mike," she cried, "I'm so happy!"

The only gentlemanly thing to do was hug her. His spirits lifted a bit
as he did. She made a nice armful. Not bad looking, either.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Well," said Amspaugh. "So that's the inside story. How very
interesting. I never heard it before."

"No, obviously it never got into any official record," Missy said.
"The only announcement made was that there'd been a near accident,
that the Station tried to make counter-missiles out of scoopships, but
that the quick action of NASS _Altair_ was what saved the situation.
Her captain was commended. I don't believe he ever got a further
promotion, though."

"Why didn't you publicize the facts afterwards?" Lindgren wondered.
"When the revolution began, that is. It would've made good
propaganda."

"Nonsense," Missy said. "Too much else had happened since then.
Besides, neither Mike nor Jimmy nor I wanted to do any cheap
emotion-fanning. We knew the asterites weren't any little
pink-bottomed angels, nor the people back sunward a crew of devils.
There were rights and wrongs on both sides. We did what we could in
the war, and hated every minute of it, and when it was over we broke
out two cases of champagne and invited as many Earthsiders as we could
get to the party. They had a lot of love to carry home for us."

A stillness fell. She took a long swallow from her glass and sat
looking out at the stars.

"Yes," Lindgren said finally, "I guess that was the worst, fighting
against our own kin."

"Well, I was better off in that respect than some," Missy conceded.
"I'd made my commitment so long before the trouble that my ties were
nearly all out here. Twenty years is time enough to grow new roots."

"Really?" Orloff was surprised. "I haven't met you often before, Mrs.
Blades, so evidently I've had a false impression. I thought you were a
more recent immigrant than that."

"Shucks, no," she laughed. "I only needed six months after the
_Altair_ incident to think things out, resign my commission and catch
the next Belt-bound ship. You don't think I'd have let a man like Mike
get away, do you?"

       *       *       *       *       *







End of Project Gutenberg's Industrial Revolution, by Poul William Anderson

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION ***

***** This file should be named 30971.txt or 30971.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/0/9/7/30971/

Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
