The Project Gutenberg EBook of Collector's Item, by Evelyn E. Smith

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Collector's Item

Author: Evelyn E. Smith

Illustrator: EMSH

Release Date: March 18, 2010 [EBook #31686]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK COLLECTOR'S ITEM ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                            Collector's Item

                           By EVELYN E. SMITH

                          Illustrated by EMSH

[Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from Galaxy Science Fiction
December 1954. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the
U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]


[Sidenote: _Being trapped in the steaming h--l of Venus is no excuse for
forgetting one's manners--but anyone abducted, marooned, tricked, kept
from tea might well crack under the strain!_]

"What I should like to know," Professor Bernardi said, gazing pensively
after the lizard-man as he bore the shrieking form of Miss Anspacher off
in his scaly arms, "is whether he is planning to eat her or make love to
her. Because, in the latter instance, I'm not sure we should interfere.
It may be her only chance."

[Illustration]

"Carl!" his wife cried indignantly. "That's a horrid thing to say! You
must rescue her at once!"

"Oh, I suppose so," he said, then gave his wife a nasty little grin that
he knew would irritate her. "It isn't that she's unattractive, my dear,
in case you hadn't noticed, though she's pretty well past the bloom of
youth--"

"_Will_ you stop making leering noises and go save her or _not_?"

"I was coming to that. It's just that she persists in using her Ph.D. as
a club to beat men into respectful pulps. Men don't like being beaten
into respectful pulps, whether by a man or a woman. Now if she'd only
learned that other people have feelings--"

"If you don't stop lecturing and go, I will!" his wife threatened.

"All right, all right," he said wearily. "Come on, Mortland."

       *       *       *       *       *

The two scientists slogged through the steamy, odorous jungle of Venus
and soon reached the lizard-man, who, weighed down by his captive, had
not been able to travel as fast.

"You blast him," the professor told Mortland. "Try not to hit Miss
Anspacher, if you can manage it."

"Er--I've never fired one of these things before," Mortland said. "Can't
stand having my eardrums blasted. However, here goes." He pointed his
weapon at the lizardlike creature in a gingerly manner. "Ah--hands up,"
he ordered. "Only fair to give the--well, blighter a sporting chance,"
he explained to Professor Bernardi.

To their amazement, the lizard-man promptly dropped Miss Anspacher into
the lavender-colored mud and put up his hands. Miss Anspacher gave an
indignant yelp.

"Seems intelligent in spite of the kidnaping," Mortland commented. "But
how does he happen to understand English? We're the only expedition ever
to have reached Venus ... that I know of, anyway." He and the professor
stared at each other in consternation. "There may have been a secret
expedition previously and perhaps they left a--a base or something,
which would explain why--"

"If you two oafs would stop speculating, you might help me out of
here!" Miss Anspacher remarked in her customary snappish tone. Professor
Bernardi leaped forward to obey. "You don't have to pull quite so hard!
I haven't taken root yet!" She came out of the mud with a sound like two
whales kissing. She brushed hopelessly at her once-white blouse and
shorts. "Oh, dear, I look a mess!"

Professor Bernardi did not comment, being engaged in slapping at a small
winged creature--about the size of a bluejay, but looking like a cross
between a bat and a mosquito--that seemed interested in taking a bite
out of him. It escaped his flapping hand and flew to the top of
Mortland's sun helmet, where it glared at the professor.

"Since you seem to understand English," Miss Anspacher said to the
lizard-man through a mouthful of hairpins, "perhaps you will be so kind
as to explain the meaning of this outrage?"

"I was smitten," the alien replied suavely. "Passion made me forget
myself."

Professor Bernardi looked thoughtfully at him. "A prior expedition isn't
the answer. It wouldn't have troubled to educate you so thoroughly.
Therefore, the explanation is that you pick up English by reading our
minds. Correct?"

The lizard-man turned an embarrassed olive. "Yes."

       *       *       *       *       *

Now that he was able to give the creature a more thorough inspection,
Bernardi saw that he really didn't look too much like a lizard. He
definitely appeared to be wearing clothes of some kind, which, in the
Venusian heat, indicated a particularly refined degree of
civilization--unless, of course, the squamous skin protected him from
the heat as well as the humidity.

More than that, though, he was humanoid in almost a Hollywood way. He
had a particularly fine profile and an athletic physique, which, oddly,
his scales seemed to enhance, much like a movie idol dressed in
fine-meshed Medieval armor. Naturally, he had a tail, but it was as well
proportioned as a kangaroo's, though shorter and more graceful, and it
struck Professor Bernardi as a particularly handsome and useful gadget.

For one thing, the people from Earth were standing uncomfortably in the
slippery mud, while the lizard-man was using his tail much in the
fashion of a spectator stool, leaning back against it almost in a
sitting position, with his armor-shod feet supporting him comfortably.
For another, the tail undoubtedly served for balance and the added push
of a walking stick and perhaps for swift attack or getaway. Very
practical and attractive, the professor concluded--too bad Man had
relinquished his tail when climbing down from the trees.

"Thank you," the saurian said with uneasy modesty, looking at him. "Good
of you to think so. You are a fairly intelligent species, aren't you?"

"Fairly," the professor acknowledged, preoccupied with a clever idea.
Perhaps existence on Venus wasn't going to be as unpleasant as he had
anticipated. "From reading my mind, you know what this blaster can do,
don't you?"

"I'm afraid so."

"Then you know what I expect of you?"

"Yes, sahib. I'se comin', massa. To hear is to obey, effendi." The
creature turned and went briskly back toward the camp, leaving the
others to stumble after him.

Mrs. Bernardi gave a shriek as his handsome scaled form emerged from the
greenish-white underbrush, haloed in luminous yellow mist. Algol, the
ship's cat, prudently took sanctuary behind her, then peered out to see
what was going on and whether there was likely to be anything in it for
him.

"This is our native bearer," Professor Bernardi explained as the three
scientists burst out of the jungle.

"My name is Jrann-Pttt." The creature bowed low. "At your service,
madame."

"Oh, Carl!" Mrs. Bernardi clapped her hands. "He's just perfect! So
thoughtful of you to find one that speaks English! I do hope you can
cook, Pitt?"

"I will do my best, madame."

       *       *       *       *       *

Algol daintily picked his way through the mud toward the saurian,
sniffed him with judicial deliberation; then, deciding that anyone who
smelled so much like the better class of fish must be All Right, rubbed
against his legs.

"Well," remarked Miss Anspacher, using the side of the spaceship as a
mirror by which to redden her somewhat prissy lips, "that makes it
practically unanimous, doesn't it?"

"All except Professor Bernardi," said Jrann-Pttt, looking at the
scientist with what might have been a smile. "He doesn't like me."

"I see that your telepathic powers are not quite accurate," the
professor returned. "I do not dislike you; I distrust you."

"The fact that the two terms are not entirely synonymous in your
language would argue a certain degree of incipient civilization," the
lizard-man observed.

"You know, Carl," Mrs. Bernardi whispered, "he has an awfully funny way
of talking, for a native."

"Frankly I don't like this at all, Professor," Captain Greenfield said,
mopping his brow with a limp handkerchief. "If I hadn't been off looking
for a better berth for the ship--all this mud worries me--this'd never
have happened."

"You mean you would have let the lizard get away with Miss Anspacher?"

The big man's face flushed crimson. "I don't think that's funny,
Professor."

Bernardi quickly changed the subject, for he realized that the captain,
being by far the most muscular of the party, was not a man to trifle
with. "Tell me, Greenfield, did you succeed in finding a better spot for
the ship? I must admit I'm worried about that mud myself."

"Only remotely dry spot around is an outcropping 'bout two kilometers
away," Greenfield said grudgingly. He shifted his camp stool in a futile
search for shade. Even though the sun never penetrated the thick layer
of clouds, the yellow light diffused through them was blinding. "Might
be big enough, but it's not level. Could blast it smooth, but that'd
take at least a week--Earth time."

Bernardi pulled his damp shirt away from his body. "Well, I daresay
we'll be all right where we are, if we're not assailed by any violent
forces of nature. On Earth, this might be a monsoon climate."

"If you ask me, that monster is more of a danger than any monsoon."

Bernardi sighed. Although by far the most competent officer available
for the job of spaceship captain, Greenfield was not quite the man he
would have chosen to be his associate for months on end. Still,
beggars--as Miss Anspacher might have eloquently put it--could not be
choosers. "What makes you say that?" he asked, trying to set an example
of tolerance.

"Don't like the idea of him cooking for us," the captain said
stubbornly. "Might poison us all in our beds."

"Well, don't eat in your bed," suggested Mortland, strolling out of the
airlock in the company of the cat. Algol, however, finding that the spot
beside the captain's camp stool was as dry as anything could be on
Venus, decided to turn back.

       *       *       *       *       *

"The difficulty is easily overcome, Captain," the professor said, still
holding on to his patience. "You can continue to cook your own meals
from the tinned and packaged foods on board ship. The rest of us will
eat fresh native foods prepared by Jrann-Pttt."

"But why," Miss Anspacher interrupted as she emerged from the airlock
with a large cast-iron skillet, "should you think Jrann-Pttt wants to
poison us?"

Both men rose from their stools. "Stands to reason he'd consider us his
enemies, Miss Anspacher," the captain said. "After all, we--as a group,
that is--captured him."

"Hired him," Professor Bernardi contradicted. "I've telepathically
arranged to pay him an adequate salary. In goods, of course; I don't
suppose our money would be of much use to him. And I think he's rather
glad of the chance to hang around and observe us conveniently."

"Observe us!" Greenfield exclaimed. "You mean he's spying out the land
for an attack? Let's prepare our defenses at once!"

"I doubt if that's what he has in mind," Professor Bernardi said
judiciously.

"He may be staying because he wants to be near me," Miss Anspacher
blurted. Overcome by this unmaidenly admission, she reddened and rushed
from them, calling, "Yoo-hoo, Jrann-Pttt! Here is the frying pan!" Algol
woke up instantly and followed her. "Frying" was one of the more
important words in his vocabulary.

Captain Greenfield stared across the clearing after them, then turned
back to Bernardi with a frown. "I don't like to see one of our girls
mixed up with a lizard--and a foreign lizard at that." But his face too
clearly betrayed a personal resentment.

"Don't tell me you have a--a fondness for Miss Anspacher, Captain,"
Professor Bernardi exclaimed, genuinely surprised. Undeniably Miss
Anspacher--although no longer in her first youth--was a handsome woman,
but he would not have expected her somewhat cerebral type to appeal to
the captain. On the other hand, she was the only unattached woman in the
party and they were a long way from home.

Greenfield picked a fleck of dried violet mud from the side of the ship
and avoided Bernardi's eye. "One of the reasons I came along," he said
almost bashfully. "Thought I'd have the chance to be alone with her now
and again and impress her with, with...."

"Your sterling qualities?" Bernardi suggested.

The captain flashed him a glance of mingled gratitude and resentment.
"And now this damned lizard has to come along!"

"Cheer up, Captain," said the professor. "I'll back you against a lizard
any time."

       *       *       *       *       *

Although the long twilight of Venus had deepened into night and it could
never really be cool there by terrestrial standards, the temperature was
almost comfortable. Everything was quite black, except for the pallid
purple campfire glowing through the darkness; the clouds that
perpetually covered the surface of the planet prevented even the light
of the stars from reaching it.

"Tell me more about the cross-versus the parallel-cousin relationships
in your culture, Jrann-Pttt," Miss Anspacher breathed, wriggling her
camp stool closer to the saurian's. "Anthropology is a great hobby of
mine, you know. How do your people feel about exogamy?"

"I'm afraid I'm rather exhausted, dear lady," he said, using one arm to
mask a yawn, and one to surreptitiously wave away the saurian head that
was peering out of the underbrush. "I shouldn't like to give a scientist
like yourself any misinformation that might become a matter of record."

"Of course not," she murmured. "You're so considerate."

       *       *       *       *       *

A pale face appeared in the firelight like some weird creature of
darkness. Terrestrial and extraterrestrial both started. "Miss
Anspacher," the captain growled, "I'd like to lock up the ship, so if
you wouldn't mind turning in--"

Miss Anspacher pouted. "You've interrupted such an interesting
conversation. And I don't see why you have to lock up the ship. After
all, the night is three hundred and eighty-five hours long. We don't
sleep all that time and it would be a shame to be cooped up."

"I'm going to try to rig up some floodlights," Greenfield explained
stiffly, "so we won't be caught like this again. Nobody bothered to tell
me the day equals thirty-two of ours, so that half of it would be
night."

"Then I won't see you for almost two weeks of our time, Jrann-Pttt? Are
you sure you wouldn't like to spend the rest of the night in our ship?
Plenty of room, you know."

"No, thank you, dear lady. The jungle is my natural habitat. I should
feel stultified by walls and a ceiling. Don't worry--I shan't run away."

"Oh, I'm not worried," Miss Anspacher said coyly, throwing a stick of
wood on the fire.

"Small riddance if he does."

"Captain Greenfield!"

That part of the captain's face not concealed by his piratical black
beard turned red. "Well, if he can read our minds, he knows damn well
what I'm thinking, anyway, so why be hypocritical about it?"

"That's right--he is a telepath, isn't he?" Miss Anspacher's face grew
even redder than the captain's. "I forgot he.... It _is_ getting late. I
really must go. Good night, Jrann-Pttt."

"Good night, dear lady." The saurian bowed low over her hand.

Leaning on the captain's brawny arm, Miss Anspacher ploughed through the
mud to the ship, followed by the mosquito-bat and Algol, who had been
toasting themselves more or less companionably at the fire. The door to
the airlock clanged behind all four of them.

       *       *       *       *       *

The other saurian's head appeared again from the bush. _Jrann-Pttt_, the
insistent thought came, _shall I rescue you now_?

_Why, Dfar-Lll? I am not a prisoner. I'm quite free to come and go
as I please. But let's get away from the strangers' ship while we
communicate. They do have a certain amount of low-grade perception and
might be able to sense the presence of another personality. At any rate,
they might look out of a port and see you._

Keeping the illuminator on low beam, Dfar-Lll led the way through the
bushes. _Seems to me you're going to an awful lot of trouble just to get
zoo specimens_, the youngster protested, disentangling its arms from the
embrace of an amorous vine. _There's really no reason for carrying on
the work since Lieutenant Merglyt-Ruuu ... passed on._

Jrann-Pttt sat down on a fallen log and, tucking up his graceful tail,
signaled his junior to join him. _In the event that we do decide to
return to base, some handsome specimens might serve to offset the
lieutenant's demise._

_Return to base? But I thought we were...._

_We haven't found swamp life pleasant, have we? After all, there's no
real reason why we shouldn't go back. Is it our fault that Merglyt-Ruuu
happened to meet with a fatal accident?_

_We-ell ... but will the commandant see it that way?_

_On the other hand, if we don't go back, wouldn't it be a good idea to
attach ourselves to an expedition that, no matter how alien, is better
equipped for survival than we? And carrying out our original purpose
seemed the best way of getting to meet these strangers informally, as it
were._

_They are unquestionably intelligent life-forms then?_

_After a fashion._ Jrann-Pttt yawned and rose. _But why are we sitting
here? Let's start back to our camp. We will be able to converse more
comfortably._

They made their way through the jungle--now walking, now wading where
the mud became water. Small creatures with hardly any thoughts scurried
before them as they went.

_The commandant may have already made contact with their rulers_,
Dfar-Lll suggested, springing forward to illuminate the way. _In that
case, we couldn't hope to remain undiscovered for long._

_Oh, these creatures are not Venusians. There's no intelligent life
here. They hail from the third planet of this system and, according to
their thoughts, this is the only vessel that was capable of traversing
interplanetary space. So we needn't worry about extradition treaties or
any other official annoyances._

_If they're friendly, why didn't you spend the night in their ship? It
certainly looks more comfortable than our collapsible moslak--which, by
the way, collapsed while you were gone. I hope we'll be able to put it
up again ourselves. I must say this for the lieutenant--he was good at
that sort of thing._

Jrann-Pttt made a gesture of distaste. _He was unfortunately good at
other things, too. But let's not discuss him. I'm not staying with the
strangers because I want to pick up one or two little things--mostly
some of our food to serve them. I used up all the supplies in my pack
and I want them to think we're living off the land. They believe me to
be a primitive and it's best that they should until I decide just how
I'm going to make most efficient use of them. Besides, I didn't want to
leave you alone._

The younger saurian sniffed skeptically.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Honestly, Pitt," Mrs. Bernardi said, keeping to leeward of the
tablecloth the lizard-man was efficiently shaking out of the airlock,
"I've never had a--an employee as competent as you." But the word she
had in mind, of course, was "servant." "I do wish you'd come back to
Earth with us."

"Perhaps you would compel me to come?" he suggested, as Algol and the
mosquito-bat entered into hot competition to catch the crumbs before
they sank into the purple ooze.

"Oh, no! We'd want you to come as our guest--our friend." _Naturally_,
her thoughts ran, _a house guest would be expected to help with the
washing up and lend a hand with the cooking--and, of course, we wouldn't
have to pay him. Though my husband, I suppose, would requisition him as
a specimen._

_I fully intend to go to Earth with them_, Jrann-Pttt mused, _but
certainly not in that capacity. Nor would I care to be a specimen. I
must formulate some concrete plan._

The captain was crawling on top of the spaceship, scraping off the dried
mud, brushing away the leaves and dust that marred its shining purity.
The hot, humid haze that poured down from the yellow clouds made the
metal surface a little hell. Yet it was hardly less warm on the other
side of the clearing, where Miss Anspacher tried desperately to write up
her notes on a table that kept sinking into the spongy ground, and
hindered by the thick wind that had arisen half an hour before and which
kept blowing her papers off. The sweet odor of the flowers tucked in the
open neck of her already grimy white blouse suddenly sickened her and
she flung them into the mud.

"We won't be going back to Earth for a long time!" she called. Gathering
up the purple-stained papers, she came toward the others, little puffs
of mist rising at each step. "We like it here. Lovely country."

How could she think to please even the savage she fancied him to be by
such an inanity, Jrann-Pttt wondered. No one could possibly like that
fetid swamp. Or was it not so much that she was trying to please him as
convince herself? Was there some reason the terrestrials had for needing
to like Venus. It hovered on the edge of the women's minds. If only it
would emerge completely, he could pick it up, but it lurked in the
shadows of their subconscious, tantalizing him.

"I'd like to know when we're going to start putting up the shelters,"
Mrs. Bernardi said, pushing a streak of fog-yellow hair out of her eyes.
"I can't stand being cooped up for another night on that ship."

"You're planning to put up shelters--to live outside of the ship?" This
would seem to confirm his darkest suspicions. Even a temporary
settlement would leave them too open to visitation from the commandant.
What his attitude toward the aliens might be, Jrann-Pttt didn't know. He
might consider them as specimens, as enemies or as potential allies.
What his attitude toward Jrann-Pttt and his companion would be, however,
the saurian knew only too well. Had they reported the lieutenant's
demise immediately, it was possible the commandant might have been
brought to believe it was an accident. Now he would unquestionably think
Jrann-Pttt had killed Merglyt-Ruuu on purpose--which was not true; how
was Jrann-Pttt to know that the mud into which he'd knocked the
lieutenant was quicksand?

"Anything against putting up shelters?" Captain Greenfield growled from
his perch.

"Monster!" the mosquito-bat shrieked at the cat. "Monster! Monster!"

       *       *       *       *       *

There was a painfully embarrassed silence.

"The creature is not intelligent," Jrann-Pttt explained, smiling. "It
merely has vocal apparatus that can reproduce a frequently heard word,
like--you have a bird, I believe, a--" he searched their minds for the
word--"a parrot."

"Monster!" the mosquito-bat continued. "Monster! Monster!"

"Shut up or I'll wring your neck!" the captain snarled. The mosquito-bat
obeyed sullenly, apparently recognizing the threat in his tone.

But the concept of "monster" hung heavily in the air between the
terrestrials and the lizard-man. _They should not feel so bad about it_,
he thought, _for they are the monsters themselves. But that would never
occur to them and I can hardly reassure them by saying...._

"Don't worry," Professor Bernardi said smoothly. "To him, it's we who
are the monsters."

A sudden gust of wind nearly whipped the tablecloth out of Jrann-Pttt's
hands. He fought with it for a moment, glad of something tangible to
contend with. "About the shelters," he said. "They might not stand up
against a storm."

"So this is monsoon country," Bernardi observed thoughtfully. "Do you
know when the storms usually come, Jrann-Pttt?" The other shook his
head. "Peculiar. There usually is a season for that sort of thing."

"I ... come from another part of the planet."

"Storms here are bad, eh?" the captain commented, swinging himself down
easily. "Frankly, that worries me. Ship's resting on mud as far as I can
see, and if there's one thing I do know something about, it's mud. If it
got any wetter, the ship might sink."

"Maybe we should leave," Mrs. Bernardi suggested. "Go to another part of
the planet where it's drier, or--" she tried not to show the sudden
surge of hope--"leave for home and come back after the rainy season."

There was a sudden silence, and Jrann-Pttt found himself able to pick up
the answers to some of his questions from the alien minds. His worst
fears were confirmed. Plan A was out. But something could still be done
with these creatures.

"Doesn't she know?" the captain demanded accusingly. "You brought her
here without telling her?"

Bernardi spread his hands wide in a futile gesture. "She should know;
I've told her repeatedly. She just doesn't understand ... or doesn't
want to."

"I know they'll forgive us," Mrs. Bernardi said stubbornly.
"We--you--haven't done anything really wrong, so how could they do
anything terrible to us? After all, didn't they refuse you the funds
because they said you couldn't--"

"Shhh, Louisa," her husband commanded.

Jrann-Pttt smiled to himself.

--"do it," she went on. "And you did. So they were wrong and they'll
have to forgive us."

"Tcha!" Miss Anspacher said. "Since when was there any fairness in
justice?"

"On the other hand," Mrs. Bernardi continued, "we have no idea of how
dangerous the storms here could be."

"Very dangerous," Jrann-Pttt said.

"For you, perhaps," the captain retorted. "Maybe not for us."

"Now that's silly," Miss Anspacher said. "You can see that Jrann-Pttt is
much more--" she blushed--"sturdily built than we are."

"I don't mean that we could face it without protection," the captain
replied angrily. "Naturally I mean that our superior technology could
cope with the effects of any storm."

"Well, Captain, we'll have to put that superior technology to use at
once," the professor told him. "You'd better start blasting that rock."

Laden with equipment and malevolent thoughts, the captain trudged off
into the murky jungle. The others would not even offer to help.
Confounded scientists; they certainly took his status as captain
seriously. He wished, for a disloyal moment, that he had stayed on
Earth. The quiet routine of a test pilot had prepared him for nothing
like this. Were Miss Anspacher and adventure worth it? At the moment, he
thought not. But he was on Venus and it was too late to change his mind.

Jrann-Pttt followed him into the jungle, keeping some distance behind,
for he had good reason to suspect that Greenfield would take his warm
interest in terrestrial technology for plain spying. Or, worse yet, he
might try to press the lizard-man into service; Jrann-Pttt felt he had
demeaned himself quite enough already.

"Have you noticed," Miss Anspacher asked, pushing the mass of damp brown
hair off her neck as she came alongside him, "how the--the smell--" _a
scientist does not mince words_--"of the swamp has grown stronger?"

Jrann-Pttt halted. He had a good idea of what the captain's reactions to
the sight of himself and Miss Anspacher arriving hand-in-hand would be.
"Yes, it is getting rather overpowering. Perhaps, for a lady of your
delicate sensibilities, it would be best to--"

"I can stand a bad smell just as well as a male--any male!"

"Perhaps even better," Jrann-Pttt said, "for I was on the verge of
turning back myself."

"Oh," she said, appeased. "Well, in that case, I'll go back with
you ... how quiet everything is!"

He had not noticed. For him, it would never be quiet because of the
stream of jangled thoughts constantly pouring into the back of his mind
from everything sentient that surrounded him.

For a moment, he wondered what it would be like to be non-telepathic
like the terrestrials, to have peace from the clamor of confused
impressions, emotions and ideas that persistently beat at his mind. But
that would be wondering how it was to be deaf to avoid discord, or blind
to shut out ugliness.

"The lull before the storm, I suppose," she said brightly. _Now is his
opportunity to kiss me--only perhaps they don't have kissing in his
society. His mouth does seem to be the wrong shape. And if I kissed him,
it might violate a taboo._

During their short absence, the citrine clouds that closed off the sky
had changed to a sinister umber. It was now almost as dusky in the
clearing as in the jungle itself, when Jrann-Pttt and Miss Anspacher
returned and joined the others.

Professor Bernardi stood looking up with sharp gray eyes at a sky he
could not see. "I hope Greenfield can finish the blasting more quickly
than he estimated," he muttered.

"Will we hear the noise way out here, Carl?" his wife worried nervously.

"Only two kilometers away? Of course we'll hear it. I do wish you
wouldn't always be asking such stupid questions."

She shivered. "Well, I hope they get it over with right away. If we just
have to sit here waiting and waiting and waiting, I'll go mad. I know I
will."

"You should try to keep your nerves in check, Louisa," Miss Anspacher
snapped. _Silly little fool._

"At least I can control my glands!" Mrs. Bernardi flared back.
_Sex-starved spinster._

"I shall make some tea, ladies," Jrann-Pttt interposed. "I'm sure we
will all feel the better for it."

Mrs. Bernardi smiled at him feebly. "You're such a comfort, Pitt. I
don't know why you of all creatures should be the one to remind me of
home."

"Home," remarked Mortland, emerging from the airlock, "is where the
heart is. Did I hear someone say 'tea'?"

       *       *       *       *       *

As Jrann-Pttt hung the kettle over the fire, suddenly the air erupted in
stunning violence of sound. The ground undulated under their feet and
water slopped out of the kettle, almost putting out the fire that rose
high to claw at it. Rivulets of thick, muddy liquid welled out of the
ground and drabbled their feet. The women turned pale. Algol gave a
faint cry and hid under Mrs. Bernardi's skirts, trembling, while the
mosquito-bat tried to lift Mortland's toupee and hide in his hair. The
ship itself quivered and seemed to jump slightly in the air, then
returned to its resting place.

All was quiet again, quieter than it had been before. Mortland anxiously
gnawed his light mustache. "Better hurry with that tea, there's a good
fellow. I'm violently allergic to loud noises."

"They'll probably continue all day," the professor said with almost
malevolent cheerfulness, "so you might as well get used to them." _Who
is he to have nerves? I am easily the most sensitive person here, but I
manage to control myself._

"I don't know how I'm going to stand it!" Mrs. Bernardi shrieked. "I
just know something terrible is going to happen."

"Please try to restrain yourself, Louisa," her husband ordered. "After
it's over, you'll find we'll be much more comfortable and secure with
the ship resting on rock."

"If you ask me, that blast made it sink a little," Mortland said. "I
wonder whether--"

He was interrupted by a thrashing in the bushes. Dfar-Lll burst forth,
shedding scales. _Do not despair, Jrann-Pttt. I am here, ready to save
you or die at your side._

The women clutched each other, Miss Anspacher praying silently and
fervently to Juno, Lakshmi, Freya, Isis and a host of other esoteric
female deities she had picked up in the course of her avocational
researches.

"He seems to be one of Jrann-Pttt's people," Bernardi observed, "so
there should be nothing to fear."

_Dfar-Lll, you fool!_ Jrann-Pttt ideated angrily. _Nothing's wrong.
They're just blasting out a better berth for their vessel. And now
you've spoiled my plans._

"What did you think at that poor little creature!" Mrs. Bernardi blazed.
"He's crying!" And, sure enough, amethyst tears were oozing out of the
young saurian's large, liquid eyes.

_I du-didn't mean any harm._

"Monster!" Mrs. Bernardi accused Jrann-Pttt. "All men are monsters,
whether they're aliens or not."

"You're so right, Louisa!" Miss Anspacher exclaimed, regarding the
younger creature in an almost kindly manner.

_I'm sorry, r-Lll_, Jrann-Pttt apologized. _I was upset by that noise,
too. How could you possibly know what it was? Come, let me introduce you
to the creatures._

Dfar-Lll stepped forward diffidently. Jrann-Pttt put a hand on the
moss-green shoulder. "Allow me to introduce my companion, Dfar-Lll," he
said aloud.

The youngster looked at him.

Mrs. Bernardi thrust out her hand. "I'm very glad to meet you, Lil."

_Agitate it with one of yours. It's a courtesy. Don't let her see how
repulsive she is to you. Remember, you're just as repulsive to her._

Dfar-Lll offered a shy, seven-fingered hand. "Pleased ... to meet
you ... ma'am," the young lizard squeaked.

"Why, he's just a baby, isn't he?" Mrs. Bernardi asked.

_I am not a baby!_ Dfar-Lll thought indignantly. _At the end of this
year, I shall celebrate my pre-maturity feast, or I would have. And
furthermore--_

There was another thunderous blast of sound. After the ground had
stopped trembling, the six found themselves ankle-deep in muddy water.
Algol, who was in considerably deeper than his ankles, mewed fretfully.
Mrs. Bernardi picked him up and comforted him.

"Perhaps blasting wasn't such a good idea," the professor muttered.
"Maybe I should tell Greenfield to call a halt and we'll take our
chances with the storm. As a matter of fa--"

"The ship!" Mortland cried. "It _is_ sinking!"

And the big metal ball slowly but visibly was indeed subsiding into the
mud.

"Stop it, somebody!" Miss Anspacher snapped in her customary schoolroom
manner.

The professor was pale, but he held on to his calm. "What can we do?
Even if we could get the captain back in time, there's no way we can
stop it. It's too heavy to pull out manually, and the engines, of
course, are inside."

As they watched in horror, the ship sank deeper and deeper, picking up
momentum as more of it went under. With a loud, sucking sound, it
vanished into the ooze. Muddy water gurgled over it and, where the ship
had been, there was now a small lake.

"This could be the beginning of a legend," Miss Anspacher murmured. "Or
the end."

There was another vibrant detonation. "Someone ought to go tell the
captain there's no use blasting any more," Bernardi said wearily. "We
have nothing to put on the rock when he smooths it off." He began to
laugh. "I suppose you could call this poetic justice." And he went on
laughing, losing a bit of his former self-control.

_There goes Plan B_, Jrann-Pttt thought.

A star of intensely bright green lightning split the clouds and widened
to cover the visible expanse of sky. There was a planet-shaking clap of
thunder that made Greenfield's puny efforts sound like the snapping of
twigs in comparison and it began to rain hard and fast.

       *       *       *       *       *

"If only I hadn't gone and blasted that damn rock," the captain
grumbled, squeezing water out of his shirt-tails, "we'd have been all
right. Probably the storm wouldn't have done a thing to the ship except
get it wet. If you can even call it a storm."

"I can and I do," Jrann-Pttt replied, haughtily squeegeeing his wet
scales. "All I said was that a storm might be coming up and it might be
dangerous. How was I to know it would last only half an hour?"

"Even the camp stools pulled through," Greenfield pointed out, "and you
said shelters wouldn't stand up."

"I only said they might not. Can't you understand your own language?"

The fissure in the clouds had not quite closed yet and through it the
enormous, blazing disk of the sun glared at them, twice as large as it
appeared from Earth. It was a moot point as to whether they'd be dried
out or steamed alive first.

"Might as well collect whatever gear we have left and get it to higher
ground," Miss Anspacher said efficiently. "Two feet of water won't do
anything any good--even those camp stools."

"It's my belief you wanted this to happen," Greenfield accused
Jrann-Pttt. "You wanted to get rid of us."

"My dear fellow," Jrann-Pttt replied loftily, "the information I gave
you was, to the best of my knowledge, accurate. However, I happen to be
a professor of zoology and not a meteorologist. Apparently you people
live out in the open like primitives," he continued, ignoring Dfar-Lll's
admiring interjection, "and are accustomed to the vicissitudes of
weather. I am a civilized creature; I live--" _or used to live_--"in an
air-conditioned, light-conditioned, weather-conditioned city. It is only
when I rough it on field trips like this to trackless parts of
the--globe that I am forced to experience weather. Even then, I have
never before been caught in a situation like this."

_In fact, I was never before caught or I wouldn't be in this situation
at all._

"Oh, Jrann-Pttt," sighed Miss Anspacher, "I knew you couldn't be just an
ordinary native!"

"How did you get into this situation then?" Professor Bernardi asked. He
had an unfortunate talent for going directly to the point.

"The third member of our expedition died," Jrann-Pttt explained. "He was
our dirigational expert. Our guide."

"How did he happen to--"

"Are we just going to stand here chatting," Miss Anspacher demanded, "or
are we going to do something about this?"

"What can we do?" Mrs. Bernardi asked weakly. "We might just as well lie
down and--"

"Never say die, Louisa," Miss Anspacher admonished.

"I suggest we go to my camp to see what shape it's in," Jrann-Pttt said,
furiously putting together Plan C. "Some of the supplies there might
prove useful."

Captain Greenfield looked questioningly at Bernardi. The professor
shrugged. "Might as well."

"All right," the captain growled. "Let's pick up whatever we can save."

       *       *       *       *       *

Since there wasn't much that could be rescued, the little safari was
soon on its way. Jrann-Pttt led, carrying Algol in his arms. Behind came
Mortland, bearing a camp stool and the kettle into which he had tucked a
tin of biscuits and into which the mosquito-bat had tucked itself, its
orange eyes glaring out angrily from beneath the lid. Next came Mrs.
Bernardi with her knitting, her camp stool and her sorrow.

Dfar-Lll followed with two stools and the plastic tea set. Close behind
was Miss Anspacher, with the sugar bowl, the earthenware teapot and an
immense bound volume of the _Proceedings of the Physical Society of
Ameranglis_ for 1993. Professor Bernardi bore a briefcase full of notes
and the table. The rain had damaged the latter's mechanism, so that its
legs kept unfolding from time to time, to the great inconvenience of
Captain Greenfield, who brought up the rear with the blasting equipment.
Behind them and sometimes alongside them came something--or
someone--else.

[Illustration]

"Surely your camp must have been closer to ours than this," Miss
Anspacher finally remarked after they had been slogging through mud and
water and pushing aside reluctant vegetation for over an Earth hour.

"I am very much afraid," Jrann-Pttt admitted, "that our camp has been
lost--that is to say, inundated."

"What are we going to do now?" the captain asked of the company at
large.

Professor Bernardi shrugged. "Our only course would seem to be making
for one of the cities and throwing ourselves upon the na--Jrann-Pttt's
people's hospitality. If Professor Jrann-Pttt has even the vaguest idea
of the direction in which his home lies, we might as well head that
way." _I wonder whether the natives could help us raise the ship._

"I'm sure my people will be more than happy to welcome you," Jrann-Pttt
said smoothly, "and to make you comfortable until your people send
another ship to fetch you."

The terrestrials looked at one another. Dfar-Lll looked at Jrann-Pttt.

Professor Bernardi coughed. "That was the only spaceship we had," he
admitted. "The first experimental model, you know." _We don't expect to
stay on this awful planet forever. After all, as Louisa says, the
government will have to forgive us. Public opinion and all that._

"Oh," the saurian said. "Then we shall have the pleasure of your company
until they build another?"

There was silence. "We have the only plans," the professor said,
gripping his briefcase more tightly. "I am the inventor of the ship, so
naturally I would have them." _If we brought back some specimens of
Venusian life--of intelligent Venusian life--to prove we'd been
here...._

"Matter of fact, old fellow," Mortland said, "we took all the plans with
us so they couldn't build another ship and follow--"

"Mortland!" the professor exclaimed.

"But they're telepaths," Miss Anspacher said. "They must know already."

Everyone turned to look at the saurians.

"I have ... certain information," Jrann-Pttt admitted, "but I cannot
understand it. You are in trouble with your rulers because they would
not give you the funds, claiming space travel was impossible?"

"That's right," Bernardi said. _Not really specimens, you understand.
Guests._

"And you went ahead and appropriated the funds and materials from your
government, since you were in a trusted position where you could do so?"

Bernardi nodded.

"Of course the question is now academic, for the ship is gone, but since
you proved the possibility of space travel by coming here, wouldn't your
government then dismiss the charges against you?"

"That's exactly what I keep telling him!" Mrs. Bernardi exclaimed.

But her husband shook his head. "The law is inflexible. We have broken
it and must be punished, even if by breaking it we proved its
fundamental error." _Why let him know our plans?_

_Why, Jrann-Pttt, that sounds just like our own government, doesn't it?_

_Yes, it does. We should be able to establish a very satisfactory mode
of living with these strangers._

"We'd hoped that after a year or so the whole thing would die down,"
Mortland explained frankly, "and we'd go back as heroes."

"Do you know the way to your home, Jrann-Pttt?" the professor asked
anxiously.

"Since we were able to catch a glimpse of the sun, I think I can figure
out roughly where we are. All we must do is walk some two hundred
kilometers in that direction--" he waved an arm to indicate the
way--"and we should be at the capital."

"Will your people accept us as refugees?" Miss Anspacher demanded
bluntly, "or will we be captives?" _Which is what I'll bet the good
professor is planning for you, if only he can figure some way to get you
and, of course, ourselves back._

"We should be proud to accept you as citizens and to receive the
benefits of your splendid technology. Our laboratories will be placed at
your disposal."

"Well, that's better than we hoped for," the professor said,
brightening. "We had expected to have to carve our own laboratories out
of the wilderness. Now we shall be able to carry on our researches in
comfort." _No need to trouble the natives; we'll be able to raise the
ship ourselves. Or build a new one. And I'll see to it personally that
they have special quarters in the zoo with a considerable amount of
privacy._

"If I were you, I wouldn't trust him too far," the captain warned. "He's
a foreigner."

"You ought to be ashamed of yourself, Captain!" Miss Anspacher said.
"I, for one, trust Jrann-Pttt implicitly. Did you say this direction,
Jrann-Pttt?" She stepped forward briskly. There was a loud splash and
water closed over her head.

Captain Greenfield rushed forward to haul her out. "Well," she said,
daintily coughing up mud, "I was wet to begin with, anyway."

"You're a brave little woman, Miss Anspacher," the captain told her
admiringly.

"This sort of thing may present a problem," Professor Bernardi
commented. "I hope that was only a pot-hole, that the water is not going
to be consistently too deep for wading."

"There might be quicksand, too," Mrs. Bernardi said somberly. "In
quicksand, one drowns slowly."

Dfar-Lll gave a start. _Surely you don't intend to lead them back to
base?_

_Precisely. The swamp is unfit for settlement._

_But to return voluntarily to captivity?_

_Who mentioned anything about captivity? Assisted by our new friends, we
have an excellent chance of taking over the ship and supplies by a
surprise attack._

_But why should these aliens assist us?_

Jrann-Pttt smiled. _Oh, I think they will. Yes, I have every confidence
in Plan C._

"I suggest," the professor said, ignoring his wife's pessimism, "that
each one of us pull a branch from a tree. We can test the ground before
we step on it, to make sure that there is solid footing underneath."

"Good idea," the captain approved. He reached out the arm that was not
occupied with Miss Anspacher and tugged at a tree limb.

And then he and the lady physicist were both floundering in the ooze.

"Well, really, Captain Greenfield!" she cried, refusing his aid in
extricating herself. "I always thought you were at least a gentleman in
spite of your illiteracy!"

"Wha--what happened?" he asked as he struggled out of the mud.
"Something pushed me; I swear it."

Jrann-Pttt mentalized. "It seems the tree did not like your trying to
remove a branch."

"The tree!" Greenfield's pale blue eyes bulged. "You're joking!"

"Not at all. As a matter of fact, I myself have been wondering why there
were so many thought-streams and yet so few animals around here. It
never occurred to me that the vegetation could be sentient and have such
strong emotive defenses. In all my experience as a botanist, I--"

"I thought you were a zoologist," Bernardi interrupted.

"My people do not believe in excessive specialization," the saurian
replied.

"Trees that think?" Mortland inquired incredulously.

"They're not very bright," Jrann-Pttt explained, "but they don't like
having their limbs pulled off. I don't suppose you would, either, for
that matter."

"I propose," Miss Anspacher said, shaking out her wet hair, "that we
break up the camp stools and use the sticks instead of branches to help
us along."

"Good idea," the captain said, trying to get back into her good graces.
"I always knew women could put their brains to use if they tried."

She glared at him.

"I thought we'd use the furniture to make a fire later," Mortland
complained. "For tea, you know."

"The ground's much too wet," Professor Bernardi replied.

"And besides," Miss Anspacher added, "I lost the teapot in that
pot-hole."

"But you managed to save the _Proceedings of the Physical Society_,"
Mortland snarled. "Serve you right if I eat it. And I warn you, if
hard-pressed, I shall."

"How will we cook our food, though?" Mrs. Bernardi demanded
apprehensively. "It's a lucky thing, Mr. Pitt, that we have you with us
to tell us which of the berries and things are edible, so at least we
shan't starve."

The visible portion of Jrann-Pttt's well-knit form turned deeper green.
"But I regret to say I don't know, Mrs. Bernardi. Those 'native' foods I
served you were all synthetics from our personal stores. I never tasted
natural foods before I met you."

"And if the trees don't like our taking their branches," Miss Anspacher
put in, "I don't suppose the bushes would like our taking their berries.
Louisa, don't do that!"

But Mrs. Bernardi, with her usual disregard for orders, had fainted into
the mud. Pulling her out and reviving her caused so much confusion, it
wasn't until then that they discovered Algol had disappeared.

       *       *       *       *       *

The party had been trudging through mud and water and struggling with
pale, malevolent vines and bushes and low-hanging branches for close to
six Earth hours. All of them were tired and hungry, now that their
meager supply of biscuits and chocolate was gone.

"Remember, Carl," Mrs. Bernardi told her husband, "I forgive you. And I
know I'm being foolishly sentimental, but if you could manage to take my
body back to Earth--"

"Don't be so pessimistic." Professor Bernardi absent-mindedly leaned
against a tree, then recoiled as he remembered it might resent being
treated like an inanimate object. "In any case, we'll most likely all
die at the same time."

"I never did want to go to Venus, really," Mrs. Bernardi sniffled. "I
only came, like Algol did, because I didn't have any choice. If you left
me behind, I'd have had to bear the brunt of.... Where is Algol?" She
stared at Jrann-Pttt. "You were carrying him. What have you done with
him?"

The lizard-man looked at her in consternation. "He jumped out of my arms
when you fainted and I turned back to help. I was certain one of the
others had him."

"He's dead!" she wailed. "You let him fall into the water and drown--an
innocent kitty that never hurt anybody, except in fun."

"Come, come, Louisa." Her husband took her arm. "He was only a cat. I'm
sure Jrann-Pttt didn't mean for him to drown. He was just so upset by
your fainting that he didn't think...."

"Not Jrann-Pttt's fault, of course," Miss Anspacher said.

"After all, we can't expect them to love animals as we do. But Algol was
a very good sort of cat...."

"Keep quiet, all of you!" Jrann-Pttt shouted. "I have never known any
species to use any method of communication so much in order to
communicate so little. Don't you understand? I would not have assumed
the cat was with one of you, if I had not subconsciously sensed his
thought-stream all along. He must be nearby."

Everyone was still, while Jrann-Pttt probed the dense underbrush that
blocked their view on both sides. "Over here," he announced, and led the
way through the thick screen of interlaced bushes and vines on the left.

About ten meters farther on, the ground sloped up sharply to form a
ridge rising a meter and a half above the rest of the terrain. The water
had not reached its blunted top, and on this fairly level strip of
ground, perhaps three meters wide, Algol had been paralleling their path
in dry-pawed comfort.

"Scientists!" Louisa Bernardi almost spat. "Professors! We could have
been walking on that, too. But did anybody think to look for dry
ground? No! It was wet in one place, so it would be wet in another. Oh,
Algol--" she reached over to embrace the cat--"you're smarter than any
so-called intelligent life-forms."

He indignantly straightened a whisker she had crumpled.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Look," Mortland exclaimed in delight as they attained the top of the
ridge, "here are some dryish twigs! Don't suppose the trees want them,
since they've let them fall. If I can get a fire going, we could boil
some swamp water and make tea. Nasty thought, but it's better than no
tea at all. And how long can one go on living without tea?"

"We'll need some food before long, too," Professor Bernardi observed,
putting his briefcase down on a fallen log. "The usual procedure, I
believe, would be for us to draw straws to see which gets
eaten--although there isn't any hurry."

"I'm glad then that we'll be able to have a fire," Mortland said, busily
collecting twigs. "I should hate to have to eat you raw, Carl."

_Mr. Pitt and his little friend are delightful creatures_, Mrs. Bernardi
thought. _So intelligent and so well behaved. But eating them wouldn't
really be cannibalism. They aren't people._

_That premise works both ways, dear lady_, Jrann-Pttt ideated. _And I
must say your species will prove far easier to peel for the cooking
pot._

"Monster! What are you doing?" Mortland dropped his twigs and pulled the
mosquito-bat away from a bush. "Don't eat those berries, you silly ass;
the bush won't like it!" The mosquito-bat piped wrathfully.

Jrann-Pttt probed with intentness. "You know, I rather think the bush
wants its berries to be eaten. Something to do with--er--propagating
itself. Of course it has a false impression as to what is going to be
done with the berries, but the important fact is that it won't put up
any resistance."

"All right, old fellow." Mortland released the mosquito-bat, which
promptly flew back to the bush. "I'm not the custodian of your morals."

"I wonder whether we could eat those berries, too," Professor Bernardi
remarked pensively.

"Carl!" Mrs. Bernardi's tear-stained face flushed pink. "Why--why,
that's almost indecent!"

"We eat beans, don't we?" Mortland pointed out. "They're seeds."

"We also eat meat," Miss Anspacher added.

There was silence. "I imagine," Mrs. Bernardi murmured, "it's because
we never get to meet the meat socially." She avoided the saurians' eyes.

"We'd better see how Monster makes out, though," Miss Anspacher
observed, replenishing her lipstick, "before we try the berries
ourselves. The fact that the bush is anxious to dispose of them doesn't
mean they can't be poisonous."

"Why should Monster sacrifice himself for us?" Mortland retorted hotly,
overlooking the fact that Monster's purpose in eating the berries was
almost certainly not an altruistic one. "If we can risk his life, we can
risk our own." He crammed a handful of berries into his mouth defiantly.
"I say, they're good!"

Algol sniffed the bush with disgust, then turned away.

"See?" said Miss Anspacher. "They're undoubtedly poisonous. When he's
really hungry, he isn't so fussy." She combed her hair.

"But is he really hungry?" Bernardi asked suspiciously. "Come here,
Algol. Nice kitty." He bent down and sniffed the cat's breath. The cat
sniffed his interestedly. Their whiskers touched. "I thought so. Fish!"

"You mean," Mrs. Bernardi shrieked, "that while we were struggling
through that water, alternately starving and drowning by centimeters,
that wretched cat has not only been walking along here dry as toast, but
gorging himself on fish?"

"Now, now, Mrs. Bernardi," Jrann-Pttt said. "Being a dumb animal, he
wouldn't think of informing you about matters of which he'd assume that
you, as the superior beings, would be fully cognizant."

"You might have told us there were fish on this planet, Mr. Pitt."

"Dear lady, there is something I feel I should tell you. I am not--"

"They're here on the other side of the ridge," Greenfield called,
bending over and peering through the foliage. "The fish, I mean."

"The pools look shallow," Bernardi said, also bending over. "The fish
should be easy enough to catch. Might even be able to get them in our
hands." He reached out to demonstrate, proving the error of both his
theses, for the fish slipped right through his fingers and, as he
grabbed for them, he lost his balance, toppled over the side of the
ridge into the mud and water below and began to disappear, showing
beyond a doubt that the pools were deeper than he had thought.

"Carl, what are you doing?" Mrs. Bernardi peered into the murky depths
where her husband was threshing about. "Why don't you come out of that
filthy mud?"

His voice, though muffled, was still acid. "It isn't mud, my dear. It's
quicksand!"

"Rope!" the captain exclaimed, grabbing a coil.

"Hold on, chaps!" cried a squeaky voice. "I'm coming to the rescue!" A
stout twelve-foot vine plunged out of the shadows and wrapped one end of
itself around a tree--disregarding the latter's violent objections--and
the other end around Professor Bernardi's thorax, which was just
disappearing into the mud. "Now if one or two of you would haul away,
we'll soon have him out all shipshape and proper. Heave ho! Don't be
afraid of hurting me; my strength is as the strength of ten because my
heart is pure."

"It's that vine!" Dfar-Lll exclaimed. "So that's what has been following
us all along!"

       *       *       *       *       *

"I can accept the idea of a vegetable thinking," Professor Bernardi
gasped as he was pulled out of the quicksand, "although with the utmost
reluctance." He shook himself like a dog. "But how can it be mobile?"

"You chaps can move around," the vine explained, "so I said to myself:
'Dammit, I'll have a shot at doing that, too.' Hard going at first, when
you're using suckers, but I persevered and I made it. Look, I can talk,
too. Never heard of a vine doing that before, did you? Fact is, I hadn't
thought of it before, but then I never had anyone to communicate with.
All those other vines are so stupid; you have absolutely no idea! Hope
you don't mind my picking up your language, but it was the only one
around--"

"We are honored," Professor Bernardi declared. "And I am deeply grateful
to you, too, sir or madam, for saving my life."

"Think nothing of it," the vine said, arranging its leaves, which were
of a pleasing celadon rather than the whitish-green favored by the rest
of the local vegetation. "Now that I can move, I'll probably be doing
heroic things like that all the time. Are you all going to the city? May
I go with you? I've heard lots about the city," it went on, taking
consent for granted, "but I never thought I'd get to see it. Everybody
in the swamp is such an old stick-in-the-mud. I thought I was trapped,
too, forced to spend the rest of my life in a provincial environment. Is
it true that the streets are filled with chlorophyll? Do you think I can
get a job in a botanical garden or something? Perhaps I can give little
talks on horticulture to visitors?"

The mosquito-bat looked out of the tea kettle austerely. "Monster!" it
piped shrilly.

"The very idea!" the vine snapped back indignantly. "Oh, well," it said,
calming down, "you probably don't know any better. It's up to me as the
intelligent life-form to forgive you, and I shall."

Jrann-Pttt and Dfar-Lll looked at each other in consternation. _Do you
think there really are cities on this planet, sir? Can there be
indigenous intelligent life? If so, it may have already got in touch
with the commandant._

_Impossible_, Jrann-Pttt replied. _The vine probably just heard us
talking about a city. After all, it picked up the language that way;
very likely it absorbed some terrestrial concepts along with it. If
there are any real settlements at all, they must be quite
primitive--nothing more than villages. No, it's we who will build the
cities on Venus. Combining our technology with the terrestrials', we
could develop a pretty little civilization here--after we've disposed of
the commandant, so he can't report our disappearance. We don't want any
publicity. So much better to keep our little society exclusive._

       *       *       *       *       *

"Wonder what time it is," the captain remarked as he rose and stretched
in the dim yellow light of the long Venusian day. "Must have slept for
hours. My watch seems to have stopped."

"Mine, too." Mortland unstrapped his from his wrist and shook it
futilely. "Waterproof, hah! If we ever get back to Earth, I shall make
the manufacturer eat his guarantee."

"Oh, well, what does time matter to us now?" Professor Bernardi pointed
out as he rose from his leafy couch with a loud creak. All of them--even
the saurians--had aches and pains in every joint and muscle as a result
of the unaccustomed exercise and the damp climate. "We are out of its
reach. It has no present meaning for us."

This depressed them all. Only the vine seemed in good health and
spirits. "I notice you're all wearing clothes except for the short
four-legged gentleman with the home-grown fur coat," it chattered
happily. "Do you think I'll be socially acceptable without them? I
wouldn't want to make a bad impression at the very start--or would
leaves do?"

Everybody looked at Jrann-Pttt. "We are not a narrow-minded species," he
said hastily. "I'm sure your leaves will be more than adequate."

After a breakfast of fish and berries stewed in tea--which the vine
declined with thanks--the various members of the party gathered up
their belongings and resumed their journey. Encrusted with dried purple
mud and grime, their clothes deliberately torn by anti-social shrubbery,
their chins--of the males, that is--disfigured by hirsute growths, the
terrestrials made a sorry spectacle. It was hot, boiling hot, and more
humid than ever.

"Well," said Miss Anspacher, letting the Swahili marching song with
which she had been attempting to encourage the company peter out, "I do
hope we'll reach your city soon, Jrann-Pttt. I must say I could use a
hot bath." She added hastily, "Hot baths are a peculiar cultural trait
of ours."

"I could use one myself," Jrann-Pttt said. He brushed his scales
fastidiously.

"I'm looking forward so to meeting your relatives," she said, grabbing
his left arm determinedly. "I'm not violating a taboo or anything, am
I?" _It isn't really slimy; it just feels that way._

"Not one of my people's. But I'm afraid you are violating a terrestrial
taboo, judging from the thoughts I pick up from your captain's mind."

"Oh, him--he's a stupid fool!"

"Not at all. Rough, perhaps. Untutored, yes. But with a good deal of
native intelligence, although fearfully primitive."

"Perhaps I was too harsh," Miss Anspacher observed thoughtfully. _The
captain ... is good-looking in a brutal sort of way, although not nearly
as handsome or even as spiritual in appearance as Jrann-Pttt. And
sometimes I almost think he_--she blushed to herself--_shows a certain
partiality for my company._

She did not, however, let go of the saurian's arm when the captain
bustled up, prepared to put a stop to this, but tactfully, if possible,
for he had begun to realize that his rude ways did not endear him to
her.

"Ah--we're making very good progress, aren't we, Pitt?" he interrupted,
trying to insinuate himself between the two.

"Excellent."

"How soon do you think we'll be at your city at this rate?"

Jrann-Pttt shrugged. "Since I have no way of telling what our rate is or
how far we have gone, how can I tell? As a matter of fact, you might as
well learn now as later--I am not a Venusian. There is no intelligent
life native to Venus."

"Oh, really!" the vine interposed indignantly. "Saying a thing like that
right in front of me! What would you call me, then, pray tell?"

Jrann-Pttt kept his actual thoughts to himself. "A mutation," he said.
"Probably you are the first intelligent life-form to appear upon this
planet. Scholarly volumes will be written about you."

"Oh?" The vine seemed to be appeased. "I accept your apology. Perhaps
I'll learn to write and do the books myself, because I'm the only one
who can understand the real me."

"But how can you show us the way to your city if you're not native to
Venus?" Bernardi demanded, whirling fretfully upon the saurian. "What is
this, anyway? Each time you come up with a different story!"

"See?" said the captain. "Didn't I tell you he was up to no good?"

"I should like to lead you to our base," Jrann-Pttt replied with quiet
dignity. "I am telling you the truth now since I feel I should have your
consent before proceeding farther."

??????? Dfar-Lll projected.

"I hesitated before, because I wasn't sure I could trust you. You
see, the spaceship in which we came to this planet is a prison ship,
with a crew consisting of malefactors--thieves, murderers,
defrauders--dispatched to the remote fastnesses of the Galaxy to fetch
back zoological specimens. Our zoo, I must say, is the finest and most
interesting in the Universe."

"Monster!" the mosquito-bat squeaked.

"Shhh," Mortland admonished. "Don't interrupt."

"I was in command of our ill-fated expedition...."

_Oh_, Dfar-Lll projected. _For a moment there, sir, you had me worried._

"When we reached Venus, I was, I must admit, careless. I gave the crew a
chance to mutiny and they did. Slew most of the officers. Dfar-Lll and I
were lucky to escape with our lives."

"But you might have told us!" Mrs. Bernardi's voice held reproach.

"Until we knew what kind of beings you were, we couldn't let you know
how helpless and unprotected we were."

The women seemed moved, but not the men.

"Leading us on a wild goose chase, were you?" the captain challenged.

Jrann-Pttt drew a deep breath. "It was my hope that all of you would
consent to help us get our ship back from these criminals. Then we could
fly to my planet--which is the fifth of the star you know as Alpha
Centauri--where, I assure you, you would be hospitably received."

_We aren't really going back home, Jrann-Pttt, are we? I'd sooner stay
here in the swamp than go back to that jail._

_Have confidence in me, r-Lll. As soon as we have disposed of the
commandant and his officers, I can put our ship out of commission. The
terrestrials won't be able to tell what's wrong. They know nothing about
space travel. The fact that they got their crude vessel to operate was
probably sheer luck._

But the younger was not to be diverted. _Will we kill them after we've
disposed of our officers? I should hate to._

_Certainly not. We shall need servants and I don't trust the prisoners
in the ship--all criminals of the lowest type!_ Aloud, he said to the
bewildered terrestrials, "If you don't want to help us, I shall
understand. No sense your interfering in another species' quarrels,
particularly as we must seem like monsters to you."

"Monster!" the mosquito-bat agreed. "Monster, monster, monster!" No one
tried to stop him. Jrann-Pttt sensed that somehow he had lost a good
deal of his grip on the terrestrials. Finesse, he thought angrily, was
wasted on these barbaric life-forms.

Bernardi sighed. "I suppose we'll have to help you." _No reason why his
ship shouldn't stop off at Earth before it goes to Alpha Centauri. No
reason why it should even go to Alpha Centauri at all, in fact._

"If you ask me," the captain said, "he's one of the criminals himself."

"But nobody asked you," Miss Anspacher retorted, the more acidly because
she had been wondering the same thing. "Shall we resume our journey?"

"Hold on," the vine said. "I don't want to intrude or anything, but it
hasn't been made quite clear to me whether or not I'm included in the
invitation to this Alpha Centauri place, and I wouldn't want to keep
going only on the off-chance that you might ask me. I really think you
should, because you led me astray with your fair promises of glittering
cities."

"The cities of our planet do not glitter," Jrann-Pttt replied, wishing
it would wither instantly, "but certainly you are invited. Glad to have
you."

"Oh, that's awfully decent of you," the vine said emotionally. "I shan't
forget it, I promise you."

       *       *       *       *       *

They plodded onward, the vine chattering so incessantly that a faint
gurgling which accompanied them went unnoticed. The gurgling grew louder
and louder as they pushed on. Finally, "I keep hearing water," Mortland
remarked. "We must be approaching a river of some kind."

A few minutes later, bursting through a screen of underbrush, they found
themselves confronted by a river whose bubbling violet-blue waters
extended for at least four kilometers from shadowy bank to bank, with
the ridge tapering to a point almost in its exact center.

Apparently, while they had been trekking along the elevation, the
surrounding terrain, concealed from them by the dense and evil-minded
vegetation, had imperceptibly taken off, leaving the ridge to become a
peninsula that jutted out into the river. They seemed to be stranded.
All they could do was retrace their steps and, since they had no idea
how far back the split became part of the mainland again, the return
journey might last almost as long as it had taken them to get there.

"I know we're heading in the right direction," Jrann-Pttt defended
himself. "I wasn't aware of the river because we must have come by an
overland route." Although he was telling the truth, at least insofar as
he knew it himself, no one, not even Dfar-Lll, believed him.

"But let's rest a bit before we turn back," Mortland proposed, flopping
to the ground. "I'm utterly used up."

"Maybe we don't need to go back," the vine said. "Not all the way,
anyhow." Everyone stared. It waved its leaves brightly at them. "I
notice the captain thoughtfully brought along lots of rope and there
were scads of fallen logs just a bit back. Couldn't you just lash the
logs together with the rope and make a--a thing on which we could float
the rest of the way? On the water, you know."

The others continued to look at it open-mouthed.

"Just a little idea I had," it said modestly. "May not amount to much,
but then you can't tell until you've tried, can you?"

"It--he--means a raft, I think," Mrs. Bernardi said.

Jrann-Pttt probed the raft concept in her mind, for he found the
vegetable's mental processes curiously obscure. "What an excellent
idea!" he exclaimed.

"It does not seem infeasible," Professor Bernardi admitted tightly. By
now, he was suspicious of everyone and everything. _If I had never
broached the idea of space travel to those peasants_, he thought, _I
would be on Earth in the dubious comfort of my own home. That's what
comes of trying to help humanity._

       *       *       *       *       *

"Well," observed the captain as the heavy raft hit the water with a
tremendous splash, "she seems to be riverworthy." He rubbed his hands in
anticipation, much of his surliness gone, now that he was about to deal
with something he understood. "Since she is, in a manner of speaking, a
ship, I suppose I assume command again?" He waited for objections,
glancing involuntarily in Jrann-Pttt's direction. There were none.
"Right," he said, repressing any outward symptoms of relief.

He efficiently deployed the personnel to the positions on the raft where
he felt they might be least useless, the gear being piled in the middle
and surmounted by Algol, who naturally assumed possession of the softest
and safest place by the divine right of cats.

_The captain does have a commanding presence_, Miss Anspacher thought,
_and a sort of uncouth grace. Moreover, he cannot read my mind--in fact,
he often cannot even understand me when I speak._

"All right!" he bellowed. "Cast off!"

The vine unfastened the rope that it had insouciantly attached to a tree
trunk, remarking to the others, "Don't let the trees intimidate you.
Actually their bark is worse than their bite." Now it dropped lithely on
board the raft, looking for a comfortable resting place.

"Please don't twine around me," Miss Anspacher said coldly. "If you
insist upon coming with us, you will have to choose an inanimate object
to cling to."

"All right, all right," it tried to soothe her. "No need to get yourself
all worked up over such a mere triviality, is there? I'll just coil
myself tidily around one of those spare logs. I must say you're warmer,
though."

_Yes, she is, isn't she?_ thought the captain, and squeezed her hand.

       *       *       *       *       *

The raft drifted down the river. Since the current was flowing in the
desired direction, there did not appear to be any need to use the poles,
and everyone sat or reclined as comfortably as possible in the
suffocating heat. The yellow haze had become so thick that they seemed
to be at the bottom of a custard cup.

[Illustration]

"I do hope we're heading the right way," Professor Bernardi said,
_although who knows what is right and what is wrong any more_?

"Perhaps we aren't," Mrs. Bernardi mused, stroking Algol, who had
crawled into her lap. "Perhaps we will go drifting along endlessly.
Every sixteen days, it will get dark and every sixteen days it will get
light, and meanwhile we will continue floating along, never going
anywhere, never getting anywhere, never seeing anything but haze and
raft and river and each other." Algol wheezed in his sleep.

"Nonsense!" Jrann-Pttt said rudely. "I have a compass. I know the
direction perfectly well."

"And yet you let us think we were wandering about blindly." Miss
Anspacher gave him a contemptuous look. The captain pressed her hand.

"Since you seem to breathe the same air and eat much the same food that
we do, Mr. Pitt," Mrs. Bernardi changed her tack, "I suppose we'll be
physically comfortable on your planet for the rest of our lives. Our
children will be born there and our children's children, and eventually
they'll forget all about Earth and think it was only a legend."

"But you did expect to settle permanently on Venus, didn't you?" the
vine asked, bewilderedly. "Or for a long visit, anyway. So I don't
really see that it makes much difference if you go to Jrann-Pttt's Alpha
Centauri place. So much nicer to be living with friends, I should
think."

"But Alpha Centauri is so very far away," Mrs. Bernardi sighed. "There
wouldn't be much chance of our ever getting back."

"Look!" Mortland exclaimed. "The river's branching. Which fork do we
take?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Jrann-Pttt, who had been dabbling his arms idly in the translucent
violet-blue water, withdrew them hastily as nine green eyes, obviously
belonging to the same individual, rose to the surface and regarded him
with more than casual interest. He consulted his compass. "Left."

"Contrarily!" the mosquito-bat suddenly squeaked, pointing a small rod
at his companions. "Rightward."

There was a stunned silence.

"Monster!" Mortland cried in reproach. "You can talk! How could you
deceive us like that?"

"Can talk," the creature retorted. "Me not intelligent life-form, ha!
Who talks last talks best. Have not linguistic facility of inferior
life-forms, but can communicate rudely in your language."

"Remember," Mortland cautioned, "there are ladies present."

"Have been lying low and laughing to self--ha, ha!--at witlessness of
lowerly life-forms."

"But why?" Mrs. Bernardi demanded distractedly. "Haven't we been kind to
you?"

"You be likewise well treated in our zoo," it assured her. "All of you.
Our zoo finest in Galaxy. And clean, too."

"Now really, sir, I must protest--" Professor Bernardi began, trying to
extricate a blaster unobtrusively from the pile of gear in which the
too-confident terrestrials had cached their weapons.

Monster gestured with his rod. "This is lethal weapon. Do not try
hindrancing me. Hate damage fine specimens. Captain, go rightward."

"Oh, is that so!" Greenfield retorted hotly. "Let me tell you, you--you
insect!"

"George!" Miss Anspacher clutched his arm. "Do what it says. For my
sake, George!"

"Oh, all right," he muttered. "Just for you, then. Told you not to trust
any of 'em," he went on, reluctantly poling the raft in the ordered
direction. "Foreigners!"

"Fine zoo," the mosquito-bat insisted. "Very clean. Run with utmost
efficientness. Strict visiting hours."

       *       *       *       *       *

"And there goes Plan D," the vine said lightly. There was a hint of
laughter in its voice. Jrann-Pttt stared at it in consternation. "Are
you also from the Alpha Centauri system, sir?" It turned its attention
to the mosquito-bat. "Naturally I'm curious to know where I'm going," it
explained, "since I seem definitely to be included in your gracious
invitation."

"Alpha Centauri, hah!" the mosquito-bat snorted. "I from what Earthlets
laughingly term Sirius. Alpha Centauri merely little star."

"Now see here!" Jrann-Pttt sprang to his feet. Criminal he might be, but
he was not going to sit there and have his sun insulted!

"Gentlemen! Gentlemen!" Miss Anspacher cried. "No use getting yourself
killed, Jrann-Pttt!"

"Correctly," Monster approved. "Elementary intelligence displayed. Why
damage fine specimens?"

_From one prison into another_, the saurian mentalized bitterly.

_Yes_, returned Dfar-Lll, _and it's all your fault._ The junior lizard
burst into tears. _I wish I had let Merglyt-Ruuu do what he wanted. I
would have been better off._

"Sirius," the vine repeated. "That's even farther away than Alpha
Centauri, isn't it? I never thought I would get that far away from the
swamp! This really will be an adventure!"

"How do you know--" Professor Bernardi began.

"Frankly," it went on, "I don't see why you chaps are so put out by the
whole thing. What's the difference between Alpha Centauri and Sirius
anyway? Matter of a few light-years, but otherwise a star's a star for
all that."

"To Jrann-Pttt, we wouldn't have been specimens," Mrs. Bernardi said,
belatedly recognizing the advantages of Alpha Centauri.

"No, not specimens," the vine told her easily. "I don't suppose you know
he had no intention of taking you back to his system. He wanted you to
help him kill the officers of his ship so they couldn't look for him and
the other escaped prisoner or report back to his planet. Then he was
going to put the ship out of commission and found his own colony here
with you as his slaves. I'd just as soon be a specimen as a slave.
Sooner. Better to reign in a zoo than serve in a swamp!"

"Just how do you know all this?" Miss Anspacher demanded.

"It's obvious enough," Bernardi said gloomily. "Another telepath." _How
can we compete or even cope with creatures like these? What a fool I
was to think I could outwit them._

"Telepathy just tricksomeness," the mosquito-bat put in jealously. "I
have no telepathy, yet superior to all."

"But why should Mr. Pitt want to kill his officers?" Mrs. Bernardi asked
querulously. "He's the commandant, isn't he? Or is he a professor? I
never got that straight."

"He was one of the criminals on the ship," the vine told her. "What you
might call a confidence man. This is about the only system in the Galaxy
where he isn't wanted. He did tell you the truth, though, when he said
they were sent on an expedition to collect zoological specimens.
Dangerous work," it sighed, "and so his people use criminals for it.
They were sent out in small detachments. Our friend here killed his
guard in a fight over a female prisoner, which was why--"

"But what happened to the female prisoner?" Miss Anspacher's eye caught
Dfar-Lll's. "Oh, no!" she gasped.

"Why not?" Dfar-Lll demanded. "I'm as much of a female as you are. Maybe
even more."

The captain leaned close to Miss Anspacher. "No one can be more feminine
than you are, Dolores," he whispered.

"But he--she's so young!" Mrs. Bernardi wailed.

The vine made an amused sound. "Don't you have juvenile delinquents on
Earth?"

"Oh, what does all that matter now?" Jrann-Pttt said sullenly. "We're
all going to a Sirian zoo, anyway."

"Correctly," approved the monster-bat. "Finest zoo. Clean. Commodious
cages. Reasonable visiting hours. Very nice."

Mrs. Bernardi began to cry.

"Now," the vine comforted her, "a zoo's not so bad. After all, most of
us spend our lives in cages of one kind or another, and without the
basic security a zoo affords--"

"But we don't know we're in cages," Mrs. Bernardi sobbed. "That's the
important thing."

Professor Bernardi looked at the vine. "But why are you--" he began,
then halted. "Perhaps I don't want an answer," he said. There was no
hope at all left in him, now that there was no doubt.

"You are wise," the vine agreed quietly. Algol arose from Mr. Bernardi's
lap and rubbed against its thick pale green stem. He knew. The
mosquito-bat looked at both of them restlessly.

The yellow haze had deepened to old gold. Now it was beginning to turn
brown.

"It's twilight," Miss Anspacher observed. "Soon it will be dark."

"Perhaps we'll sail right past his ship in the night," Mortland
suggested hopefully.

The mosquito-bat gave a snort. "Ship has lights. All modern
convenients."

Suddenly the air seemed to have grown chilly--colder than it had any
right to be on that torrid planet. All around them, it was dark and very
quiet.

"I think I do see lights," Mortland said.

"Must be ship," Monster replied. And somehow the rest of them could
sense the uneasiness in the thin, piping, alien voice. "Must be!"

"Your ship's a very large one then," Bernardi commented as they rounded
a bend and a whole colony of varicolored pastel lights sprang up ahead
of them.

"Not my ship!" the mosquito-bat exclaimed in a voice pierced with
anguish. "Not my ship!"

Before them rose the fantastic, twisting, convoluting, turning spires of
a tall, marvelous, glittering city.

"You will find that the streets actually are filled with chlorophyll,"
the vine said. "And I know you'll be happy here, all of you. You see, we
can't have you going back to your planets now. No matter how good your
intentions were, you'd destroy us. You do see that, don't you?"

"You may be right," Bernardi agreed dispiritedly, "although that doesn't
cheer us any. But what will you do with us?"

"You'll be provided with living quarters comparable to those on your own
planets," the vine told him, "and you'll give lectures just as if you
were in a university--only you'll be much more secure. I assure you--"
its voice was very gentle now--"you'll hardly know you're in a zoo."






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Collector's Item, by Evelyn E. Smith

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK COLLECTOR'S ITEM ***

***** This file should be named 31686.txt or 31686.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/1/6/8/31686/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
