The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Water Eater, by Win Marks

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Water Eater

Author: Win Marks

Illustrator: Balbalis

Release Date: March 31, 2010 [EBook #31841]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE WATER EATER ***




Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net






                         Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from Galaxy Science Fiction June 1953.
    Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed.


                           the water eater


                             By WIN MARKS


                       Illustrated by BALBALIS


     _Most experiments were dropped because they failed--and some
      because they worked too well!_

       *       *       *       *       *




I just lost a weekend. I ain't too anxious to find it. Instead, I sure
wish I had gone fishing with McCarthy and the boys like I'd planned.

I drive a beer truck for a living, but here it is almost noon Monday
and I haven't turned a wheel. Sure, I get beer wholesale, and I have
been known to take some advantage of my discount. But that wasn't what
happened to this weekend.

Instead of fishing or bowling or poker or taking the kids down to the
amusement park over Saturday and Sunday, I've been losing sleep over
an experiment.

Down at the Elks' Club, the boys say that for a working stiff I have a
very inquiring mind. I guess that's because they always see me reading
_Popular Science_ and _Scientific American_ and such, instead of
heading for the stack of _Esquires_ that are piled a foot deep in the
middle of the big table in the reading room, like the rest of them do.

Well, it was my inquiring mind that lost me my wife, the skin of my
right hand, a lot of fun and sleep--yeah, not a wink of sleep for two
days now! Which is the main reason I'm writing this down now. I've
read somewheres that if you wrote down your troubles, you could get
them out of your system.

I thought I had troubles Friday night when I pulled into the driveway
and Lottie yelled at me from the porch, "The fire's out! And it's
flooded. Hurry up!"

Trouble, hah! That was just the beginning.

       *       *       *       *       *

Lottie is as cute a little ex-waitress as ever flipped the suds off a
glass of beer, but she just ain't mechanically minded. The day Uncle
Alphonse died and left us $2500 and I went out and bought a kitchen
and shed full of appliances for her, that was a sad day, all right.
She has lived a fearful life ever since, too proud of her dishwasher
and automatic this and that to consider selling them, but scared stiff
of the noises they make and the vibrations and all the mysterious
dials and lights, etc.

So this Friday afternoon when the oil-burner blew out from the high
wind, she got terrified, sent the kids over to their grandmother's in
a cab and sat for two hours trying to make up her mind whether to call
the fire department or the plumber.

Meanwhile, this blasted oil stove was overflowing into the fire pot.

"Well, turn it off!" I yelled. "I'll be in right away!"

I ducked into the garage and got a big handful of rags and a hunk of
string and a short stick. This I have been through before. I went in
and kissed her pretty white face, and a couple of worry lines
disappeared.

"Get me a pan or something," I said and started dismantling the front
of the heater.

These gravity-flow oil heaters weren't built to make it easy to drain
off excess oil. There's a brass plug at the inlet, but no one in
history has been able to stir one, the oil man told me. I weigh 200
pounds stripped, but all I ever did was ruin a tool trying.

The only way to get out the oil was to open the front, stuff rags down
through the narrow fire slot, sop up the stuff and fish out the rags
with the string tied around one end of the bundle. Then you wring out
the rags with your bare hands into a pan.

"Hey, Lottie," I yelled, "this is your roaster! It'll be hard to
clean out the oil smell!"

But, of course, it was too late. I had squeezed a half-pint of oil
into it already. So I went on dunking and wringing and thinking how
lousy my cigarettes were going to taste all evening and feeling glad
that I delivered beer instead of oil for a living.

       *       *       *       *       *

I got the stove bailed out and lit with only one serious blast of soot
out the "Light Here" hole. Then I dumped the oil out in the alley and
set the roaster pan in the sink. Lottie was peeling potatoes for
dinner, and she snuggled her yellow curls on my shoulder kind of
apologetically for the mess she had caused me. I scrubbed the soot and
oil off my hands and told her it was all right, only next time, for
gosh sakes, please turn the stove off at least.

The water I was splashing into the roaster gathered up in little
shrinking drops and reminded me that the pig-hocks I brought home for
Sunday dinner were going to rate throwing out unless we got the oil
smell out of the pan.

"Tell you what you do," I said to Lottie. "Get me all your cleaning
soaps and stuff and let's see what we got."

Lottie is always trying out some new handy-dandy little kitchen helper
compound, so she hefted up quite an armload. Now, when I was in high
school, I really liked chemistry. "Charlie, Boy Scientist," my pals
used to sneer at me. But I was pretty good at it, and I been reading
the science magazines right along ever since. So I know what a
detergent is supposed to do, and all about how soaps act, and stuff
that most people take the advertisers' word for.

"This one," I told Lottie, "has a lot of caustic in it, see?"

She nodded and said that's the one that ruined her aluminum coffee
pot. She remembered it specially.

I poured some very hot tap water into the roaster and shook in the
strong soap powder. "This is to saponify the oil," I explained.

"What's saponify?" Lottie asked.

"That means to make soap. Soap is mainly a mixture of some caustic
with fat or oil. It makes sudsy soap."

"But we got soap," she said. "Why don't you just use the soap we got?"

We went into the business of soap-making pretty deep. Meanwhile, I
read some more labels and added pinches of this and that detergent and
a few squirts of liquid "wonder-cleaners" that didn't say what was in
them.

In her crisp Scotch way, Lottie got across to me that she thought I
was wasting soap powder and my time and cluttering up the sink while
she was busy there, so I wound up with half a cup of Doozey soap
flakes, filled the pan to the brim and set the concoction at the back
of the drain board to do its business.

       *       *       *       *       *

When dinner was over, I was in the living room reading the paper when
I heard Lottie muttering at the sink. Lottie doesn't usually mutter,
so I went out to see what was wrong.

"Nice mess," she said and pointed at the roaster. The stuff had cooled
and jelled into a half-solid condition.

"Hah!" I said. "We had a supersaturated solution. When it cooled off,
it coagulated."

Lottie scowled. It makes her nervous when I use big words which I only
do when I'm talking about chemistry and the like.

"Well, uncoogalate it and dump it out of my roaster," she told me.

My scientific inquiring mind was stirred as I lifted the pan over to
the table under the center light. We had here a gelatin of various
cleaners, and every one of them claiming to be best ever. What would
this new combination do?

I grabbed a pan off the stove that had a mess of scorched carrot
leavings in the bottom. Lottie had been soaking it with about a half
inch of water. As I reached for a tablespoon, Lottie objected. "Look,
now, if you are going to start another _experiment_, dump that mess
out first and let me work on the roaster."

I saved about a cupful of the slimy gunk and she went back to her
dishes.

"You'll be sorry," I said under my breath, "if this turns out to be
the only batch of the finest cleaner in the whole world. And us with
only a cupful."

A minute later, I was glad she hadn't heard me. When I dropped a
little glob of the stuff into the carrot pan and stirred it around a
bit, instead of dissolving and diluting in the extra water, the
mixture seemed to stay the same density after swallowing up the water.

"Give me a pie tin," I demanded.

Lottie sighed, but she got a shallow pan out of the pantry and handed
it to me. Then I poured the jelly out of the carrot pan and I made my
first important discovery.

The stuff was not good for cleaning out scorched carrots.

The pot was bone-dry. So were the carrots. They had a desiccated look
and were stuck worse than ever to the bottom. I brushed them with my
finger and the top layers powdered to dust. Then I noticed that not a
droplet or smidgin of the jelly remained in the pot. When I had poured
it out, it had gone out all at the same time, as if it was trying to
hang together.

The carbonized carrots at the very bottom were hard and dry, too. A
scrape job if I ever saw one.

       *       *       *       *       *

The pie tin was now full almost to the rim. The globby stuff sort of
rolled around, trying to find a flat condition, which it finally did.
The motion was not as startling as the sudden quiet that settled over
the surface after a last ripple.

The stuff looked like it was waiting.

The temptation was worse than a park bench labeled "wet paint," so I
stuck my finger in it. Right in the middle of it.

A ripple flashed out from the center like when you drop a pebble in a
pool, and the ripple hit the brim and converged back to my finger.
When it hit, the surface climbed up my finger about an eighth of an
inch. Another ripple, another eighth of an inch, and about now I felt
something like a gentle sucking sensation. Also, another feeling I can
only tell you was "unclammy."

I jerked away fast and shook my finger hard over the pan, but it
wasn't necessary. None of the stuff had stayed with me. In fact, my
finger was dry--powdery dry!

Then I got the feeling that someone was staring over my shoulder.
There was. It was Lottie, and she had a look of horror on her face
that didn't help my nerves a bit.

"Get rid of it, Charlie!" she cried. "Get rid of it! Please throw it
out!"

"Now, now, honey," I said. "It ain't alive."

"It is!" she insisted.

Lottie chatters quite a bit and pretty well speaks her mind. But she
doesn't go around making assertions. When she does come out
flat-footed with a serious statement, it is always from the bottom of
her 22-carat womanly intuition, and she is practically always right.

"How could it be alive?" I argued. I often argue when I know I'm
wrong. This time I argued because I wanted to wipe that awful look off
my wife's face. "Come on in the living room and relax," I said.

       *       *       *       *       *

And then sweet-natured, honey-haired little Lottie did a violent
thing. Still staring over my shoulder at the pie tin, she screamed
wide-open and ran out of the house. A second later, I heard her start
the car out the driveway at 30 miles an hour in reverse. She burned
rubber out in front and was gone.

I hadn't moved an inch. Because when she screamed, I looked back at
the jelly to see why, and the stuff had oozed over the edge and was
flowing slowly toward me.

I know a little about Korzybski and how he wanted everybody to make
what he called a cortico-thalamic pause whenever they get scared as
hell. So I was making this cortico-thalamic pause, which is really
counting to ten before you do anything, while Lottie was leaving the
house. When I got through with my pause, I jumped backward over my
kitchen chair so hard that I must have knocked my head on the tile
sink-board.

When I came to, it was after midnight. The kitchen light was still on.
Lottie was still gone. I knew it. If she was here, she'd have had me
in bed. No matter how much of my employer's product I have sampled,
never has Lottie let me sleep it off on the kitchen floor. Her 110
pounds is a match for my 200 in more ways than one, and she takes good
care of her man.

Then I realized that this was not a stag beer-bust. There was
something about a pot of soap-jelly.

It was still there. A long slug of the half-transparent stuff had
strung down off the edge of the table and still hung there like a
nasty-looking icicle.

The knob on the back of my head throbbed so much that at first I
couldn't figure what was wrong with the air. Then my aching dry throat
told me what the matter was. The air was dry like the summer we spent
at a dude ranch in Arizona. It made my nostrils crimp, and my tongue
felt like a mouthful of wrinkled pepperoni.

When I got to my feet and looked at the top of the kitchen table, I
almost panicked again. But this time the pause worked and I got better
results.

Alive or dead, the gunk was the most powerful desiccant I'd ever heard
of. It had drunk up the water in the carrot pot, sucked the surface
moisture from my finger and then spent the past few hours feeding on
the humidity in the air.

It was thirsty. Like alcohol has affinity for water, this stuff was
the same way, only more so. In fact, it even reached out toward
anything that had water in it--like me.

That's why it had oozed over the pan the way it did.

       *       *       *       *       *

What's so frightening about that, I asked myself. Plants grow toward
water.

[Illustration]

But plants are alive!

That's what Lottie had said--before she screamed.

"So you're thirsty?" I asked it out loud. "Okay, we'll give you a
_real_ drink!"

I got a bucket from the service porch and took the pancake turner to
scrape the gooey nightmare into it. I even caught the drip off the
edge, and it seemed quietly grateful to sink back to the parent glob
in the pail, which by now amounted to about a quart.

I set the pail in the laundry tray and turned on the faucet hard. In
about a second and a half, I almost sprained my wrist turning it off.
Not only did the jelly drink up the water without dissolving, but it
started creeping up the stream in a column about three inches in
diameter, with the water pouring down its middle.

When I got the water shut off, the unholy jelly-spout slopped back
disappointedly.

And now the bucket was over half full of the stuff.

I dropped in an ice-cube as an experiment. It didn't even splash. The
surface pulled away, letting the cube make a pretty good dent in it,
but then only gradually did the displaced goo creep back around it as
if to sample it cautiously.

I couldn't stand the dry air any more, so I threw open the doors and
windows and let the cool, damp night air come in. The ice-cube had
disappeared without even a surface puddle. Now, as the humidity came
back, I thought I noticed a restless shimmering in the jelly.

The phone rang. It was Lottie's mother wanting to know why Lottie had
come over there in hysterics, and where had I been since seven
o'clock. I don't remember what I answered, but it served the purpose.
Lottie hasn't returned and they haven't called up any more.

When I returned to the bucket, it seemed that the stuff was deeper
yet, but I couldn't tell because I hadn't marked the level. I got
Lottie's fever thermometer out of the medicine chest and took the
jelly's temperature. It read 58 degrees F. The wall thermometer read
58 degrees, too. Room temperature, with the windows open. What kind of
"life" could this be that had no temperature of its own?

But then what kind of a fancy-pants metabolism could you expect out of
an organism that fed on nothing but Lake Michigan water, right out of
the reservoir?

       *       *       *       *       *

I got a pencil and notebook out of Lottie's neat little desk and
started making notes.

I wondered about the density of the stuff. Ice floated in it and the
bucket seemed heavy. I broke the thermometer and tapped a drop of
mercury onto the restless surface. The droplet sank slowly to the
bottom with no apparent effect either way.

Heavier than water. Lighter than mercury.

I took a beer out of the refrigerator and swallowed it. The last drops
I sprinkled into the pail. The drippings sizzled across the surface
until only a fine dust was left. A tiny ripple flipped this dust over
to the edge of the pail as if clearing the thirsty decks for action.
But this drew my eyes to the rim of the liquid. There was no meniscus,
either up or down.

Remembering back, I figured this meant there was no surface tension,
which reminded me that part of this mixture was made of detergent.

But had I created a new form of life? Like Lottie said, was it really
alive? Certainly it could reproduce itself. It had brains enough to
know the direction of more water, like when it took off after me on
the table.

Not long ago, there was this important physicist who wrote about how
life probably got started away back when the Earth was just forming.
He argued that special creation was more or less a lot of hogwash, and
that what actually took place was that as the Earth cooled, all the
hot chemicals mixing around sort of stumbled onto a combination or two
that took on the first characteristics of life.

In other words, this guy left off where Mr. Darwin began his theory of
evolution.

Now me, I don't know. Lottie makes me go to church with the kids every
Sunday and I like it. If this chemical theory about life getting
started is right--well, then, a lot of people got the wrong idea about
things, I always figured.

But how would I or this physicist explain this quivering mess of
protoplasm I got on my hands by accident this particular Friday night?

I experimented some more. I got out the kids' junior encyclopedia and
looked up some things I'd forgot, and some I had never learned in the
first place.

       *       *       *       *       *

So it got to be Saturday morning. Fred and Claude phoned about the
fishing trip and I made an excuse. No one else bothered me. All day
Saturday, I studied. And all Saturday night and Sunday. But I couldn't
figure out any sensible answers that would make peace with my
minister.

It looked like I had created some form of life. Either that or some
life-form in the stove oil that had been asleep a billion years had
suddenly found a condition to its liking and had decided to give up
hibernating in favor of reproduction.

What drove me on was the thought that I must have something here that
was commercially important--a new culture of something that would
revolutionize some branch of chemistry or biology. I wouldn't even
stop to fry an egg. I chewed up some crackers and drank a few more
bottles of beer when my stomach got too noisy. I wasn't sleepy,
although my eyes felt like they were pushed four inches into my skull.

Junior's little chemistry set didn't tell me very much when I made the
few tests I knew how. Litmus paper remained either red or blue when
stuck into the jelly. This surprised me a little because this whole
mass of de-sudsed washing compound mixture had started out with a
pretty good shot of lye in it.

So my notes grew, but my useful information didn't. By midnight
Sunday, it appeared that my jelly invention had only one important
talent: The ability to drink endlessly anything containing water. And
only the water was used, it seemed. Dissolved solids were cast aside
in the form of variously colored dusts.

By now, the goop had outgrown the pail and was two-thirds up in the
laundry tub. A slow drip from the faucet kept the surface of my
monster in a constant state of frenzy, like feeding a rumpot beer by
the thimbleful.

It was fascinating to watch the little curleycues of jelly flip up
after each drop, reaching for more, and then falling back with a
cranky little lash.

       *       *       *       *       *

At two o'clock this morning, I began to get a little sense in me. Or
maybe it was just the fear finally catching up again.

_There was danger here._

I was too fuzzy to know exactly what the danger was, but I began to
develop a husky hate for the whole project.

"Kill it!" came into my mind. "Get rid of it, Charlie!"

Lottie's scream shrilled back into my ears, and this command became
very important to me. I became angry.

"Want a drink, do you?" I shouted out loud. I put on the tea kettle
and when it was to full steam, I took it back to the tub. "I'll give
you a drink with a kick in it!"

What happened, I would like to forget. Ten times as fast as it had
climbed up the cold water spout, it ran up the boiling water stream,
into the tea kettle, blew off the lid and swarmed over my hand with a
scalding-dry slither that made me drop the kettle into the tub and
scream with pain.

The jelly steamed and stuck to my flesh long enough to sear it half to
the bone. Then it slopped back with the rest and left me grabbing my
wrist and tearing at the flesh with my finger-nails to stop the pain.

Then I got insane mad. I got my big blowtorch I use for peeling paint,
and I lit it and pumped it up as high as it would go and aimed it down
into that tub.

Not too much happened. The jelly shrank away from the roaring blast,
but it didn't climb over the edge of the tub. It shrank some more and
I poured the flame on.

It didn't burn. It just got to be less and less, and what was left
began to get cloudy. And when I hit the bottom of the tub, the last
glob moved around pretty active, trying to escape the heat, but I got
it. Every damned last shred of it, and I was laughing and crying when
I dropped the torch into the tub. I had been holding it with my
scalded hand and I guess I fainted.

I wasn't out long. I got up and dressed my hand with lard, and it felt
pretty good. Took a couple of aspirins and sat down at Lottie's
typewriter. I know I won't sleep until I get this off my mind in about
the way it happened, because I probably won't believe all of it myself
when I get back to normal.

I just now went out and fished the blowtorch out of the laundry tub.
All there was left in the bottom of the tub was maybe half a pound of
singed-looking--soap flakes?

       *       *       *       *       *

There, I've finished writing this all down. But I'm still not sleepy.
I'm not worried about patching things up with Lottie. She's the most
wonderful, understanding wife a guy ever had.

My hand feels real good now. I got it wrapped in lard and gauze, and I
could drive the truck if I wanted to.

I'm not afraid of getting fired or bawled out for not coming to work
on time this morning.

No, the reason I haven't turned a wheel on my beer truck today is
something else.

Friday night, when Lottie wanted to wash the roaster, I saved only a
cup of the jelly for my experiments. The rest she washed down the
drain.

The sewer empties into Lake Michigan.

The brewery where I load up is right on the shore of Lake Michigan.

I'm afraid to drive down there and look.

--WIN MARKS

       *       *       *       *       *







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Water Eater, by Win Marks

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE WATER EATER ***

***** This file should be named 31841.txt or 31841.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/1/8/4/31841/

Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
