The Project Gutenberg EBook of Thompson's Cat, by Robert Moore Williams

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Thompson's Cat

Author: Robert Moore Williams

Release Date: April 11, 2010 [EBook #31948]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THOMPSON'S CAT ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                              THOMPSON'S CAT

                         By ROBERT MOORE WILLIAMS

[Transcriber Note: This etext was produced from Planet Stories September
1952. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
copyright on this publication was renewed.]


[Sidenote: _The weird, invisible insect depopulated an entire planet.
Now it was felling Thompson's crew as his ship hurtled toward the
sun ... certain death for all, including the disease carrier. Forgotten
in the panic was Buster, Thompson's wise cat._]


"It's a dead world," Thompson spoke. There was awe in his voice, and in
spite of his sure knowledge that nothing could happen to him or to his
crew here on this world, there was also somewhere inside of him the
trace of a beginning fear.

Standing beside him on the rooftop of the building, Kurkil spoke in a
whisper, asking a question that had been better unasked. "What killed
it?"

Thompson stirred fretfully. He hadn't wanted to hear this question, he
didn't want to hear it now. His gaze went automatically to the trim
lines of the space cruiser resting quietly in the square below the
building. His spirits lifted at the sight. That was his ship, he was in
charge of this far-flung exploring expedition thrown out from Sol
Cluster to the fringes of the universe, thrown out by Earth-sired races
beginning their long exploration of the mysteries of space and of the
worlds of space. There was pride in the sight of the ship and pride in
the thought of belonging to this space-ranging race. Then his gaze went
over the deserted city radiating in all directions from them and he was
aware again of the touch of fear.

Resolutely he turned the feeling out of his mind, began seeking an
answer to Kurkil's question.

This place had been a city once. If you counted buildings and streets,
tall structures where people might work quietly and effectively, broad
avenues leading out to trim homes where they might rest in peace after
their labors of the day, if you counted these things as being important,
it was still a city. But if you thought that the important element in
the make-up of a city was its inhabitants then this place no longer
deserved the name.

It had no inhabitants.

"I don't know what killed it," Thompson said. Before landing they had
circled this world. From the air they had seen more than a dozen cities
such as this one. All of them dead, all of them deserted, all of them
with streets overgrown by shrubbery, the pavements buckling from the
simple pressure of roots pushing upward, the buildings falling away into
ruin for the same reason. But they had seen no inhabitants. They had
seen the roads the inhabitants had built to connect their cities,
deserted now. They had seen the fields where these people had once
worked, fields that now were turning back into forests. They had seen no
evidence of landing fields for air craft or space ships. The race that
had built the cities had not yet learned the secret of wings.

From the roof of the building where they stood, the only living
creatures to be seen were visible through the plastic viewport of the
ship below them--Grant, the communication specialist, and Buster, the
ship's cat.

Grant had been left to guard the vessel. Buster had been required to
remain within the ship, obviously against his will. He had wanted to
come with Thompson. A trace of a grin came to Thompson's face at the
sight of the cat. He and Buster were firm mutual friends.

"I don't like this place," Kurkil spoke suddenly. "We shouldn't have
landed here."

Kurkil paused, then his voice came again, stronger now, and with
overtones of fear in it. "There's death here." He slapped at his arm,
stared around him.

"What happened?"

"Something bit me." He showed the back of his hand. A tiny puncture was
visible.

"Some insect," Thompson said. The matter of an insect bite was of no
concern. Kurkil, and every other member of this expedition, were
disease-proof. Back in Sol Cluster vaccines and immunizing agents had
been developed against every known or conceivable form of germ or virus.
Each member of the crew had been carefully immunized. In addition, they
had been proofed against stress, against mounting neural pressure
resulting from facing real or imaginary danger.

Barring space collision or an accident on a world they were exploring,
nothing could happen to them.

"We checked the air, took soil and vegetation samples, before we
landed," Thompson said. "There is nothing here that is harmful to a
human." There was comfort in the thought.

Kurkil brightened perceptibly. "But, what happened to the race that
built this city?"

"I don't know," Thompson answered. A tinge of gruffness crept into his
voice as he forced out of his mind the memories of what they had seen in
this building they had entered and had climbed. This had once been an
office building, a place where the unknown people who had worked here
had handled their business transactions and had kept their records. They
had seen no bookkeeping machines, none of the elaborate mechanical
devices used in Sol Cluster to record the pulse of commerce. This race
had not progressed that far. But they had left behind them books written
in an unintelligible script, orders for merchandise still neatly
pigeonholed, all in good order with no sign of disturbance.

The workers might have left these offices yesterday, except for the
carpets of dust that covered everything.

"There isn't even any animal life left," Kurkil spoke.

"I know."

"But what happened? A race that has progressed to the city-building
stage doesn't just get wiped out without leaving some indication of what
happened to them."

"Apparently they did just that."

"But it's not possible."

"It happened."

"But--"

"There's Neff," Thompson spoke. Far down the avenue below them, three
figures had appeared, Neff, Fortune, and Ross. Neff tall and slender,
Fortune round like a ball, and Ross built square like a block of
concrete. Neff saw them on top of the building and beckoned to them.
There was urgency in the gesture.

"They've found something," Thompson said. With Kurkil following him he
went hastily out of the building.

"What is it?"

"Come and see," Neff answered. Neff's face was gray. Fortune and Ross
were silent.

The building in front of which they were standing had been a house once.
The architecture resembled nothing they had ever seen on Earth but the
purpose of the structure was obvious. Here somebody had lived. Thompson
tried to imagine people living here, the husband coming home in the
evening to the dinner prepared by the wife, kids running to meet him.
His imagination failed.

"Back here," Neff said.

They went around what had been a house into what had been a garden of
some kind, a quiet nook where a family might sprawl in peace. "There,"
Neff said pointing.

The three skeletons were huddled together in an alcove in front of what
had once been a shrine. They lay facing the shrine as if they had died
praying. Above them in a niche in a wall was--

"An idol," Kurkil whispered.

"They died praying to their god," Thompson said. He was not aware that
he had spoken. Three skeletons....

The bones indicated a creature very similar to the human in structure. A
large, a middle-sized, and a small skeleton.

"We think the small one is that of a child," Ross spoke. "We think this
was a family."

"I see," Thompson said. "Did you find other skeletons?"

"Many others. We found them almost everywhere but usually tucked away in
corners, as if the people had tried to hide from something." His voice
went suddenly into uneasy silence.

"Any indication as to the cause of death?"

"None. It apparently came on quite suddenly. We judge that the
inhabitants had some warning. At least we do not seem to find enough
skeletons for a city of this size, so we estimate that part of the
population fled, or tried to."

"I see," Thompson repeated tonelessly. He caught a vague impression that
something had passed before his eyes, like a darting flicker of light,
and he caught, momentarily, a fast rustle in the air, as of souls
passing. His mind was on the flight of this race, the mass hegira they
had attempted in an effort to escape from some menace. What menace?
"What do you think caused it?"

Ross shrugged, a gesture eloquent with a lack of knowledge and of
understanding. "War--"

"No wars were fought on this planet," Neff spoke quickly. "These cities
show no evidence of conflict."

"Um," Thompson said. The four men were looking uneasily at him. They
were waiting for him to make up his mind, to decide on a course of
action.

Thompson did not like his own thinking. Something--the blood-brother of
death--had been here on this planet, that much was certain. The evidence
was everywhere.

"We will return to the ship," Thompson said.

Grant saw them coming, had the lock open for them. His worried face
looked out at them. "What gives here?"

"We don't know," Thompson answered. The cat, Buster, pushed forward
between Grant's legs, took a long leap at Thompson's chest, made a
twenty-claw safe landing there. "Hi, old fellow, were you worried about
me?"

They passed through the lock. "Take her up," Thompson said. "We need a
little time to think about this enigma. Maybe we can think better when
we're not so close to it."

At his words, relief showed on the faces of the men. "Maybe sometime
soon we'll be heading for home?" Kurkil spoke, grinning hopefully.

"You can be certain of that," Thompson said.

       *       *       *       *       *

The ship lifted, hung miles high in the air above the silent planet. The
group considered the problem.

"I vote to make a complete investigation," Grant said. He was full of
eager enthusiasm. "There was a race here. Something happened to it.
We've got to find out what happened because--" He got no further. Slowly
the enthusiasm went from his face. "No, that's not possible," he ended.

"There's no danger of the virus that destroyed this race crossing space
to Sol Cluster," Kurkil spoke. "The distance is too great."

"The distance wasn't too great for us to cross it," Fortune spoke.

"Please," Thompson interrupted. "We can't use logic on this situation
until we have adequate data. The only data we have--" His voice trailed
off into silence as his memory presented him with a facsimile of that
data--silent, deserted cities, a world going back to vegetation, three
skeletons in front of a shrine.

Abruptly he reached a decision. It was impulsive. "Our tour of
exploration is near an end anyhow. We're leaving. We're heading back to
Sol Cluster. We'll mark this planet on the star maps for further
exploration."

The face of every man present brightened as he made the announcement.
Sol Cluster! Home! The green world of Earth across the depths of space.
In even the thought there was almost enough magic to wipe out the fear
of what they'd seen back there on the deserted planet.

Less than an hour later, the drone of the drivers picked up as the ship,
already set on course, began to accelerate in preparation for the jump
into hyper-flight. Thompson was in his cabin making a final check of the
machine-provided flight data. Buster was in his lap half-asleep.
Suddenly the cat jumped from his lap and seemed to pounce on some
elusive prey in the room. The cat caught what it was seeking, its jaws
crunched, it swallowed.

Thompson stared at the cat from disbelieving eyes. "Buster, are you
dreaming? Did you dream there was a mouse in here?"

The cat meowed, came toward him, jumped again into his lap and went back
to sleep. Thompson returned to his figures. They were correct.

Over the ship's communication system came the soft throb of a gong. The
warning that the jump was coming. In his lap, Buster awakened, instantly
sank twenty claws into Thompson's clothing. Thompson reached out and
took a firm grip on the hand holds on his desk, began to breathe deeply.
The gong sounded again. Final warning that the ship was going into
hyper-flight. Thompson took as deep a breath as possible, held it.

The gong went into silence. The ship throbbed. The jump was in progress.
Thompson had the dazed impression that every atom in his body tried to
turn over at once. For a moment, there was a feeling of intense strain.
Then the feeling was gone as the ship and its contents passed into
hyper-flight. Thompson began to breathe again. In his lap, Buster
relaxed his claw holds, began to purr. Buster was an old hand at taking
these jumps.

"EEEEEEyooow!"

The eerie scream that came echoing through the ship seemed to lift up
every single strand of hair on Thompson's head. Thompson ran out of the
cabin. The scream came again, from the lounge. Thompson entered the
lounge just in time to see Kurkil standing in the middle of the room,
rip the last remnant of clothing from his body. Revealed under the
lights, his skin was turning a vivid green.

Fortune was trying to approach him. Kurkil was warning the man off.

"Stay away, stay away. Don't touch me. You'll get it."

In the split second that was needed for Thompson to take in the
situation, the green color flowing over Kurkil's body deepened in
intensity.

As the color deepened, the screams bubbling on his lips began to die
away. He fell slowly, like a man who is coming unhinged one joint at a
time.

He was dead before he hit the floor. Dead so completely that not even a
convulsive tremor passed through his body.

A frozen silence held the lounge. For this was a dream, a nightmare,
wild, distorted imagery.

Fortune's hand waved vaguely in the direction of Sol Cluster. "It looks
as if we're not as bug and stress proof as they said we were."

"What happened?"

"He was sitting there in the chair and I thought he was asleep. Then he
was screaming and tearing his clothes off." Ross spread his hands. "I
tried to help--"

"I know," Thompson said. He was trying to decide what to do. This ship
possessed no facilities for handling the dead. Such a contingency had
been thought too remote for consideration. Well, there was the ejection
port. "Get sheets," Thompson said. With Fortune and Ross helping, he set
about doing what had to be done.

       *       *       *       *       *

Later, in the lounge, they met to decide what had to be done. Neff,
leaving the drivers on automatic control, came up from the engine room.
Grant came forward from the control room. If any danger presented
itself, warning bells would call them back to their posts.

They were a silent and an uneasy group. Only Buster remained unaffected.

"There seems no doubt that we brought the infection back on board ship
with us," Thompson said.

He had stated the obvious. It got the answer it deserved. Silence.

"We also must consider the possibility that another of us, possibly all
of us, are infected."

No man stirred, no man spoke. Apparently they hoped they had not heard
correctly the words that had been spoken. In Thompson's lap Buster
grumbled as if he had understood and did not like what had been said.

"What are we going to do?"

"How can we find out what's causing this disease?"

Two voices came. Then came Fortune's voice. "And even if we find out,
what can we do about it? _They_ couldn't do anything about it."

"The fact that the race back there couldn't stop the disease, doesn't
mean we can't stop it. We're a different race with a different
metabolism and a different body structure--"

"Kurkil had the same metabolism and the same body structure," Ross said.

"We will do what we can," Thompson spoke flatly. In spite of the fact
that these men were supposed to be nerve proof, there was panic in the
air. He could sense it, knew that it had to be stopped before it got
started. Inwardly he cursed the fact that there was no doctor aboard,
but he knew only too well the line of reasoning that had led to the
omission of a physician.

"We have a medical library," Ross said, tentatively.

"Yes," Fortune spoke. "And it tells you exactly how to treat every
conceivable form of accident but it doesn't say a single damned word
about infections, and if it did we don't have any medicine to treat
them.

Again silence fell. In Thompson's lap, Buster squirmed, dropped to the
floor. Tail extended, body low, he moved across the plastic floor as if
he were stalking something that lay beyond the open door. "We'll
fumigate anyhow," Thompson said. "We'll scour the ship."

There was some relief in action. The clothing that had been worn by the
landing party went out through the ejection lock. Inside the ship, the
floors, walls, and ceilings were scoured by sweating men who worked
feverishly. Fumigants were spread in every room.

With the spreading of the fumigants, spirits began to rise, but even
then the signs of stress were still all too obvious. No one knew the
incubation period of the virus. Hours only had been needed to bring
Kurkil to his death. But days might pass before the virus developed in
its next victim.

Months or even years might pass before they were absolutely sure they
were free from any chance of infection.

By the time the ship reached Sol Cluster, and the automatic controls
stopped its hyper-flight, they might all be dead.

If that happened, the ship's controls would automatically stop its
flight. It would be picked up by the far-ranging screens of the space
patrol, a ship would be sent out to board it and bring it in.

At the thought of what would happen then, Thompson went hastily forward
to the control room. Grant, thin-lipped and nervous, was on duty there.
Thompson hastily began plotting a new course. Grant watched over his
shoulder.

"Make this change," Thompson said.

"But, Captain--" Grant protested. The man's face had gone utterly white
as he realized the implications of this new course. "No. We can't do
that. It'll mean--"

"I know what it will mean. And I'm in my right mind, I hope. This course
is a precaution, just in case nobody is left alive by the time we reach
Sol Cluster."

"But--"

"Make the change," Thompson ordered bluntly.

Reluctantly Grant fed the new course into the computers. A throb went
through the vessel as the ship shifted in response.

"We'll come out of hyper-flight in less than three hours," Grant spoke.
"Heaven help us if this course is not changed before that time."

"If this course is not changed before that time, Heaven alone can help
us. From now on, you're not to leave this control room for an instant."

"Yes, sir."

With Buster following behind him, Thompson left the control room.

"Yoooow!" The scream coming from the lounge this time was in a different
key and had a different sound. But the meaning was the same as it had
been when Kurkil had screamed. Thompson went forward on the run.

The victim was Ross. Like Kurkil, he was tearing his clothes off. Like
Kurkil, he was turning green. When he went down, he did not rise again.

As he stood staring down at Ross, Thompson had the vague impression of
whirring wings passing near him. Whispering wings, as if a soul were
taking flight.

From the engine room Neff appeared. "I heard somebody scream over the
intercom. Oh, I see." His face worked, his jaws moved as if he was
trying to speak. But no sound came.

Fortune emerged from his quarters to look down at Ross. "Our fumigating
didn't work, huh?"

"Maybe he caught the bug on the planet," Thompson said. He tried to put
conviction into his voice. The effort failed. "Get sheets," he said.

       *       *       *       *       *

There was no prayer. There was no burial ceremony. The body went through
the ejection port and disappeared in the vast depths of space.

Thompson returned to his cabin, slumped down at his desk, Fortune and
Neff following.

Buster meowed. "Okay, pal." The cat jumped into Thompson's lap.

"I guess there's not much point in trying to kid ourselves any longer,"
Fortune said. His voice was dull and flat, without tone and without
spirit. A muscle in Neff's cheek was twitching.

"I don't understand you," Thompson said.

"Hell, you understand me well enough. The facts are obvious. We've
either all got the virus, or it's here in the ship, and we will get it.
All we're doing is waiting to see who goes next. What I want to know
is--Who'll shove the last man through the ejection port?"

"I don't know," Thompson answered.

"Isn't there anything else we can do?" The tic in Neff's cheek was
becoming more pronounced.

"If there is, I don't know--What the hell, Buster?" The cat which had
been lying in his lap, suddenly leaped to the floor. Tail extended,
crouched, eyes alert, the cat seemed to be trying to follow the flight
of something through the air above him.

Very vaguely, very dimly, Thompson caught the rustle of wings.

The actions of the cat, and the sound, sent a wave of utter cold washing
over his body.

Before he could move, the cat leaped upward, caught something in
snapping jaws.

In the same split second Thompson moved. Before Buster had had time to
swallow, Thompson had caught him behind the jaws, forcing them shut. On
his desk was a bell jar. He lifted it, thrust the cat's head under it,
forced his thumb and forefinger against the jaws of the cat.

The outraged Buster disgorged something. Thompson jerked the cat's head
from under the jar, slammed down the rim. The angry cat snarled at him.
Neff and Fortune were staring at him from eyes that indicated they
thought he had lost his senses. Thompson paid them no attention. He was
too busy watching something inside the bell jar even to notice that they
existed.

He could not see the creature under the jar.

He knew it could fly but he did not know its shape or size. He could
hear it hitting the falls of the jar. And each time it hit the wall, a
tiny greenish smudge appeared at the point of impact.

"What--what the hell have you got there?" Neff whispered.

"I don't know for sure. But I think I've got the carrier of the virus."

"What?"

"Watch."

"I can't see anything."

"Nor can I yet, but I can hear it and I can see the places where it hits
the wall of the jar. There's something under the jar. Something that
Buster has been seeing all along."

"What?"

Thompson pointed at the jar. "One or several of those things came into
the ship when the lock was open. We couldn't see them, didn't know they
existed. But Buster saw them. He caught one of them in this cabin soon
after we took off. I thought he was playing a game to amuse himself,
or--" He broke off. From the back of his mind came a fragment of
history, now in the forgotten Dark Ages of Earth, whole populations had
been ravaged and destroyed by a fever that was carried by some kind of
an insect. Did they have some kind of an insect under his jar?

Holding his breath, Thompson watched.

The pounding against the walls of the jar was growing weaker. Then it
stopped. On the desk top, a smudge appeared. Wings quavered there, wings
that shifted through a range of rainbow colors as they became visible.

As the flutter of the wings stopped the whole creature became visible.
Made up of some kind of exceedingly thin tissue that was hardly visible,
it was about as big as a humming bird.

Silence held the room. Thompson was aware of his eyes coming to focus on
the long pointed bill of the creature.

"Alive it was not visible at all," Fortune whispered. "Dead, you can see
it." His voice lifted, picked up overtones of terror. "Say an hour or so
ago Ross was complaining that something had bit him."

Like the last remnant of a picture puzzle fitting together, something
clicked in Thompson's mind. "And Kurkil. While we were out of the ship
something bit him."

Silence again. His eyes went from Neff to Fortune. "Did--"

They shook their heads.

"Then that ties up the package," Thompson whispered. "This creature
carried the virus, or poison, or whatever it was. Without being bitten,
the virus cannot spread. We've found the cause. We've got it licked."

He was aware of sweat appearing on his face, the sweat of pure relief.
He sank back into his chair. Buster, recovering from his indignity at
the outrage he had suffered, jumped to the top of the desk, settled down
with his nose against the glass, watching the dead creature inside the
bell jar.

"He caught one of those things right in this cabin," Thompson whispered.
A shudder passed over him and was gone. He had been so close to death,
and had not known it. Buster had saved him.

Instead of seeking protection from him, the cat, in a sense, had been
protecting him. His gaze centered fondly on the cat.

"What if there are more of those things in the ship?" Fortune spoke.

"We can solve that one," Thompson spoke. "Space suits. And, now that we
know what we're looking for, we can clean out the ship. If we don't,
Buster will do it for us."

"Space suits!" As if he had heard no more than those two words, Fortune
ran from the room. He returned with three suits. They hastily donned
them.

"No damned bug can bite through one of these things," Neff said
exultantly. "Say, what about Grant? Hadn't we better take him a suit
too?"

"I should say so. Fortune...." But Fortune was already leaving the room
on his errand. Thompson snapped open the intercom system. "Grant?"

"Yes, what is it?"

"We've found the cause and we've got the disease licked."

Grant's voice a shout coming back from the control room. "Thank God.
I've been sitting here watching Sol grow bigger and bigger...." His
voice suddenly choked, went into silence, then came again, asking a
question. "Is it all right to change course now?"

"Definitely it's all right," Thompson answered. "In fact, it's an
order."

An instant later, the ship groaned as the direction of flight was
shifted. Thompson took a deep breath, was aware that Neff was staring at
him. "What was that he said about watching Sol grow bigger and bigger?
Say, what course were we on?"

"Collision course with the sun," Thompson answered.

"What?" Neff gasped. "Do you mean to say that you were going to throw
the ship into the sun?"

Slowly Thompson nodded. "I didn't know whether we would be alive or not
but I didn't want this ship to enter Sol Cluster and turn loose there
the virus that had already depopulated a planet."

He spoke slowly, with the sure knowledge of a desperate danger safely
passed. Neff stared at him from round and frightened eyes.

On the desk top Buster gave up his vigil, meowed, and jumped into the
captain's lap. With the thick gloves of his space suit clad hands,
Thompson fondly stroked him.

Buster arched his back in grateful appreciation and began to purr.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Thompson's Cat, by Robert Moore Williams

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THOMPSON'S CAT ***

***** This file should be named 31948.txt or 31948.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/1/9/4/31948/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
