The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Ethical Way, by Joseph Farrell

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Ethical Way

Author: Joseph Farrell

Illustrator: Johnson

Release Date: April 12, 2010 [EBook #31962]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ETHICAL WAY ***




Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







                         Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from Galaxy Science Fiction March 1958.
    Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed.


                           The Ethical Way


                          By JOSEPH FARRELL


     _There is a way around every tabu, knock on wood--but just
      watch out that the wood doesn't knock back!_


                        Illustrated by JOHNSON

       *       *       *       *       *




"Is it time?" Jarth Rolan asked anxiously. Pilot Lan Barda pushed him
gently back into a seat. "No, but very soon. And be calm--you're
jumpier than a human."

"But we've waited so long--yes, a long time. And I _am_ anxious to get
home."

Lan peered calmly out of his vehicle. They were hovering in Earth's
upper atmosphere, at the permitted limit.

"Be patient. These people have almost reached the critical point.
We'll get the signal before long."

Jarth Rolan popped out of his chair and danced about in nervous
excitement.

"Won't it be dangerous? For us, I mean. Going down into that
radioactive atmosphere. And how about them--will any of them live?
Suppose we wait too long?"

Lan Barda laughed. He was a husky humanoid, pinkish of skin and
completely hairless, like all galactics. He slapped Jarth Rolan's
back.

"We have experts watching. These humans have used four cobalt bombs,
and plenty of smaller stuff. The fallout is close to the danger point.
Our observers will know just when we can move in because--" he winked
and his voice dropped to a conspiratorial whisper--"they're using
automatically controlled instruments."

"Oh, my!" Jarth Rolan clapped his hands to his cheeks. "But those are
robots--and the use of robots is against religion."

"I know, Jarth. But we won't be using them much longer, will we?" He
poked a playful finger into Jarth's ribs. "We'll have slaves--and
it'll be completely ethical."

Jarth Rolan winced. "Must you use that word 'slaves,' Lan? It sounds
so--" He waved his hands.

Lan laughed again. "Be honest with yourself, Jarth. You're out to make
a few _dopolins_ for yourself as a slave raider."

"An entrepreneur," said Jarth. "In personal services."

Lan Barda became serious. "There's the signal--it's time to go down.
Let's go, Jarth, before somebody else gets them all."

       *       *       *       *       *

An hour later, it was Lan Barda's turn to be nervous. He watched a
needle creep into the red zone.

"Hurry, Jarth. We've been on this planet long enough. That fifth
cobalt bomb is sending the index up fast. Can't you skip these last
few?"

"Oh, no. Very unethical to leave these three here to die. Must take a
small chance, you know. Besides, see the sign on that taxi--just
married. A fine young couple. And a fine young taxi driver. Couldn't
sleep if I didn't help these three."

"Couldn't sleep thinking of the profit you'd passed up. Here, let me
take that one. We have to get out of here fast."

Jarth Rolan fluttered anxiously about the pilot until they were safely
above the poisoned atmosphere.

"How many?" he asked. "Did we fill the ship?"

Lan Barda checked off items on his clipboard. "A thousand and three,
with these last ones. You'll make a good profit."

"Not so much the profit. Oh, no. More than that involved. Ethics and
religion, Lan. Yes. With all these sla--servants, our people will
never have to use robots. They'll be relieved of routine labor and can
devote their lives to art and science. And it's all ethical--oh, yes,
for these people were doomed."

"Want to know something, Jarth?" Lan Barda bent closer and whispered
wickedly. "This ship has automatic controls. Has to. No living being
has fast enough reactions to handle an interstellar ship. All robot
driven, at least in part."

"Robots! May we be forgiven!" Jarth stared suspiciously at Lan Barda.
"Sometimes, Lan, I think you are an agnostic."

The pilot became more serious. "Maybe, Jarth. In our work, we must use
robots. We joke about it, but it goes against all galactic belief to
let a machine think for us. Maybe that's why we pilots are so
cynical."

"A galactic is always ethical," said Jarth Rolan solemnly. "This
affair, for example. We let these poor creatures of Earth handle their
own affairs with no interference until they doomed themselves. It was
unethical to intervene a minute sooner. Yes--the ethical way and I
feel better for it and proud to be a galactic."

"That's true," said Lan Barda. "A galactic wouldn't feel right, being
a member of the dominant race of the Galaxy, if he didn't help the
less fortunate."

       *       *       *       *       *

Jarth Rolan had prepared a center on his estate for the slaves. The
demand was greater than the supply. He chatted happily with his wife.

"An excellent investment, Shalla--yes. And the highest group council
wants us to lease them out by the day for the present instead of
selling outright."

She nodded. "That's the fair way. Everybody can have a turn having a
slave."

"And," said Jarth, rubbing his pink hands, "we'll collect every day
and still hold title."

"Will they multiply fast," asked Shalla, "so there will be enough for
all?"

"They always did on Earth. Yes. By the time we pass our estate on to
our son, this investment will have multiplied in value."

At the center, the slaves clustered about the bulletin boards to read
the slave code. The three who had been brought aboard last stood
together. Laurent Crotier and his wife Jean were still in their
wedding clothes, and Sam the taxi driver was in uniform. They read the
seven articles of the slave code.

"We have to work twelve hours a day," Laurent observed. "And have off
every seventh day. This could be worse."

"We'll keep our eyes open and wait for our chance," Sam piped up.
"Some day we'll make a break out of here."

"Yeah," said Jean. "And remember, Frenchy, no kids."

Nine months later, Laurent, Jr., was born. Before the blessed event,
Laurent went to Jarth Rolan with a complaint.

"She can't do it, work twelve hours a day now. You have to change the
rules. By gar, if my wife die 'count of this, I goin' kill you, Jarth
Rolan."

Jarth Rolan waltzed about nervously, biting his fingernails.

"No, we do not want her to have trouble. No. She will need proper
rest. There is a meeting of the highest group council right now,
concerning this. Others have the same problem. But yes, I will relieve
her of work without waiting for the council's decision. Tell your wife
to stay home, Laurent, until the baby is born."

Laurent pushed his luck. "And after that, too. A kid got to have a
mother. I do the work for three, you let my wife take care of the
family."

"Oh, this _is_ a problem!" Jarth Rolan rubbed his fingers unhappily
over his bald scalp. "Some of the other females are in the same
condition. But it is like planting a crop--one labors hard at the
beginning to reap a great harvest later. We will work this out."

The next day, fifteen articles amending the code arrived and were
posted. Laurent read happily.

"Now," he said to Jean, "it is the law. You will stay home and have
the baby."

"'And for such further period'," she read, "'as is considered
necessary.' You sure told him off, Frenchy."

She squeezed his arm affectionately and his chest went out a little.

"And remember," she said, "this is the last one."

"Look at this rule," said Sam. "All kids must be educated. I'm only--"
he winked at them--"thirteen. It's off the job and back to school for
me."

Laurent blinked. "By gar, Sam, I think you been shaving pretty near as
long as I am. But if Jarth Rolan ask me, I say I know Sam is
thirteen."

Jarth Rolan came along to explain the amendments.

"We don't want the slaves to be ignorant. Oh, no. It will be worth
extra effort and expense to reap the harvest. The slaves will work at
many specialized tasks. Even personal servants will read and write
letters and help at business and keep accounts--yes, indeed. We must
assign some slaves to teaching."

       *       *       *       *       *

About the time Laurent, Jr., started school, Laurent led a delegation
to Jarth Rolan.

"We got some complaint to make. These food servings pretty small
lately. We work hard, we have to eat more."

Jarth Rolan's facial skin had developed wrinkles, though the
galactics' life span was comparable to a human's and he was only about
forty. He fidgeted.

"I am sorry--oh, yes. Sorry. There have been delays in food
shipments--the same trouble all over. Too many excused from the work
force, you know. Most of the women are pregnant or have children, and
teachers and special assignments--but things will improve, believe me.
Yes. You will soon find an improvement. Yes--very soon."

The delegation talked it over outside Jarth Rolan's house.

"He's been letting himself go," said a woman. "Did you notice how thin
he's become? And the same with his family."

Laurent reflected. "To raise a lot of kids is hard. My father, he work
like hell all the time. Raise his own food, don't depend on nobody. I
think that land back of the center, we should plough it up and put in
some potatoes."

"On our own time?" Sam exclaimed.

Laurent chuckled. "Well, Sam, you got no kids--you just a young boy
eighteen years old. By gar, I think you have gray hair when you
twenty-one."

The others joined the laughter. Sam's lie about his age had
boomeranged--he had been kept in school and denied permission to marry
until he was officially eighteen, a few months ago.

Laurent fingered his chin thoughtfully. "I think we look over that
land. Maybe we get some time out from our regular work, we do some
farming."

Before the blowup on Earth, the galactics had made occasional landings
to gather animals and seeds of food plants. Certain centers were put
under government control to grow food for the slaves. The people at
Jarth Rolan's center saw that this arrangement was breaking down
because of the increasing slave population and the diversion of labor
to child raising. They looked over the piece of land and Laurent
okayed it. They went back to Jarth Rolan. He approved at once.

"Oh, indeed. I can obtain all the equipment you'll need. Get started
right away. We can grow a good part of our own food. Yes. I am sure it
will work out."

"We goin' need some time for work the farm," Laurent pointed out.

"Oh? I thought maybe in your spare time--"

"You want to kill us?" Sam demanded. "Put us on an extra job after
working us hard twelve hours a day?"

"But--there's so little coming in. Still, maybe you're right. Worth
the extra trouble and expense now. Building for the future--that's the
idea."

       *       *       *       *       *

Jarth Rolan notified his group leader of the arrangement and it
percolated swiftly up through the hierarchy to the council of the
highest group heads, who directed policy for the entire Galaxy. There
were nine of them and they talked over this development.

"I approve. We should have done it this way from the beginning."

"Of course. But certain advocates of government control insisted on
public ownership of the food farms--"

"What do you mean, certain advocates? If you mean me, be galactic
enough to say so."

"I intend no personal offense to anybody. But there is bound to be
inefficiency in any government project--"

The chairman pounded the table. "Stay with the subject. It has been
suggested that each center grow part of its food. I am in favor."

"But it cuts down the available labor force. We're having complaints
now about the shortage of slaves--"

"Think of the future. I admit the present situation is difficult. It's
like raising a herd of prize cattle--all expense and no profit at
first. Then the herd is built up and suddenly you're rich."

"But we're putting so much into it--"

"The more we put in, the more we take out. And they're multiplying
rapidly. Remember our new goal of two slaves for each galactic--one
for the day shift and one for the night. It's the only way our people
can live a decent life, freed from routine labor, devoting themselves
to art and science."

"That's right. We work so our children can lead the better life. It's
worth some sacrifice."

The chairman stood up. "Most of us seem willing to endure a little
hardship now for the benefit of our children. I suggest we endorse
this new procedure."

       *       *       *       *       *

Laurent, Jr., married the girl next door. Laurent celebrated the
wedding with a barrel of beer he had brewed on the farm. Sam became
glassy-eyed and lectured the young couple.

"Just wait for the right time. Rise up and capture their spaceships.
That's what we'll do. We'll go back to Earth and then let them try to
get us off it again."

"But Earth is dead," Laurent, Jr., objected. "We can't live there.
Poisonous radiation."

"By gar!" Laurent drained another brew. "You believe everything they
tell you, hah? We goin' show them sometime. Like Sam says, not now,
but sometime. Maybe me and Sam don't do it, but don't you kids
forget--you not goin' be slaves always. You watch for the right time,
like Sam says."

His son looked dubious. "But what you told me about Earth doesn't
sound so good. Like the way you were so cold and hungry in that shack
in Canada. And Mama walking up five flights in New York after working
all day in the garment factory. And all those wars! Why did you
people spend half your time shooting each other, Dad?"

[Illustration]

Laurent belched indignantly. "By gar, boy! We was free! We don't have
no galactic stand over us, do this, do that. We was free!"

"We don't work so hard," said his son. "And look at old Jarth Rolan
and the others out there--they've given us the day off, but the
galactics are all busy in the fields. Everybody has to work, Dad."

Laurent looked through a slight haze at the masters laboring in the
potato fields. Farm work and teaching and other special assignments
had created a shortage of personal slaves. Jarth Rolan gave preference
in leasing slaves to those who came and helped him at the center.

Since having a personal slave was a mark of prestige among the
galactics, many of those laboring on the farm were from the highest
levels of society.

"They don't know nothing about raise potatoes," Laurent grumbled. "We
put in complaint, by damn. We want each one have his own land. I work
like jackass, I want to get paid for it."

       *       *       *       *       *

The highest group council was in session. One member was explaining:
"It's the custom of tipping slaves. At first, those who could get a
slave were so happy that they often gave him a few coins. Now the
custom is firmly established--anybody who doesn't tip a slave is
considered cheap. I do it and so do you."

"Of course. What's wrong with giving them a few _polins_ now and then?
Or a _dopolin_ or two when they have a baby or a wedding?"

"Nothing wrong with it, in itself. But they don't spend anything. We
supply their food and clothing; nothing else we have seems to appeal
to them. The money goes out of circulation. It's estimated that half
the money in the Galaxy is being hoarded by slaves."

"What? That's impossible. Just from those small tips?"

"Small tips, but day after day; year after year. Add up some time what
you've given and multiply by the number who've been doing it."

"Then that's behind our economic troubles. A currency shortage. Can we
take it away from them?"

"Of course not. Besides being unethical, it would turn them against
us. They wouldn't understand."

"Then we'll abolish tipping."

"Too late. What we need is an ethical way of getting back that
currency."

A new member spoke: "I understand that on Earth these slaves were
often addicted to alcohol, gambling and various alkaloids. Perhaps we
could introduce these items, under government control, of course--"

He stopped. Eight pair of eyes were blazing at him.

"You're new here," the chairman said. "If you ever make another
suggestion like that--"

They pondered. The chairman fingered some papers.

"Here's a suggestion. The slaves have been petitioning for the right
to own land. It seems to be the only thing they'll spend their money
for."

"Impossible!"

"But maybe--"

"We could limit the holdings."

"And have the land subject to condemnation by the government at a fair
price."

The chairman called for order. "Let's argue this out. Remember the
slaves will need time to work their land. Since their work day is down
to nine hours, we'll have to arrange something."

       *       *       *       *       *

Jean had been complaining about the lumps in the mattress. When
Laurent took them out, there was enough in galactic currency to buy a
piece of land in his name and hers, plus a plot for each of the
children, and a new mattress as well. Sam was suspicious.

"They're out to get what little we've been able to save, Laurent. They
can take the land anytime--for what they call a fair price. Fair! Fine
chance they'll be fair about it."

But Laurent kept the land and was even able to buy a piece for each
grandchild, although they arrived faster and faster as his own large
family grew up and married. One day Jean called him to a new house at
the edge of the widely expanded center to see the latest arrival.

Laurent poked a finger at the squalling creature. "So I'm another
grandpa. Which one this?"

"This time you're a great-grandpa, Frenchy. This is Laurent 4th."

"You mean we gettin' that old? By damn! Well, I'm buy him a piece of
land, too. So much new building, this land be worth plenty when he
grows up."

The 512th amendment permitted slaves to retire at 65. Laurent was a
leading real estate dealer by that time. He had twenty-three children
and more grandchildren than he could count. The center was grown to a
city, its main street running through what had been his first farm.
Sometimes Laurent relaxed in his rocking chair and needled Sam.

"By gar, Sam, if you not the oldest-looking man of fifty-five I ever
see. I think you a hundred years old when you retire. When you havin'
that revolution?"

"The day will come if we keep after the young ones. But damn it,
Laurent, it's hard to talk any sense into them. Some of them can't
even understand me."

"Well, they all talk galactic, Sam. My grandson, he call himself Loran
Kotay. But these young people, they have to live their own lives. Hey,
look at old Jarth Rolan up there, washing his windows. Old guy should
retire, Sam. I'm goin' see a couple of my boys give him a hand."

       *       *       *       *       *

But Jarth Rolan died before he could afford to retire and was replaced
by his only grandson, Jarro Kogar. Laurent and Jean passed on shortly
after, leaving nearly four hundred descendants.

Jarro Kogar was a newly married galactic in his early thirties. He
moved into the mansion and talked things over with his wife.

"Don't see how we can afford a child right now. Wouldn't be fair to
the child. Things will improve in a few years."

"Of course," she said. "We're young--we'll have time to start our
family. If we wait, we'll be able to give them more."

They held similar conversations later and one day realized it was too
late. Jarro Kogar died in his sixties. His widow directed the center
for several more years. The slaves liked her and took good care of
her. She left them the estate when she died.

Loran Krotalu protested to the authorities that the slaves didn't want
the estate. But the group heads ruled it legal under amendment 1,486,
especially since no relatives could be located.

Loran left the center and moved to another city where he found a
galactic couple who wanted a slave. He and his family served the
galactic couple for many years. This couple, like Jarro Kogar and his
wife, were childless and when they both died, Loran and his wife were
very grieved.

After the funeral, Loran went into the city. He returned hours later,
tired and depressed.

"It's no use," he told his wife. "There's not an unattached galactic
in the area. We might get a few hours work a week with one, but we
can't have one to ourselves."

"But, Loran, _everybody_ in our set works for a galactic!"

"I know," he said miserably. "But it's no use. There must be fifty
slaves for every galactic. I've taken a job at the spaceship factory.
It's the best I can do."

       *       *       *       *       *

Membership on the highest group council had become a killing job.
Chief problem was the revision of the slave code, which had 3,697
articles. After trying for years to simplify the code, the council
members called in Loran Krovalo to fill a vacancy and take over the
job.

Loran was known and liked by galactic and slave alike for his
brilliant essays on the master-slave relationship. While he was on the
council, the Cerberan affair broke out. The Cerberans, an intelligent
saurian race from a globular cluster, exploded into the Galaxy in vast
numbers. Military action became necessary.

"We can handle them," Loran told the council. "Our factories are
mobilized and we have any number of spacemen. We have robot
instruments for fighting that are better than anything they have. We
can carry the war to their home planets."

Some of the galactics objected.

"But the use of robots is forbidden. We can't fight the Cerberans with
robot-controlled weapons."

"Don't worry, sir," Loran said kindly. "We slaves will take care of
it. Our form of religion doesn't prohibit robots unless they are in
the shape of a man. We think of real robots as being human in shape."

One of the galactics rose.

"I know you're right, but my conscience won't let me vote for robots
in any form. Therefore I am resigning from the council."

A second rose, then a third and fourth. They looked at each other, and
one spoke for the group.

"We are also resigning. I suggest that four slaves be appointed in our
places for the duration of the war. Then they will have a majority and
no galactic need violate his conscience by voting for the use of
robots."

The Cerberans were crushed, but the infested area was huge and the
invasion of the globular cluster took time. The war emergency lasted
fifty years. When it was over, the slaves called on the galactics to
take back control of the government.

But the widespread use of robot mechanisms in the war had caused a
reaction among the galactics. Their consciences simmered and a wave of
orthodoxy swept over their race. There was difficulty in persuading
galactics to leave their home planets to sit on the council, because
faster-than-light ships used robot controls.

The slaves scoured the planet that housed the council and kept two or
three seats filled with galactics for a while. But they were generally
old, and they died, and most of them were unmarried or childless.

       *       *       *       *       *

Loran Crotay, twelfth-generation slave, sat in his home chatting with
a friend from far-off Pornalu VI. Being in the space-shipping
business, he had many friends throughout the Galaxy.

His wife answered the door and a pink humanoid shuffled in, mumbling
greetings, and went into the other room. He was middle-aged, studious
and bespectacled, and he wore a wig. Loran's friend watched him
curiously.

"Haven't seen one of them in years, Loran. We have a reservation for
the poor devils on my planet. Don't reproduce very fast, you know, and
they may become extinct. Too bad--they're so likable. Always so
ethical and conscientious."

"I know." Loran nodded. "We let poor Vendro make a few _dopolins_
tutoring our son. He's very intelligent and a good teacher. I like to
help them all I can--the only ethical thing to do. I wouldn't feel
like a slave if I didn't give poor Vendro a break."

"That's true," said his friend. "A slave wouldn't feel right, being a
member of the dominant race of the Galaxy, if he didn't help the less
fortunate."

                                                       --JOSEPH FARRELL

       *       *       *       *       *






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Ethical Way, by Joseph Farrell

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ETHICAL WAY ***

***** This file should be named 31962.txt or 31962.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/1/9/6/31962/

Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
