The Project Gutenberg EBook of Love Story, by Irving E. Cox, Jr.

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Love Story

Author: Irving E. Cox, Jr.

Illustrator: Paul  Orban

Release Date: April 21, 2010 [EBook #32078]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LOVE STORY ***




Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







                         Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from If Worlds of Science Fiction April 1956.
    Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed.


                             _love story_


                        BY IRVING E. COX, JR.


                     _Illustrated by Paul Orban_


     _Everything was aimed at satisfying the whims of women. The
      popular cliches, the pretty romances, the catchwords of
      advertising became realities; and the compound kept the men
      enslaved. George knew what he had to do...._

       *       *       *       *       *




The duty bell rang and obediently George clattered down the steps from his
confinement cubicle over the garage. His mother's chartreuse-colored
Cadillac convertible purred to a stop in the drive.

"It's so sweet of you to come, Georgie," his mother said when George
opened the door for her.

"Whenever you need me, Mummy." It was no effort at all to keep the
sneer out of his voice. Deception had become a part of his character.

His mother squeezed his arm. "I can always count on my little boy to
do the right thing."

"Yes, Mummy." They were mouthing a formula of words. They were both
very much aware that if George hadn't snapped to attention as soon as
the duty bell rang, he risked being sentenced, at least temporarily,
to the national hero's corps.

Still in the customary, martyr's whisper, George's mother said, "This
has been such a tiring day. A man can never understand what a woman
has to endure, Georgie; my life is such an ordeal." Her tone turned at
once coldly practical. "I've two packages in the trunk; carry them to
the house for me."

George picked up the cardboard boxes and followed her along the brick
walk in the direction of the white, Colonial mansion where his mother
and her two daughters and her current husband lived. George, being a
boy, was allowed in the house only when his mother invited him, or
when he was being shown off to a prospective bride. George was
nineteen, the most acceptable marriage age; because he had a
magnificent build and the reputation for being a good boy, his mother
was rumored to be asking twenty thousand shares for him.

As they passed the rose arbor, his mother dropped on the wooden seat
and drew George down beside her. "I've a surprise for you, George--a
new bidder. Mrs. Harper is thinking about you for her daughter."

"Jenny Harper?" Suddenly his throat was dust dry with excitement.

"You'd like that, wouldn't you, Georgie?"

"Whatever arrangement you make, Mummy." Jenny Harper was one of the
few outsiders George had occasionally seen as he grew up. She was
approximately his age, a stunning, dark-eyed brunette.

"Jenny and her mother are coming to dinner to talk over a marriage
settlement." Speculatively she ran her hand over the tanned,
muscle-hard curve of his upper arm. "You're anxious to have your own
woman, aren't you, George?"

"So I can begin to work for her, Mummy." That, at least, was the
correct answer, if not an honest one.

"And begin taking the compound every day." His mother smiled. "Oh, I
know you wicked boys! Put on your dress trunks tonight. We want Jenny
to see you at your best."

She got up and strode toward the house again. George followed
respectfully two paces behind her. As they passed beyond the garden
hedge, she saw the old business coupe parked in the delivery court.
Her body stiffened in anger. "Why is your father home so early, may I
ask?" It was an accusation, rather than a question.

"I don't know, Mother. I heard my sisters talking in the yard; I think
he was taken sick at work."

"Sick! Some men never stop pampering themselves."

"They said it was a heart attack or--"

"Ridiculous; he isn't dead, is he? Georgie, this is the last straw. I
intend to trade your father in today on a younger man." She snatched
the two packages from him and stormed into the house.

Since his mother hadn't asked him in, George returned to his
confinement cubicle in the garage. He felt sorry, in an impersonal
way, for the husband his mother was about to dispose of, but otherwise
the fate of the old man was quite normal. He had outlived his economic
usefulness; George had seen it happen before. His real father had died
a natural death--from strain and overwork--when George was four. His
mother had since then bought four other husbands; but, because boys
were brought up in rigid isolation, George had known none of them
well. For the same reason, he had no personal friends.

He climbed the narrow stairway to his cubicle. It was already late
afternoon, almost time for dinner. He showered and oiled his body
carefully, before he put on his dress trunks, briefs made of black
silk studded with seed pearls and small diamonds. He was permitted to
wear the jewels because his mother's stockholdings were large enough
to make her an Associate Director. His family status gave George a
high marriage value and his Adonis physique kicked the asking price
still higher. At nineteen he stood more than six feet tall, even
without his formal, high-heeled boots. He weighed one hundred and
eighty-five, not an ounce of it superfluous fat. His skin was deeply
bronzed by the sunlamps in the gym; his eyes were sapphire blue; his
crewcut was a platinum blond--thanks to the peroxide wash his mother
made him use.

Observing himself critically in the full-length mirror, George knew
his mother was justified in asking twenty thousand shares for him.
Marriage was an essential part of his own plans; without it revenge
was out of his reach. He desperately hoped the deal would be made with
Jenny Harper. A young woman would be far less difficult for him to
handle.

When the oil on his skin was dry, he lay down on his bunk to catch up
on his required viewing until the duty bell called him to the house.
The automatic circuit snapped on the television screen above his bunk;
wearily George fixed his eyes on the unreeling love story.

For as long as he could remember, television had been a fundamental
part of his education. A federal law required every male to watch the
TV romances three hours a day. Failure to do so--and that was
determined by monthly form tests mailed out by the Directorate--meant
a three month sentence to the national hero's corps. If the statistics
periodically published by the Directorate were true, George was a
relatively rare case, having survived adolescence without serving a
single tour of duty as a national hero. For that he indirectly thanked
his immunity to the compound. Fear and guilt kept him so much on his
toes, he grew up an amazingly well-disciplined child.

George was aware that the television romances were designed to shape
his attitudes and his emotional reactions. The stories endlessly
repeated his mother's philosophy. All men were pictured as beasts
crudely dominated by lust. Women, on the other hand, were always
sensitive, delicate, modest, and intelligent; their martyrdom to the
men in their lives was called love. To pay for their animal lusts, men
were expected to slave away their lives earning things--kitchen
gadgets, household appliances, fancy cars, luxuries and
stockholdings--for their patient, long-suffering wives.

_And it's all a fake!_ George thought. He had seen his Mother drive
two men to their graves and trade off two others because they hadn't
produced luxuries as fast as she demanded. His mother and his
pinch-faced sisters were pampered, selfish, rock-hard Amazons; by no
conceivable twist of imagination could they be called martyrs to
anything.

That seemed self-evident, but George had no way of knowing if any
other man had ever reasoned out the same conclusion. Maybe he was
unique because of his immunity to the compound. He was sure that very
few men--possibly none--had reached marriage age with their immunity
still undiscovered.

       *       *       *       *       *

George was lucky, in a way: he knew the truth about himself when he
was seven, and he had time to adjust to it--to plan the role he had
been acting for the past twelve years. His early childhood had been a
livid nightmare, primarily because of the precocious cruelty of his
two sisters. Shortly before his seventh birthday they forced him to
take part in a game they called cocktail party. The game involved only
one activity: the two little girls filled a glass with an unidentified
liquid, and ordered George to drink. Afterward, dancing up and down in
girlish glee, they said they had given him the compound.

George had seen the love stories on television; he knew how he was
expected to act. He gave a good performance--better than his sisters
realized, for inside his mind George was in turmoil. They had given
him the compound (true, years before he should have taken it), and
nothing had happened. He had felt absolutely nothing; he was immune!
If anyone had ever found out, George would have been given a life
sentence to the national hero's corps; or, more probably, the Morals
Squad would have disposed of him altogether.

From that day on, George lived with guilt and fear. As the years
passed, he several times stole capsules of the compound from his
mother's love-cabinet and gulped them down. Sometimes he felt a little
giddy, and once he was sick. But he experienced no reaction which
could possibly be defined as love. Not that he had any idea what that
reaction should have been, but he knew he was supposed to feel very
wicked and he never did.

Each failure increased the agony of guilt; George drove himself to be
far better behaved than he was required to be. He dreaded making one
mistake. If his mother or a Director examined it too closely, they
might find out his real secret.

George's basic education began when he was assigned to his confinement
room above the garage after his tenth birthday. Thereafter his time
was thoroughly regulated by law. Three hours a day he watched
television; three hours he spent in his gym, building a
magnificent--and salable--body; for four hours he listened to the
educational tapes. Arithmetic, economics, salesmanship, business
techniques, accounting, mechanics, practical science: the things he
had to know in order to earn a satisfactory living for the woman who
bought him in marriage.

He learned nothing else and as he grew older he became very conscious
of the gaps in his education. For instance, what of the past? Had the
world always been this sham he lived in? That question he had the good
sense not to ask.

But George had learned enough from his lessons in practical science to
guess what the compound really was, what it had to be: a mixture of
aphrodisiacs and a habit-forming drug. The compound was calculated to
stir up a man's desire to the point where he would give up anything in
order to satisfy it. Boys were given increased doses during their
adolescence; by the time they married, they were addicts, unable to
leave the compound alone.

George couldn't prove his conclusion. He had no idea how many other
men had followed the same line of reasoning and come up with the same
answer. But why was George immune? There was only one way he could
figure it: it must have happened because his sisters gave him the
first draft when he was seven. But logically that didn't make much
sense.

Bachelors were another sort of enemy: men who shirked their duty and
deserted their wives. It seemed unreasonable to believe a man could
desert his wife, when first he had to break himself of addiction to
the compound. George had always supposed that bachelor was a boogy
word contrived to frighten growing children.

As a consequence, he was very surprised when the house next door was
raided. Through the window of his confinement cubicle, he actually saw
the five gray-haired men who were rounded up by the Morals Squad. The
Squad--heavily armed, six-foot Amazons--tried to question their
captives. They used injections of a truth serum. Two of the old men
died at once. The others went berserk, frothing at the mouth and
screaming animal profanity until the Squad captain ordered them shot.

George overheard one of the women say, "It's always like this. They
take something so our serum can't be effective."

Later that afternoon George found a scrap of paper in his mother's
garden. It had blown out of the bonfire which the Morals Squad made of
the papers they took out of the house next door. The burned page had
apparently been part of an informational bulletin, compiled by the
bachelors for distribution among themselves.

"... data compiled from old publications," the fragment began, "and
interpreted by our most reliable authorities." At that point a part of
the page was burned away. "... and perhaps less than ninety years ago
men and women lived in equality. The evidence on that point is
entirely conclusive. The present matriarchy evolved by accident, not
design. Ninety years ago entertainment and advertising were
exclusively directed at satisfying a woman's whim. No product was sold
without some sort of tie-in with women. Fiction, drama, television,
motion pictures--all glorified a romantic thing called love. In that
same period business was in the process of taking over government from
statesmen and politicians. Women, of course, were the stockholders who
owned big business, although the directors and managers at that time
were still men--operating under the illusion that they were the
executives who represented ownership. In effect, however, women owned
the country and women governed it; suddenly the matriarchy existed.
There is no evidence that it was imposed; there is no suggestion of
civil strife or...." More words burned away. "However, the women were
not unwilling to consolidate their gains. Consequently the popular
cliches, the pretty romances, and the catchwords of advertising became
a substitute for reality. As for the compound...."

There the fragment ended. Much of it George did not understand. But it
gave him a great deal of courage simply to know the bachelors actually
existed. He began to plan his own escape to a bachelor hideout. He
would have no opportunity, no freedom of any sort, until he married.
Every boy was rigidly isolated in his confinement cubicle, under the
watchful eye of his mother's spy-cameras, until he was bought in his
first marriage.

Then, as he thought more about it, George realized there was a better
way for him to use his immunity. He couldn't be sure of finding a
bachelor hideout before the Morals Squad tracked him down. But George
could force his bride to tell him where the compound was made, since
he was not an addict and she could not use the compound to enslave
him. Once he knew the location of the factory, he would destroy it.
How, he wasn't sure; he didn't plan that far ahead. If the supply of
the drug could be interrupted, many hundreds of men might be goaded
into making a break for the hills.

       *       *       *       *       *

The duty bell rang. George snapped to attention on the edge of his
bunk. He saw his mother waving from the back door of her house.

"I'll be down right away, Mummy."

His mother was waiting for him in the pantry. Under the glaring
overhead light he stopped for her last minute inspection. She used a
pocket-stick to touch up a spot on his chest where the oil gleam had
faded a little. And she gave him a glass of the compound to drink.

"Jenny really wants to marry you, George," she confided. "I know the
symptoms; half our battle's won for us. And my former husband won't be
around to worry us with his aches and pains. I made the trade this
afternoon."

He followed her into the dining room where the cocktails were being
served. Aside from the Harpers, George's mother had rented two
handsome, muscular escorts for his sisters. In the confusion, George
saw Jenny Harper's mother stealthily lace his water glass with a dose
of the compound. He suppressed a grin. Apparently she was anxious to
complete the deal, too.

George found it almost impossible to hold back hilarious laughter when
Jenny herself shyly pressed a capsule of the compound into his hand
and asked him to use it. Three full-size slugs of the drug! George
wondered what would have happened if he hadn't been immune.
Fortunately, he knew how to act the lusty, eager, drooling male which
each of the women expected.

The negotiations moved along without a hitch. George's mother held out
for twenty-eight thousand shares, and got it. The only problem left
was the date for the wedding, and Jenny settled that very quickly. "I
want my man, Mom," she said, "and I want him now."

Jenny always got what she wanted.

When she and her mother left that evening, she held George's hand in
hers and whispered earnestly, "So they were married and lived happily
ever after. That's the way it's going to be with us, isn't it,
George?"

"It's up to you, Jenny; for as long as you want me."

That was the conventional answer which he was expected to make, but he
saw unmasked disappointment in her face. She wanted something more
genuine, with more of himself in it. He felt suddenly sorry for her,
for the way he was going to use her. She was a pretty girl, even sweet
and innocent--if those words still had any real meaning left after
what his mother's world had done to them. Under other circumstances,
George would have looked forward with keen pleasure to marrying Jenny.
As it was, Jenny Harper was first a symbol of the fakery he intended
to destroy, and after that a woman.

       *       *       *       *       *

Five days later they were married. In spite of the short engagement,
Mrs. Harper and George's mother managed to put on a splendid show in
the church. George received a business sedan from his mother, the
traditional gift given every bridegroom; and from Mrs. Harper he
received a good job in a company where she was the majority
stockholder. And so, in the customary pageantry and ceremony, George
became Mr. Harper.

"Think of it--Mr. Harper," Jenny sighed, clinging to his arm. "Now
you're really mine, George."

On the church steps the newlyweds posed for photographs--George in the
plain, white trunks which symbolized a first marriage; Jenny in a
dazzling cloud of fluff, suggestively nearly transparent. Then Mrs.
Harper drew Jenny aside and whispered in her daughter's ear: the
traditional telling of the secret. Now Jenny knew where the compound
was manufactured; and for George revenge was within his grasp.

George's mother had arranged for their honeymoon at Memory Lodge, a
resort not far from the Directorate capital in Hollywood. It was the
national capital as well, though everyone conscientiously maintained
the pretense that Washington, with an all-male Congress, still
governed the country. George considered himself lucky that his mother
had chosen Memory Lodge. He had already planned to desert Jenny in the
mountains.

George knew how to drive; his mother had wanted him to do a great deal
of chauffeuring for her. But he had never driven beyond town, and he
had never driven anywhere alone. His mother gave him a map on which
his route to the lodge was indicated in bright red. In the foothills
George left the marked highway on a paved side road.

He gambled that Jenny wouldn't immediately realize what he had done,
and the gamble paid off. Still wearing her nearly transparent wedding
gown, she pressed close to him and ran her hands constantly over his
naked chest, thoroughly satisfied with the man she had bought. In the
church George had been given a tall glass of the compound; he acted
the part Jenny expected.

But it was far less a role he played than George wanted to admit. His
body sang with excitement. He found it very difficult to hold the
excitement in check. If he had been addicted to the compound, it would
have been out of the question. More than ever before he sympathized
with the men who were enslaved by love. In spite of his own immunity,
he nearly yielded to the sensuous appeal of her caress. He held the
wheel so hard his knuckles went white; he clenched his teeth until his
jaw ached.

All afternoon George drove aimless mountain roads, moving deeper into
the uninhabited canyons. Carefully judging his distances with an eye
on the map, he saw to it that he remained relatively close to the
city; after he forced Jenny to give him the information he wanted, he
wanted to be able to get out fast.

By dusk the roads he drove were no longer paved. Ruts carved deep by
spring rains suggested long disuse. The swaying of the car and the
constant grinding of gears eventually jolted Jenny out of her romantic
dreams. She moved away from George and sat looking at the pines which
met above the road.

"We're lost, aren't we?" she asked.

"What's that?" he shouted to be heard above the roar of the motor.

"Lost!"

For a minute or two longer he continued to drive until he saw an open
space under the trees. He pulled the car into the clearing and snapped
off the ignition. Then he looked Jenny full in the face and answered
her. "No, Jenny, we aren't lost; I know exactly what I'm doing."

"Oh." He was sure she had understood him, but she said, "We can spend
the night here and find the lodge in the morning. It's a pity we
didn't bring something to eat." She smiled ingenuously. "But I brought
the compound; and we have each other."

They got out of the car. Jenny looked up at the sunset, dull red above
the trees, and shivered; she asked George to build a fire. He tucked
the ignition key into the band of his white trunks and began to gather
dry boughs and pine needles from the floor of the forest. He found
several large branches and carried them back to the clearing. There
was enough wood to last until morning--whether he stayed that long or
not. Jenny had lugged the seats and a blanket out of the car and
improvised a lean-to close to the fire.

He piled on two of the larger branches and the bright glow of flame
lit their faces. She beckoned to him and gave him a bottle of the
compound, watching bright-eyed as he emptied it.

With her lips parted, she waited. He did nothing. Slowly the light
died in her eyes. Like a savage she flung herself into his arms. He
steeled himself to show absolutely no reaction and finally she drew
away. Trembling and with tears in her eyes, she whispered, "The
compound doesn't--" The look of pain in her eyes turned to terror.
"You're immune!"

"Now you know."

"But who told you--" She searched his face, shaking her head. "You
don't know, do you--not really?"

"Know what?"

Instead of replying, she asked, "You brought me here deliberately,
didn't you?"

"So we wouldn't be interrupted. You see, Jenny, you're going to tell
me where the compound's made."

"It wouldn't do you any good. Don't you see--" He closed his hands on
her wrists and jerked her rudely to her feet. He saw her face go
white. And no wonder: that magnificent, granite hard body, which she
had bought in good faith for her own pleasure, was suddenly out of her
control. He grinned. He crushed her mouth against his and kissed her.
Limp in his arms, she clung to him and said in a choked, husky
whisper, "I love you, George."

"And you'll make any sacrifice for love," he replied, mocking the
dialogue of the television love stories.

"Yes, anything!"

"Then tell me where the compound's manufactured."

"Hold me close, George; never let me go."

How many times had he heard that particular line! It sickened him,
hearing it now from Jenny; he had expected something better of her. He
pushed her from him. By accident his fist raked her face. She fell
back blood trickling from her mouth. In her eyes he saw shock and a
vague sense of pain; but both were overridden by adoration. She was
like a whipped puppy, ready to lick his hand.

"I'll tell you, George," she whispered. "But don't leave me." She
pulled herself to her feet and stood beside him, reaching for his
hand. "We make it in Hollywood, in the Directorate Building, the part
that used to be a sound stage."

"Thanks, Jenny." He picked up one of the car seats and walked back to
the sedan. She stood motionless watching him. He fitted the seat in
place and put the key in the lock. The starter ground away, but the
motor did not turn over.

He glanced back at Jenny. She was smiling inscrutably, "You see,
George, you have to stay with me."

He got out of the car and moved toward her.

"I was afraid you were planning to desert me," she went on, "so I took
out the distributor cap while you were getting the firewood."

He stood in front of her. Coldly he demanded, "Where did you put it,
Jenny?"

She tilted her lips toward his. "Kiss and tell--maybe."

"I haven't time for games. Where is it?"

His fist shot out. Jenny sprawled on the ground at his feet. Again he
saw the pain and the adoration in her face. But that couldn't be
right. She would hate him by this time.

He yanked her to her feet. Her lips were still bleeding and blood came
now from a wound in her cheek. Yet she managed to smile again.

"I don't want to hurt you, Jenny," he told her. "But I have to have--"

"I love you, George. I never thought I'd want to give myself to a man.
All the buying doesn't make any difference, does it? Not really. And I
never knew that before!"

With an unconscious movement, she kicked her train aside and he saw
the distributor cap lying beneath it. He picked it up. She flung
herself at him screaming. He felt the hammer beat of her heart; her
fingers dug into his back like cat claws. Now it didn't matter. He had
the secret; he could go whenever he wanted to. Nonetheless he pushed
her away--tenderly, and with regret. To surrender like this was no
better than a capitulation to the compound. It was instinctively
important to make her understand that. He knew that much, but his
emotions were churned too close to fever pitch for him to reason out
what else that implied.

He clipped her neatly on the jaw and put her unconscious body on the
ground by the fire. He left the map with her so she could find her way
out in the morning; he knew it was really a very short hike to a
highway, where she would be picked up by a passing car or truck.

       *       *       *       *       *

He drove out the way he had come in--at least he tried to remember.
Four times he took a wrong turn and had to backtrack. It was,
therefore, dawn before he reached the outskirts of Hollywood. In any
other city he would not have been conspicuous--simply a man on his way
to work; only women slept late. However, Hollywood was off-limits to
every male. The city was not only the seat of the Directorate, but the
manufacturing center for the cosmetics industry. And since that gave
women her charm, it was a business no man worked at.

George had to have a disguise. He stopped on a residential street,
where the people were still likely to be in their beds. He read names
on mail boxes until he found a house where an unmarried woman lived.
He had no way of knowing if she had a husband on approval with her,
but the box was marked "Miss." With any luck he might have got what he
wanted without disturbing her, but the woman was a light sleeper and
she caught him as he was putting on the dress. He was sorry he had to
slug her, but she gave him no resistance. A spark of hope, a spark of
long-forgotten youth glowed in her eyes; before she slid into
unconsciousness.

Wearing the stolen dress, which fit him like a tent, and an enormous
hat to hide his face, George parked his sedan near the Directorate
and entered the building when it opened at eight. In room after room
automatons demonstrated how to dress correctly; robot faces displayed
the uses of cosmetics. There were displays of kitchen gadgets,
appliances, and other heavy machinery for the home; recorded lectures
on stock management and market control. Here women came from every
part of the country for advice, help and guidance. Here the Top
Directors met to plan business policy, to govern the nation, and to
supervise the production of the compound. For only the Top
Directors--less than a dozen women--actually knew the formula. Like
their stockholdings, the secret was hereditary, passed from mother to
daughter.

George searched every floor of the building, but found nothing except
exhibit rooms. Time passed, and still he did not find what he had come
for. More and more women crowded in to see the exhibits. Several times
he found new-comers examining him oddly; he found he had to avoid the
crowds.

Eventually he went down steps into the basement, though a door marked
"Keep Out." The door was neither locked nor guarded, but there was a
remote chance it might lead to the production center for the compound.
In the basement George found a mechanical operation underway; at first
he took it for another cosmetic exhibit. Conveyor belts delivered
barrels of flavoring syrup, alcohol and a widely advertised liquid
vitamin compound. Machines sliced open the containers, dumping the
contents into huge vats, from which pipes emptied the mixture into
passing rows of bottles.

The bottles: suddenly George recognized them and the truth dawned on
him, sickeningly. Here was the manufacturing center for the
compound--but it might just as well have been a barn in Connecticut or
a store window in Manhattan. No man was enslaved by the compound, for
the compound did not exist. He was imprisoned by his own sense of
guilt, his own fear of being different. George remembered his own fear
and guilt: he knew how much a man could be driven to make himself
conform to what he thought other men were like.

His revenge was as foolish as the sham he wanted to destroy. He should
have reasoned that out long ago; he should have realized it was
impossible to have immunity to an addictive drug. But, no, George
believed what he saw on the television programs. He was victimized as
much as any man had ever been.

He turned blindly toward the stairway, and from the shadows in the
hall the Morals Squad closed in around him. With a final gesture of
defiance, he ripped off the stolen dress and the absurd hat, and stood
waiting for the blast from their guns. An old woman, wearing the
shoulder insignia of a Top Director, pushed through the squad and
faced him, a revolver in her hand. She was neither angry nor
disturbed. Her voice, when she spoke, was filled with pity. Pity! That
was the final indignity.

"Now you know the truth," she said. "A few men always have to try it;
and we usually let them see this room and find out for themselves
before--before we close the case."

Tensely he demanded, "Just how much longer do you think--"

"We can get away with this? As long as men are human beings. It's
easier to make yourself believe a lie if you think everyone else
believes it, than to believe a truth you've found out on your own. All
of us want more than anything else to be like other people. Women have
created a world for you with television programs; you grow up
observing nothing else; you make yourself fit into the pattern. Only a
few independent-minded characters have the courage to accept their own
immunity; most of them end up here, trying to do something noble for
the rest of mankind. But you have one satisfaction, for what it's
worth: you've been true to yourself."

_True to yourself._ George found a strange comfort in the words, and
his fear was gone. He squared his shoulders and faced the mouth of her
gun. _True to yourself_: that was something worth dying for.

He saw a flicker of emotion in the old woman's eyes. Admiration? He
couldn't be sure. For at the moment a shot rang out from the end of
the corridor; and the Top Director fell back, nursing a hand suddenly
bright with blood.

"Let him go." It was Jenny's voice. She was sheltered by a partly open
door at the foot of the stairway.

"Don't be a fool," the old woman replied. "He's seen too much."

"It doesn't matter. Who would believe him?"

"You're upset. You don't realize--"

"He's mine and I want him."

"The Directorate will give you a refund of the purchase price."

"You didn't understand me. I don't want one of your pretty automatons;
anybody can buy them for a few shares of stock. I want a man--a real
man; I want to belong to him."

"He belongs to you; you bought him."

"And that's what's wrong. We really belong to each other."

The old woman glanced at George and he saw the same flicker of feeling
in her eyes. And tears, tears of regret. Why? "We have you
outnumbered," the old woman said quietly to Jenny.

"I don't care. I have a gun; I'll use it as long as I'm able."

The Morals Squad raised their weapons. The Director shook her head
imperiously and they snapped to attention again. "If you take him from
us," she called out to Jenny, "you'll be outlawed. We'll hunt you
down, if we can."

"I want him," Jenny persisted. "I don't care about the rest of it."

The old woman nodded to George. He couldn't believe that she meant it.
The Director was on her home ground, in her headquarters building,
backed by an armed squad of stone-faced Amazons. She had no reason to
let him go.

She walked beside him as he moved down the hall. When they were
twenty feet from the guard, she closed her thin hand on his arm; her
eyes swam with tears and she whispered, "There truly is a love potion.
Not this nonsense we bottle here, but something real and very
worthwhile. You and this girl have found it. I know that, from the way
she talks. She doesn't say anything about ownership, and that's as it
should be. As it has to be, for any of us to be happy. Hold tight to
that all the rest of your life. Don't ever believe in words; don't
fall for any more love stories; believe what you feel deep
inside--what you know yourself to be true.

"You men who learn how to break away are our only hope, too. Most of
us don't see that yet. I do; I know what it used to be like. Someday
there may be enough men with the stamina to take back the place of
dominance that we stole from them. We thought we wanted it; for
decades before we had been screaming about women's rights." Her thin
lips twisted in a sneer and she spat her disgust. "Finally we took
what we wanted, and it turned to ashes in our hands. We made our men
playthings; we made them slaves. And after that they weren't men any
more. But what we stole isn't the sort of thing you can hand back on a
silver platter; you men have to get enough courage to take it away
from us."

Her grip tightened on his arm. "There's a fire door at the end of the
hall; if you push the emergency button, you'll close it. That will
give you a five or ten minute start. I can't help you any more...."

They were abreast of Jenny. She seized Jenny's hand and thrust it into
his. "Beat it, kids; there's a bachelor camp on the north ridge. You
can make it.

"And from here on in, what he says goes," the old woman added. "Don't
forget that."

"She won't," George answered, supremely self-assured.

He took Jenny's arm and, turning abruptly, they made their break for
freedom. The Director managed to remain standing in the middle of the
corridor, making a dangerous target of herself so that none of the
Morals Squad could risk a shot at the fugitives. As the fire door
clanged shut George looked back. He saw the old woman's lips moving in
silent prayer.

       *       *       *       *       *






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Love Story, by Irving E. Cox, Jr.

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LOVE STORY ***

***** This file should be named 32078.txt or 32078.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/2/0/7/32078/

Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
