The Project Gutenberg EBook of Instant of Decision, by Gordon Randall Garrett

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Instant of Decision

Author: Gordon Randall Garrett

Illustrator: Ebel

Release Date: April 22, 2010 [EBook #32088]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK INSTANT OF DECISION ***




Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







                         Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from Space Science Fiction May 1953. Extensive
    research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S. copyright on this
    publication was renewed.


                         INSTANT OF DECISION


                          BY RANDALL GARRETT


                         ILLUSTRATED BY EBEL


     How could a man tell the difference if all the reality of
     Earth turned out to be a cosmic hoax? Suppose it turned out
     that this was just a stage set for students of history?

       *       *       *       *       *




When the sharp snap of a pistol shot came from the half-finished
building, Karnes wasn't anywhere near the sandpile that received the
slug. He was fifteen feet away, behind the much more reliable
protection of a neat stack of cement bags that provided cover all the
way to a window in the empty shell of brick and steel before him.

Three hundred yards behind him, the still-burning inferno of what had
been the Assembly Section of Carlson Spacecraft sent a reddish,
unevenly pulsating light over the surrounding territory, punctuating
the redness with intermittent flashes of blue-white from flaring
magnesium.

For an instant, Karnes let himself hope that the shot might be heard
at the scene of the blaze, but only for an instant. The roar of fire,
men, and machine would be too much for a little pop like that.

He moved quietly along the stacked cement bags, and eased himself over
the sill of the gaping window into the building. He was in a little
hallway. Somewhere ahead and to his left would be a door that would
lead into the main hallway where James Avery, alias James Harvey,
alias half-a-dozen other names, was waiting to take another pot-shot
at the sandpile.

The passageway was longer than he had thought, and he realized that he
might have been just a little careless in coming in through the
window. With the firelight at his back, he might make a pretty good
target from farther down the hall, or from any of the dark, empty
rooms that would someday be officers'.

Then he found it. The slight light from the main hallway came through
enough to show him where to turn.

Keeping in the darkness, Karnes' eyes surveyed the broad hallway for
several seconds before he spotted the movement near a stairway. After
he knew where to look, it was easy to make out the man's crouched
figure.

Karnes thought: _I can't call to him to surrender. I can't let him get
away. I can't sneak across that hall to stick my gun in his ribs. And,
above all, I cannot let him get away with that microfilm._

_Hell, there's only one thing I can do._

Karnes lifted his gun, aimed carefully at the figure, and fired.

       *       *       *       *       *

Avery must have had a fairly tight grip on his own weapon, because
when Karnes' slug hit him, it went off once before his body spread
itself untidily across the freshly set cement. Then the gun fell out
of the dead hand and slid a few feet, spinning in silly little
circles.

Karnes approached the corpse cautiously, just in case it wasn't a
corpse, but it took only a moment to see that the caution had been
unnecessary. He knelt, rolled the body over, unfastened the pants,
pulled them down to the knees and stripped off the ribbon of adhesive
tape that he knew would be on the inside of the thigh. Underneath it
were four little squares of thin plastic.

As he looked at the precious microfilm in his hand, he sensed
something odd. If he had been equipped with the properly developed
muscles to do so, he would have pricked his ears. There was a soft
footstep behind him.

He spun around on his heel, his gun ready. There was another man
standing at the top of the shadowy stairway.

Karnes stood up slowly, his weapon still levelled.

"Come down from there slowly, with your hands in the air!"

The man didn't move immediately, and, although Karnes couldn't see his
face clearly in the shimmering shadows, he had the definite impression
that there was a grin on it. When the man did move, it was to turn
quickly and run down the upper hallway, with a shot ringing behind
him.

Karnes made the top of the stairway and sent another shot after the
fleeing man, whose outline was easily visible against the pre-dawn
light that was now beginning to come in through a window at the far
end of the hall.

The figure kept running, and Karnes went after him, firing twice more
as he ran.

_Who taught you to shoot, dead-eye?_ he thought, as the man continued
to run.

At the end of the hall, the man turned abruptly into one of the
offices-to-be, his pursuer only five yards behind him.

       *       *       *       *       *

Afterwards, Karnes thought it over time after time, trying to find
some flaw or illusion in what he saw. But, much as he hated to believe
his own senses, he remained convinced.

The broad window shed enough light to see everything in the room, but
there wasn't much in it except for the slightly iridescent gray object
in the center.

It was an oblate spheroid, about seven feet high and eight or nine
feet through. As Karnes came through the door, he saw the man step
_through_ the seemingly solid material into the flattened globe.

Then globe, man and all, vanished. The room was empty.

Karnes checked his headlong rush into the room and peered around in
the early morning gloom. For a full minute his brain refused even to
attempt rationalizing what he had seen. He looked wildly around, but
there was no one there. Suddenly he felt very foolish.

_All right. So men can run into round gray things and vanish. Now use
a little sense and look around._

There was something else in the room. Karnes knelt and looked at the
little object that lay on the floor a few feet from where the gray
globe had been. A cigarette case; one of those flat, coat-pocket jobs
with a jet black enamel surface laid over tiny checked squares that
would be absolutely useless for picking up fingerprints. If there were
any prints, they'd be on the inside.

He started to pick it up and realized he must still be a bit confused;
his hands were full. His right held the heavy automatic, and between
the thumb and forefinger of his left were the four tiny sheets of
microfilm.

Karnes holstered the pistol, took an envelope from his pocket, put the
films in it, replaced the envelope, and picked up the cigarette case.
It was, he thought, a rather odd-looking affair. It--

"Awright, you. Stand up slow, with your hands where I can see 'em."

_Great God_, thought Karnes, I _didn't know they were holding a tea
party in this building_. He did as he was told.

There were two of them at the door, both wearing the uniform of
Carlson Spacecraft. Plant protection squad.

"Who are you, bud?" asked the heavy-jawed one who had spoken before.
"And whataya doin' here?"

Karnes, keeping his hands high, said: "Take my billfold out of my hip
pocket."

"Okay. But first get over against that wall and lean forward."
Evidently the man was either an ex-cop or a reader of detective
stories.

       *       *       *       *       *

When Karnes had braced himself against the wall, the guard went
through his pockets, all of them, but he didn't take anything out
except the pistol and the billfold.

The card in the special case of the wallet changed the guard's manner
amazingly.

"Oh," he said softly. "Government, huh? Gee, I'm sorry, sir, but we
didn't know--"

Karnes straightened up, and put his hands down. The cigarette case
that had been in his right hand all along dropped into his coat
pocket.

"That's all right," he said. "Did you see the lad at the foot of the
stairs?"

"Sure. Jim Avery. Worked in Assembly. What happened to him?"

"He got in the way of the bullet. Resisting arrest. He's the jasper
that set off the little incendiaries that started that mess out there.
We've been watching him for months, now, but we didn't get word of
this cute stroke until too late."

The guard looked puzzled. "Jim Avery. But why'd he want to do that?"

Karnes looked straight at him. "Leaguer!"

The guard nodded. You never could tell when the League would pop up
like that.

Even after the collapse of Communism after the war, the world hadn't
learned anything, it seemed. The Eurasian League had seemed, at first,
to be patterned after the Western world's United Nations, but it
hadn't worked out that way.

The League was jealous of the UN lead in space travel, for one thing,
and they had neither the money nor the know-how to catch up. The UN
might have given them help, but, as the French delegate had remarked:
"For what reason should we arm a potential enemy?"

After all, they argued, with the threat of the UN's Moonbase hanging
over the League to keep them peaceful, why should we give them
spaceships so they can destroy Moonbase?

The Eurasian League had been quiet for a good many years, brooding,
but behaving. Then, three years ago, Moonbase had vanished in a flash
of actinic light, leaving only a new minor crater in the crust of
Luna.

There was no proof of anything, of course. It had to be written off as
an accident. But from that day on, the League had become increasingly
bolder; their policy was: "Smash the UN and take the planets for
ourselves!"

And now, with Carlson Spacecraft going up in flames, they seemed to be
getting closer to their goal.

       *       *       *       *       *

Karnes accepted his weapon and billfold from the guard and led them
back down the stairway. "Would one of you guys phone the State Police?
They'll want to know what happened."

The State Police copters came and went, taking Karnes and the late Mr.
Avery with them, and leaving behind the now dying glow of Carlson
Spacecraft.

There were innumerable forms to fill out and affidavits to make; there
was a long-distance call to UN headquarters in New York to verify
Karnes' identity. And Karnes asked to borrow the police lab for an
hour or so.

That evening, he caught the rocket for Long Island.

As the SR-37 floated through the hard vacuum five hundred miles above
central Nebraska, Karnes leaned back in his seat, turning the odd
cigarette case over and over in his hands.

Except for the neat, even checking that covered it, the little
three-by-four inch object was entirely featureless. There were no
catches or hinges, or even any line of cleavage around the edge. He
had already found that it wouldn't open.

Whatever it was, it was most definitely _not_ a cigarette case.

The X-ray plates had shown it to be perfectly homogeneous throughout.

_As far as I can see_, thought Karnes, _it's nothing but a piece of
acid-proof plastic, except that the specific gravity is way the hell
too high_. _Maybe if I had cut it open, I could have--_

Karnes didn't push anything on the case, of that he was sure. Nor did
he squeeze, shake, or rub it in any unusual way. But something
happened; something which he was convinced came from the case in his
hands.

He had the definite impression of something akin to a high-pressure
firehose squirting from the interior of the case, through his skull,
and into and over his brain, washing it and filling it. Little rivers
of knowledge trickled down through the convolutions of his brain,
collected in pools, and soaked in.

       *       *       *       *       *

He was never sure just how long the process took but it was certainly
not more than a second or two. Afterwards, he just sat there, staring.

From far across the unimaginable depths of the galaxy, fighting its
way through the vast, tenuous dust clouds of interstellar space, came
a voice: "Are you ill, sir?"

Karnes looked up at the stewardess. "Oh. Oh, no. No, I'm all right.
Just thinking. I'm perfectly all right."

He looked at the "cigarette case" again. He knew what it was, now.
There wasn't any English word for it, but he guessed "mind impressor"
would come close.

It had done just that; impressed his mind with knowledge he should not
have; the record of something he had no business knowing.

_And he wished to Heaven he didn't!_

_This_, Karnes considered, _is a problem_. _The stuff is so_ alien!
_Just a series of things I know, but can't explain. Like a dream; you
know all about it, but it's practically impossible to explain it to
anybody else._

At the spaceport, he was met by an official car. George Lansberg, one
of the New York agents, was sitting in the back seat.

"Hi, sleuth. I heard you were coming in, so I asked to meet you." He
lowered his voice as Karnes got in and the car pulled away from the
parking lot. "How about our boy, Avery?"

Karnes shook his head. "Too late. Thirty million bucks worth of
material lost and Avery lost too."

"How come?"

"Had to kill him to keep him from getting away with these."

He showed Lansberg the microfilm squares.

"The photocircuit inserts for the new autopilot. We'd lose everything
if the League ever got its hands on these."

"Didn't learn anything from Avery, eh?" Lansberg asked.

"Not a thing." Karnes lapsed into silence. He didn't feel it necessary
to mention the mind impressor just yet.

Lansberg stuck a cigarette into his mouth and talked around it as he
lit it.

"We've got something you'll be getting in on, now that Avery is taken
care of. We've got a fellow named Brittain, real name Bretinov, who is
holed up in a little apartment in Brooklyn. He's the sector head for
that section, and we know who his informers are, and who he gives
orders to. What we don't know is who gives orders to him.

"Now we have it set up for Brittain to get his hands on some very
honest-looking, but strictly phony stuff for him to pass on to the
next echelon. Then we just sit around and watch until he does pass
it."

       *       *       *       *       *

Karnes found he was listening to Lansberg with only half an ear. His
brain was still buzzing with things he'd never heard of, trying to fit
things he had always known in with things he knew now but had never
known before. Damn that "cigarette case"!

"Sounds like fun," he answered Lansberg.

"Yeah. Great. Well, here we are." They had driven to the Long Island
Spaceways Building which also housed the local office.

They got out and went into the building, up the elevator, down a
corridor, and into an office suite.

Lansberg said: "I'll wait for you here. We'll get some coffee
afterwards."

The redhead behind the front desk smiled up at Karnes.

"Go on in; he's expecting you."

"I don't know whether I ought to leave you out here with Georgie or
not," Karnes grinned. "I think he has designs."

"Oh, goodie!" she grinned back.

_My, my aren't we clever!_ His thought was bitter, but his face didn't
show it.

Before he went in, he straightened his collar before the wall mirror.
He noticed that his plain, slightly tanned face still looked the same
as ever. Same ordinary gray-green eyes, same ordinary nose.

_Chum, you_ look _perfectly sane_. _You_ are _perfectly sane. But who
in hell would believe it?_

It wouldn't, after all, do any good for him to tell anyone anything he
had found. No matter what the answer was, there wasn't anything he
could do about it. There wasn't anything _anyone_ could do about it.

Thus, Karnes' report to his superior was short, to the point, and
censored.

That evening, Karnes sat in his apartment, chain-smoking, and staring
out the window. Finally, he mashed out a stub, stood up, and said
aloud: "Maybe if I write it down I can get it straight."

He sat down in front of the portable on his desk, rolled in a sheet
of paper, and put his fingers on the keys. Then, for a long time, he
just sat there, turning it over and over in his mind. Finally, he
began to type.

     _A Set of General Instructions and a Broad Outline on the
     Purposes and Construction of the Shrine of Earth._

     _Part One: Historical._

     _Some hundred or so millennia ago, insofar as the most
     exacting of historical research can ascertain, our remote
     ancestors were confined to one planet of the Galaxy; the
     legendary Earth._

     _The third planet of Sun (unintelligible number) has long
     been suspected of being Earth, but it was not until the
     development of the principles of time transfer that it
     became possible to check the theory completely._

     _The brilliant work done by--_

     (Karnes hesitated over the name, then wrote--)

     _--Starson on the ancient history and early evolution of the
     race has shown the theory to be correct. This has opened a
     new and fascinating field for the study of
     socioanthropology._

     _Part Two: Present Purposes and Aims._

     _Because of the great energy transfer and cosmic danger
     involved in too frequent or unrestricted time travel, it has
     been decided that the best method for studying the social
     problems involved would be to rebuild, in toto, the ancient
     Earth as it was just after the initial discoveries of atomic
     power and interplanetary space travel._

     _In order to facilitate this work, the Surveying Group will
     translate themselves to the chronological area in question,
     and obtain complete records of that time, covering the years
     between (1940) and (2020)._

     _When the survey is complete, the Construction Group will
     rebuild that civilization with as great an exactness as
     possible, complete with population, fossil strata, edifices,
     etc._

     _Upon the occasion of the opening of the Shrine, the replica
     of our early civilization will be begun as it was on
     (January 3, 1953). The population, having been impregnated
     with the proper memories, will be permitted to go about
     their lives unhampered._

Karnes stopped again and reread the paragraph he had just written. It
sounded different when it was on paper. The dates, for instance, he
had put in parentheses because that was the way he had understood
them. But he knew that whoever had made the mind-impressor didn't use
the same calendar he was used to.

He frowned at the paper, then went on typing.

     _Part Three: Conduct of Students._

     _Students wishing to study the Shrine for the purpose of
     (unintelligible again) must obtain permits from the Galactic
     Scholars Council, and, upon obtaining such permits, must
     conduct themselves according to whatever rules may be laid
     down by such Council._

     _Part Four: Corrective Action to be Taken._

     _At certain points in the history of ancient Earth, certain
     crises arose which, in repetition, would be detrimental to
     the Shrine. These crises must be mitigated in order that--_

Karnes stopped. That was all there was. Except--except for one more
little tail end of thought. He tapped the keys again.

(_Continued on Stratum Two_)

_Whatever in hell that means_, he thought.

He sat back in his chair and went over the two sheets of typed paper.
It wasn't complete, not by a long shot. There were little tones of
meaning that a printed, or even a spoken word couldn't put over. There
were evidences of a vast and certainly superhuman civilization; of an
alien and yet somehow completely human way of thinking.

But that was the gist of it. The man he had seen in that new building
at Carlson Spacecraft was no ordinary human being.

That, however, didn't bother Karnes half so much as the gray globe the
man had disappeared into after he had been shot at. And Karnes knew,
now, that the shots probably hadn't missed.

The globe was one of two things. And the intruder had been one of two
groups.

(A) One of the Surveyors of Ancient Earth, in which case the globe had
been a--well, a time machine. Or

(B) A student, in which case the machine was a type of spacecraft.

The question was: Which?

If it were (A), then he and the world around him were real, living,
working out their own destinies toward the end point represented by
the man in the gray globe.

But if it were (B)--

Then this was the Shrine, and he and all the rest of Earth were
nothing but glorified textbooks!

And there would come crises on the Shrine, duplicates of the crises on
old Earth. Except that they wouldn't be permitted to happen. The poor
ignorant people on the Shrine had to be coddled, like the children
they were. Damn!

Karnes crumpled the sheets of paper in his hands, twisting them
savagely. Then he methodically tore them into bits.

       *       *       *       *       *

When the first dawnlight touched the sea, Karnes was watching it out
the east window. It had been twenty-four hours since he had seen the
superman walk into his gray globe and vanish.

All night, he had been searching his brain for some clue that would
tell him which of the two choices he should believe in. And he
couldn't bring himself to believe in either.

Once he had thought: _Why do I believe, then, what the impressor said?
Why not just forget it?_

But that didn't help. He _did_ believe it. That alien instrument had
impressed his mind, not only with the facts themselves, but with an
absolute faith that they _were_ facts. There was no room for doubt;
the knowledge imparted to his mind was true, and he knew it.

For a time, he had been comforted by the thought that the gray globe
must be a time machine because of the way it had vanished. It was very
comforting until he realized that travel to the stars and beyond
didn't necessarily mean a spaceship as he knew spaceships.
Teleportation--

Now, with the dawn, Karnes knew there was only one thing he could do.

Somehow, somewhere, there would be other clues--clues a man who knew
what to look for might find. The Galactics couldn't be perfect, or
they wouldn't have let him get the mind impressor in his hands. Ergo,
somewhere they would slip again.

Karnes knew he would spend the rest of his life looking for that one
slip. He had to know the truth, one way or another.

Or he might not stay sane.

       *       *       *       *       *

Lansberg picked him up at eight in a police copter. As they floated
toward New York, Karnes' mind settled itself into one cold purpose; a
purpose that lay at the base of his brain, waiting.

Lansberg was saying: "--and one of Brittain's men got the stuff last
night. He hadn't passed it on to Brittain himself yet this morning,
but he very probably will have by the time we get there.

"We've rigged it up so that Brittain will have to pass it to his
superior by tomorrow or it will be worthless. When he does, we'll
follow it right to the top."

"If we've got every loophole plugged," said Karnes, "we ought to take
them easy."

"Brother, I hope so! It took us eight months to get Brittain all hot
and bothered over the bait, and another two months to give it to him
in a way that wouldn't make him suspicious.

"It's restricted material, of course, so that we can pin a subversive
activities rap on them, at least, if not espionage. But we had to
argue like hell to keep it restricted; the Spatial Commission was
ready to release it, since it's really relatively harmless."

Karnes looked absently at the thin line of smoke wiggling from
Lansberg's cigarette.

"You know," he said, "there are times when I wish this war would come
right out in the open. Actually, we've been fighting the League for
years, but we don't admit it. There have been little disagreements and
incidents until the devil won't have it. But it's still supposed to be
a 'worry war'."

Lansberg shrugged. "It will get hot just as soon as the Eurasian
League figures they are far enough along in spacecraft construction to
get the Martian colonies if they win. Then they'll try to smash us
before we can retaliate; then, and not before.

"We can't start it. Our only hope is that when they start, they'll
underestimate us. Say, what's that you're fooling with?"

The sudden change of subject startled Karnes for an instant. He looked
at the mind impressor in his hands. He had been toying with it
incessantly, hoping it would repeat its performance, or perhaps give
additional information.

"This?" He covered quickly. "It's a--a puzzle. One of those plastic
puzzles." _Maybe it doesn't work on the same person twice. If I can
get George to fool around with it, he might hit the right combination
again._

"Hmmm. How does it work?" George seemed interested.

Karnes handed it to him. "It has a couple of little sliding weights
inside it. You have to turn the thing just right to unlock it, then it
comes apart when you slide out a section of the surface. Try it."

       *       *       *       *       *

Lansberg took it, turned it this way and that, moving his hands over
the surface. Karnes watched him for several minutes, but there didn't
seem to be any results.

Lansberg looked up from his labors. "I give up. I can't even see where
it's supposed to come apart, and I can't feel any weights sliding
inside it. Show me how it works."

Karnes thought fast. "Why do you think I was fiddling with it? I
don't know how it works. A friend of mine bet me a ten spot that I
couldn't figure out the combination."

Lansberg looked back at the impressor in his hands. "Could he do it?"

"A snap. I watched him twice, and I still didn't get it."

"Mmm. Interesting." George went back to work on the "puzzle."

Just before they landed on the roof of the UN annex, Lansberg handed
the impressor back to Karnes. It had obviously failed to do what
either of them had hoped it would.

"It's your baby," Lansberg said, shaking his head. "All I have to say
is it's a hell of a way to earn ten bucks."

Karnes grinned and dropped the thing back in his coat pocket.

By the time that evening had rolled around, Karnes was beginning to
get just a little bored. He and Lansberg had been in and out of the
New York office in record time. Then they had spent a few hours with
New York's Finest and the District Attorney, lining up a net to pick
up all the little rats involved.

After that, there was nothing to do but wait.

Karnes slept a couple of hours to catch up, read two magazines from
cover to cover, and played eight games of solitaire. He was getting
itchy.

His brain kept crackling. _What's the matter with me? I ought to be
thinking about this Brittain fellow instead of--_

But, after all, what did Brittain matter? According to the records, he
was born Alex Bretinov, in Marseilles, France, in nineteen
sixty-eight. His father, a dyed-in-the-wool Old Guard Communist, had
been born in Minsk in nineteen forty.

_Or had he been wound up, and his clockwork started in January of
nineteen fifty-three?_

The radio popped. "Eighteen. Alert. Brittain just left his place on
foot. Carson, Reymann following. Over."

Lansberg dropped his magazine. "He seems to be heading for the Big
Boy--I hope."

The ground car followed him to a subway, and two men on foot followed
him in from Flatbush Avenue.

       *       *       *       *       *

Some hours later, after much devious turning, dodging, and switching,
Brittain climbed into a taxi on the corner of Park Avenue and
Forty-seventh Street, evidently feeling he had ditched any tails he
might have had.

Karnes and Lansberg were right behind him in a radio car.

The cab headed due south on Park Avenue, following it until it became
Fourth, swung right at Tenth Street, past Grace Church, across
Broadway. At Sixth, it angled left toward Greenwich Village.

"Somewhere in the Village, nickels to knotholes," Lansberg guessed as
he turned to follow.

Karnes, at the radio, was giving rapid-fire directions over the
scrambler-equipped transceiver. By this time, several carloads of
agents and police were converging on the cab from every direction.
From high above, could be heard the faint hum of 'copters.

Lansberg was exultant. "We've got them for once! And the goods on
every essobee in the place."

The cars hummed smoothly through the broad streets, past the
shabby-genteel apartment neighborhood. Back in the early sixties, some
of these buildings had been high-priced hotels, but the Village had
gone to pot since the seventies.

A few minutes later, the cab pulled up in front of an imposing looking
building of slightly tarnished aluminum paneling. Brittain got out,
paid his fare, and went inside.

As the cab pulled away, Karnes gave orders for it to be picked up a
few blocks away, just in case.

The rest of the vehicles began to surround the building.

Karnes, meanwhile, followed Brittain into the foyer of the apartment
hotel. It was almost a mistake. Brittain hadn't gone in. Evidently
attracted by the footsteps following him, he turned and looked back
out. Karnes wasn't more than ten feet away.

_Just pretend you live here_, thought Karnes, _and bully-boy will
never know the difference_.

He walked right on up to the doorway, pretending not to notice
Brittain. Evidently, the saboteur was a little flustered, not quite
knowing who Karnes was. He, too, pretended that he had no suspicions.
He pressed a buzzer on the panel to announce himself to a guest.
Karnes noticed it was 523; a fifth floor button.

The front door, inside the foyer, was one of those gadgets with an
electric lock that doesn't open unless you either have a key to the
building or can get a friend who lives there to let you in.

When Karnes saw Brittain press the buzzer, he waited a second and took
a chance.

"Here," he said, fishing in his pocket, "I'll let you in." _That ought
to give him the impression I live here._

Brittain smiled fetchingly. "Thanks, but I--"

Bzzzz! The old-fashioned lock announced that it was open. Karnes
stopped fishing and opened the door, letting Brittain follow him in.
He stayed in the lead to the elevator, and pushed the button marked
"4."

"You getting off before four?" he asked conversationally.

"No."

The elevator slid on up to four without another word being said by
either man.

Karnes was judging the speed of the elevator, estimating the time it
took for the doors to open as they did so, and making quick mental
comparisons with his own ability to climb stairs at a run. The
elevator was an old one, and fairly slow--

When the doors slid open, he stepped out and began to walk easily down
the hall toward the stairway. When the elevator clicked shut, he broke
into a run and hit the stairway at top speed, his long legs taking the
steps three at a time.

The stairway was poorly lit, since it was hardly ever used, and, at
the fifth floor, he was able to conceal himself in the darkness as
Brittain turned up the hall toward 523.

Karnes looked closely at his surroundings for the first time. There
was a well-worn, but not ragged, nylon carpet on the floor, dull
chrome railing on the stair bannisters, and the halls were lit by
old-fashioned glo-plates in the ceiling. The place was inexpensive,
but not cheap.

Having made sure that Brittain actually had entered 523, he stepped
back toward the elevator in order to notify Lansberg.

A sudden voice said: "You lookin' for-a somebody, meester?"

Karnes turned. An elderly man with a heavy mustache and a heavy body
stood partway up the stairs, clad in slacks and shirt.

"Who are you?" frowned Karnes.

"I'm Amati, the supratendent. Why?" The scowl was heavy.

Karnes couldn't take any chances. The man might be perfectly okay,
but--

       *       *       *       *       *

Lansberg's steps sounded, coming up the stairs. With him was a
Manhattan Squad officer of the Police Department.

"Shhh, Mr. Amati. C'mere a minute," said the cop.

"Oh. Lootenant Carnotti. Whatsa--"

"Shhhhhh! C'mere, I said, and be quiet!"

"You know this man?" Lansberg asked the policeman softly, indicating
Amati.

"Sure. He's okay."

Lansberg turned to the superintendent. "What do you know about the guy
who just came in?"

Amati seemed to have realized that something serious was going on, for
his voice dropped to a conspiratorial whisper. "I dunno. I don't-a see
who it is. Whatsa goin' on, Lootenant Carnotti?"

"What about Apartment 523? Who lives there?" asked Karnes.

"Oh, them? Meester and Meeses Seigert. Artists. Sheesa paint pictures,
heesa make statues." Then Amati's eyes widened knowingly. "Ohhh! You
guys da Vice Squad, eh? I _theenk_ theresa someteeng fonny about
them!"

Footsteps sounded coming down the stairs from above.

"We watched the indicator needle on the elevator door in the lobby,
and I signalled the 'copters on the roof," Lansberg whispered.

The hallway began to fill quietly with police.

Lieutenant Carnotti assigned one of the men to watch Amati, mainly in
order to keep him out of the way, and Karnes led the men down the hall
towards 523, guns drawn.

Karnes knocked boldly on the door.

"Yeah? Who is it?" asked someone inside.

Karnes pitched his voice a little lower than normal, and said: "It's-a
me, Meester Amati, only me, the soopratendant."

The imitation wasn't perfect, but the muffling effect of the door
would offset any imperfections.

"Oh, sure, Mr. Amati. Just a sec." There was a short pause, filled
with muffled conversation, then somebody was unlocking the door.

       *       *       *       *       *

Things began to happen fast. As the door came open, Karnes saw that it
had one of those inside chain locks on it that permit the door to be
opened only a few inches. Without hesitation, he threw his weight
against the door. Lansberg was right behind him.

Under the combined weight of the two men, the chain ripped out of the
woodwork, permitting the door to swing free. As it did so, it slammed
into the face of the man who had opened it, knocking him backwards.

There were seven or eight other men and two women in the room. One of
the men already had a heavy pistol out and was aiming it at the
doorway. Karnes dropped to the floor and fired just as the other's
pistol went off.

The high-velocity three millimeter slug whined through the air above
Karnes' head and buried itself in Lansberg's shoulder. Lansberg
dropped, spun halfway around from the shock. His knees hit Karnes in
the back.

Karnes lurched forward a little, and regained his balance. Something
flew out of his coat pocket and skittered across the floor. Karnes
didn't notice what it was until one of the men across the room picked
it up.

Brittain had picked up the mind impressor!

Karnes was aware that there were more men behind him firing at another
of the conspirators who had made the mistake of drawing a weapon, but
he wasn't interested too much. He was watching Brittain.

It only took seconds, but to Karnes it seemed like long minutes.
Brittain had evidently thought the impressor was a weapon when he
picked it up, and, after seeing his mistake, had started to throw it
at the door. Then the impressor shimmered slightly, as though there
were a hot radiator between the observor and the object. Brittain
stopped, paralyzed, his eyes widening.

Then he gasped and threw the impressor against the floor as hard as he
could.

"_NO!_" he screamed, "_IT'S A LIE!_"

The impressor struck the floor and broke. From its shattered interior
came a blinding multi-colored glare. Then there was darkness. Karnes
fainted.

When Karnes awoke, one of the policemen was shaking him.

"Wake up, Mr. Karnes, wake up!"

Karnes sat up abruptly. "What happened?" He had no time to be
original.

"I don't know for sure. One of the Leaguers threw a gas bomb of some
sort, and it knocked out everyone in the room. Funny, though, it even
knocked out all the Leaguers. When the rest of the boys came in,
everybody was out cold on the floor. Most of them are coming out of it
now, except for two of the Leaguers. They got some lead in them,
though, not gas."

Karnes stood up. He felt a little dizzy, but otherwise there wasn't
anything wrong. He surveyed the room.

On the floor was a slightly yellowed spot where the impressor had
flared and vanished. Lansberg was unconscious with a copiously
bleeding right shoulder. Two other men were rapidly being brought
around by the police. Three of the League agents were still out;
nobody tried to wake them up, they were being handcuffed.

One of the women was crying and cursing the "damned filthy Nations
police" over one of the bodies, and the other woman was sitting
stonily, staring at her handcuffs with a faint sneer.

"Where's Brittain?" roared Karnes. The man was nowhere in the room.

"Gone," said one of the cops. "Evidently he skipped out while the rest
of us were unconscious. He was the guy who threw the bomb."

Karnes glanced at his watch. One sixteen in the morning. They had been
out about twelve or thirteen minutes.

"Where the devil did he go? How in--"

Lieutenant Carnotti came up to him, a look of self-disgust on his
face. "I know how he got away, Mr. Karnes; I just talked to the boys
on the roof. He grabbed a uniform coat and cap off Sergeant Joseph
while he was out and commandeered a 'copter on the roof."

       *       *       *       *       *

Karnes didn't wait for further information. He ran out into the hall
and into the open elevator. Within less than a minute, he was on the
roof.

One cop was speaking rapidly into a transmitter.

"--number 3765. Left about ten minutes ago, supposedly for the
hospital. Officer Powers in the 'copter with him."

He cut off and looked at Karnes, who was standing over him. His gun
was out before he spoke. "Who are you, buddy."

Karnes told him who he was. The cop looked skeptical. Karnes didn't
have his hat on, and his clothes were a bit rumpled after his nap on
the floor.

Karnes didn't need to say anything; another policeman was going
through his pockets, and he found the billfold. As soon as they saw
the forgeproof identity card, they relaxed.

"Sorry, Mr. Karnes," said the man at the transceiver, "but we've
already let one man get away."

Karnes nodded. "I know. Pure blind luck that his suit was almost the
same shade as that gray uniform you guys wear, or he'd never have got
away with it. All he needed was the jacket and cap."

"Have any idea which way he went?"

The cop shrugged. "He came up here and told us that three men had been
shot down below and some more gassed. He said Mr. Lansberg had sent
him for a hospital call. Then he jumped in a 'copter with Powers and
headed northeast. We didn't pay much attention. After all, he was
wearing a sergeant's stripes."

Northeast. That would be toward Long Island. But, naturally, he would
circle; he wouldn't be dumb enough to head in the right direction
until he was out of sight. Or would he?

"Get on that radio again," he told the radioman, "--and tell them I
want that man alive. Get that--_alive!_"

"Right." The officer switched on his microphone and began to talk.

Karnes pinched the bridge of his nose and closed his eyes in an
attempt to concentrate. With Lansberg shot up, that put the Brittain
case in his hands. Theoretically, he should be pumping the prisoners
down below to find out how much higher the spy ring went.

       *       *       *       *       *

But his real interest lay in Brittain, himself. There was no doubt
that he had received another message from the impressor before he had
thrown it down.

Evidently, when the thing broke, the unknown energies which powered it
had short-circuited, paralyzing everyone in the room with their
mind-impressing effect.

Then why hadn't it affected Brittain? Perhaps his recent exposure to a
normal dosage had immunized him. There was no way of knowing--there
never would be.

But what was the message Brittain had received from the impressor that
would make him react so violently? It couldn't be the same one that
he, Karnes, had received.

Continued on Stratum Two!

Sure; that was it! Like the pages in a book. He, himself, had been hit
with page one; Brittain had page two. Page three? Lost forever.

Why hadn't they found that 'copter by now? It ought to be easy enough
to spot.

He walked over to the edge of the building and looked down. The police
were herding the prisoners into the ground cars. Presently, they were
gone. One of the police officers touched his shoulder.

"Ready to go, Mr. Karnes?"

Karnes nodded and climbed into the 'copter. The machine lifted and
headed toward the Central Police Station.

He was still trying to think when the phone rang. The policeman picked
it up.

"3217. Brown speaking. Oh? Yeah, just a second. It's for you, Mr.
Karnes."

Karnes took the instrument. "Karnes speaking."

"Radio Central, Mr. Karnes," came the voice. "We just got some more on
Brittain. About ten minutes ago, he abandoned the police 'copter.
Officer Powers was in the seat, shot through the head. We'll get the
essobee on a murder rap, now."

"Where was the 'copter abandoned?"

Radio Central told him and went on: "Funny thing was, he didn't try
to hide it or anything. And he stole another 'copter from a private
citizen. We're trying to get the description now. I'll call you if
anything further comes in."

"Fine." Karnes hung up. The address where Brittain had left the
'copter was in almost a direct line between the apartment building and
Long Island Spaceport. But if Brittain were actually heading there,
why should he leave such a broad and obvious trail?

He turned to the officer who was driving the 'copter.

"I've got a hunch. Swivel this thing around and head for Long Island.
I've got a funny feeling that Brittain will be there. He--"

The phone rang again, and Karnes grabbed it.

"Mr. Karnes, we've found that civilian's 'copter! It's at Long Island
Spaceport! Just a second, the stuff's still coming in." Pause. "Get
this: A man answering to Brittain's description bought a ticket for
the West Coast rocket.

"As you know, that's UN territory, and we have no jurisdiction. The
rocket is sealed for takeoff, but they're holding it for us until you
get there!"

"Right! I'm headed there now!" he answered quickly.

It was twelve minutes later that the police 'copter settled just
outside the rocket enclosure. Karnes had already notified the pilot to
be ready for him. He sprinted up the ramp and stood at the airlock of
the transcontinental rocket.

It sighed open, and Karnes stepped inside. He was met by a frightened
stewardess.

"Tell him to get in here and not to try any funny stuff!" snapped a
voice from the passenger cabin.

Brittain was standing at the forward end of the passenger compartment
with a levelled gun.

The rocket was tilted at forty-five degrees for the takeoff, and the
passenger's seats had swiveled with a section of the flooring to keep
them level, which gave the effect of a stairway which climbed toward
the pilot's cabin in the forward section of the ship. Brittain's
position was at the top of the stairway.

Karnes raised his hands and kept them carefully away from his hip
holster.

"All right," called Brittain, "Close that door and get this ship off
the ground."

The pilot could hear him through the intercom system. The airlock door
slid shut again.

"You and the stewardess get into a seat," the spy continued sharply.
"If you try anything funny, I start shooting the other passengers if
I can't hit you."

Karnes saw then what hold Brittain had on the pilot. The rocketeer
couldn't afford to risk the lives of his passengers.

He and the stewardess slid into the acceleration seats and strapped
themselves in. Brittain stepped down the tiered floor and took a rear
seat near a frightened-looking blonde girl.

"Anything funny, and Blondie here gets a bullet. Okay, pilot. Take her
up!"

There was a faint hiss, and then the rockets began their throbbing
roar. Acceleration pressure began to shove the passengers back in
their seats. Karnes leaned back and tried--successfully--to suppress
the smile of triumph that kept trying to come to his lips.

Brittain had finally made a mistake.

One hundred and twenty-five miles over Pennsylvania, the rockets cut
out, and the ship went into free fall. And Brittain's mistake became
evident.

With the abrupt cessation of weight, the padded acceleration seats
expanded again, pressing the passengers up against their safety
straps. But Brittain had failed to strap himself in.

       *       *       *       *       *

The expanding seat shoved forward and toward the ceiling. Before he
could recover from his surprise, Karnes had undone his own seat belt
and snapped his body through the air toward Brittain. They collided
with a thump and Brittain's body slammed against the roof of the cabin
with agonizing force. The gun came out of his hand and clanged against
a wall, then drifted off harmlessly. Brittain was out cold.

Karnes handcuffed him securely and, with the stewardess' help, tugged
him back to the baggage compartment. One of the passengers was quietly
retching into a vacuum disposal chute.

With Brittain securely strapped into an empty baggage rack, Karnes
swam back to the pilot's compartment, pulling himself along the
railing that ran along the floor.

The pilot looked relieved. "Thank heaven you got the devil! He got
wise when we delayed the takeoff, and threatened to start shooting my
passengers. There wasn't a thing I could do."

"I know. Let me use your radio."

It took a couple of minutes to get UN International Investigation on
the hookup, but Karnes finally was talking to his superior in the UN
office. He reported what had happened.

"Fine, Karnes," came the tight-beamed voice. "Now, here's something
else you ought to know. Our radar net has spotted robot rockets coming
in over the Pole. So far, five of them have been hit by interceptor
rockets, but we don't have them all by a long shot.

"Evidently, the League feels that they're ready to slam us, now that
they've got Moonbase and two of our spacecraft plants out of the way.
_The war is on_, Karnes."

Karnes acknowledged, they cut the connection.

There was one thing burning hotly in his brain. Brittain had fled New
York without seeming to care how far they traced him or what kind of
trail he left behind. _Why?_

He jerked open the door of the pilot's cabin, and, not bothering to
use the rail, launched himself toward the rear of the ship, flipping
himself halfway down to land with his feet against the baggage room
door. He pulled the door open and pushed inside.

Brittain was still groggy, so Karnes began slapping his face
methodically, rocking his head from side to side.

"Okay! Okay! Stop it!" Brittain yelled, fully awake.

Karnes stopped, and Brittain blinked, owlishly. Karnes' hunch factory
was still operating at full blast; he was fairly sure that the lie he
was about to tell would have all of the desired effect.

"You didn't really think you could get away, did you, bud?" he asked,
nastily. "We're headed back for New York now, and you'll stand trial
for murder as well as sabotage and espionage."

Brittain's eyes widened in horror.

"What did that mind impressor tell you?" Karnes went on.

       *       *       *       *       *

Brittain was trying to keep his mouth shut, but at that moment there
was a glare of light which flashed bluely through the hard quartz of a
nearby window.

From somewhere far to the north, another interceptor rocket had found
the atomic warhead of an enemy bomb.

Brittain knew and recognized that flash. He screamed wordlessly and
then began to sob like a hysterical child.

Karnes began to slap him again. "Come on, what was it?"

"Don't--don't let them go back to New York! It said--it said--" he
gasped and took a deep breath "--WE'LL ALL BE KILLED!" he screamed.

"Why?" Karnes's voice was cold.

"BOMB!" Brittain screamed again.

After a few more minutes of questioning, Karnes finally got the rest
of the story from him.

The Galactics had found that on this date a nuclear bomb would get
through the UN screen and completely destroy most of Greater New York.
Only one other bomb would get through, but it would be thrown off
course and land somewhere in the Pacific, having missed Los Angeles
entirely.

"Anything else?" asked Karnes after a few seconds of silence from
Brittain. "Didn't it say they would have to prevent that?"

Brittain's voice was dull now. "All it said was that the records would
have to be preserved. It said that things must go on exactly as
before. It said that nothing must interfere with the complete
development, whatever that means."

Karnes pushed his way out of the room and back towards the pilot's
compartment. What the pilot had to say was no news to Karnes.

"Radio from New York says that a bomb missed LA and hit the ocean.
That was a close one."

Karnes nodded silently, and leaned back in the stewardess' seat to
think.

       *       *       *       *       *

No wonder Brittain had been so anxious to get out of New York.

New York would be destroyed, but that was inevitable. The thing that
had bothered him, his dilemma, was solved.

Was this the real Earth that he lived in, or a museum that had been
set up by the Galactics? If it was old Earth, then man would solve his
present problems and go on to solve the problem of time travel and
interstellar transportation. The present war would be just another
little incident in the far past, like the battles of Gettysburg and
Agincourt.

       *       *       *       *       *

And if it were the museum Earth? No difference. For the Galactics had
decided not to interfere. They had decided to let the race of Earth go
on as it was--exactly as it had gone before. It made no difference,
really. _No difference at all._ A perfect duplication of an original
_was_ the original, in every meaningful way.

"Funny," said the pilot abruptly, "I'm not getting any signal from New
York."

Karnes took a deep breath and bit at his lower lip. But he did not
look toward the horror that was New York. The city was gone, but the
world was there--solid and real!

_You'd better expand your museum a little bit, boys_, he thought.
_We'll need to include Mars and Venus before very long. And then the
stars._

       *       *       *       *       *






End of Project Gutenberg's Instant of Decision, by Gordon Randall Garrett

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK INSTANT OF DECISION ***

***** This file should be named 32088.txt or 32088.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/2/0/8/32088/

Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
