The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Kenzie Report, by Mark Clifton

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Kenzie Report

Author: Mark Clifton

Illustrator: Kelly Freas

Release Date: April 25, 2010 [EBook #32131]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE KENZIE REPORT ***




Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







                         Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from If Worlds of Science Fiction May 1953.
    Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed.


                         THE _Kenzie_ REPORT


                          _By Mark Clifton_


                      Illustrated by Kelly Freas


     _If this story has a moral, it is: "Leave well enough
      alone." Just look what happened to Kenzie "mad-about-ants"
      MacKenzie, who didn't...._

       *       *       *       *       *




That Kenzie MacKenzie was a mad scientist hardly showed at all. To see
him ambling down the street in loose jointed manner, with sandy hair
uncombed, blue eyes looking vaguely beyond normal focus, you might
think here was a young fellow dreaming over how his gal looked last
night. It might never occur to you that he was thinking of--ants.

Of course, we fellows in the experimental lab all knew it, but Kenzie
wasn't too hard to get along with. In fact, he could usually be
counted on to pull us out of a technical hole. We put up with him
through a certain fondness, maybe even a little pride. It gave us a
harmless subject to talk about when security was too rigid on other
things.

Our Department Chief knew it, but Kenzie had solved quite a few knotty
electronics problems. The Chief never has been too particular to see
credit get back to the guy who earned it. We guessed he figured having
Kenzie there was profitable to him. In fact, the little redhead in
payroll told me the Chief was drawing quite a few bonus checks.

Personnel probably didn't know about it. Kenzie's papers, buried deep
in the files, wouldn't show it; because about the only question they
had _not_ asked us was, "Where do you stand on the matter of ants?"

There was an unwritten law in the lab for nobody ever to mention
insects, or even elderly female relatives. I guess that was why it
wasn't mentioned to the new guy, name of Robert Pringle. This fellow
Pringle worked along for a couple weeks and showed us he had the old
know-how in his fingers. A capable tech, a good joe, and we thought we
were lucky to get him.

On this particular morning, it happened that Pringle was working at
the bench next to Kenzie. Being a talented tech, like the rest of us,
his mind naturally ran along more than one channel at the same time. I
expect he was really surprised at the reaction he got when he shouted
out to the room at large.

"Hey, fellows," he yelled. "I got little green bugs on my roses. What
do you do about it?"

The silence made him look up from his work, and he couldn't help
noticing we all stood there with clinched hands and gritted teeth. We
were watching Kenzie, who snapped the juice off his soldering iron and
pointed the iron at Pringle.

"Those," said Kenzie in a hollow, impressive voice, "are aphis. If you
will look closer, Pringle, you will see among them--ants. The aphid is
to the ant as the dairy cow is to the human. Those ants are aphid
herders, carefully tending and milking their flock."

"Here we go again," moaned one of the fellows across the lab.

"The ants are a highly intelligent life form," Kenzie went on. "I
would explain it to you in detail, but I am in the middle of a problem
at this moment."

"Thank heaven for that," another tech ground out the words.

"Suffice it to say," Kenzie ignored all interruptions, "Man would well
occupy himself trying to communicate with them."

The Chief came to the doorway of his little office down at the end of
the lab. He looked us all over patiently and knowingly.

"Now give him your syllogism, Kenzie," he said quietly, "so we can all
get back to work."

"You may reflect on this, Pringle," Kenzie stated and waved his
soldering iron in the air.

"One: Man wants to communicate with intelligent life from other
planets or the stars.

"Two: We know from observation the ants communicate with one another.

"Ergo: Before we reach so far as to contact extra terrestrial
intelligence, had we not better occupy our time with solving a much
simpler communications problem; to wit: communicate with the ants? How
can we expect to solve communication with really alien beings from the
stars, when we have not learned to communicate with the intelligent
beings at our very feet?"

All over the room we sighed heavily with relief. We knew the syllogism
was the conclusion, the Sunday punch. The boy had really cut it short
this time. Usually he was good for a solid hour with facts and figures
about how ants built bridges and such stuff.

We all looked at Pringle's face, expecting to see the embarrassed and
sheepish grin. This was the usual reaction of a stranger when he first
met up with Kenzie's syllogism. It horrified us to see, instead, his
shining eyes. We heard him say enthusiastically.

"That's just how I've always felt about it, Kenzie. It's a pleasure to
meet a man who isn't afraid of thinking."

"Oh, no-o-o!" we all groaned out in a chorus.

"Only," Pringle said dubiously, and our hopes began to arise again.
"Only I've been thinking more along the line of termites." Our hopes
fell and were shattered.

We heard the Chief moan to himself and saw him turn and almost run
back into his office.

"Two of 'em now," he was mumbling over and over. "Two of 'em now. It
ain't worth it. It ain't worth it." He sat down heavily and buried his
head in his arms across the top of his desk. Kenzie was watching him
too, like he was wondering what had got into the Chief. Then Kenzie
turned back to Pringle.

"Ants," he said with determination.

"Termites," Pringle answered him stubbornly. Kenzie glared at Pringle
for a minute, then his face cleared.

"Why not both of them?" he asked, like a fellow who was willing to be
big about it.

"Sure, why not?" Pringle came his half way also. Then, like he wasn't
to be outdone in generosity. "Ants first, then termites later."

Solemnly the two shook hands. They went back to their work at the
bench, and there was an aura of understanding and accord at that end
of the room thick enough to be felt.

"I hope you insect lovers will be very happy together," the grid
expert mumbled to their backs. The rest of us also settled back into
our varied jobs and problems. But we worked as if we momentarily
expected an earthquake to rock us. Our hands were not quite steady.
Our eyes were not firm and piercing. We almost held our breaths. For a
wonder, we agreed with the Chief. Two of 'em now.

The days passed and nothing more was said. More than ever now, we
enforced the taboo on insects. We didn't mention trees, or wood, or
even the conditional subjunctive. Would sounded like wood. Wood might
bring up the thought of termites.

We could see the Chief was weighing the advantages of keeping them
against the risks of upsetting the department constantly. As we
expected, greed won. We knew he would not risk giving up the prestige
and extra bonuses he got for Kenzie's work. And he knew he had to keep
those discoveries coming, because our management has a short memory of
what a guy has done in the past.

The Chief even let Kenzie have Pringle as his own personal tech. It
served two purposes. It isolated them from the rest of us. It made
Kenzie happy.

I will say for the lads, they spent most of their time on Company
problems, at first. But gradually, on one corner of Kenzie's bench, a
gadget began to take shape. The two of them worked on it when there
were no urgent, frantic, must-be-out-today-without-fail problems to be
solved first. None of us could figure out the purpose of the
mechanism.

We knew if we couldn't figure it, the Chief couldn't. But we could
practically see him rub his hands in glee when he thought of the extra
bonus he might get for this new gadget.

Of course the Chief wasn't a complete slouch as an electronics
engineer. But it was a long time since he did his study, and he had
grown hazy by spending too many years as an administrator. The word
got around that for hours at a time, after we had gone home, the Chief
would stand at Kenzie's bench.

The way we reasoned it, he figured he ought to know something about
the gadget when he took it in to Old Rock Jaw, and palmed it off as
his latest discovery. We also reasoned that since we couldn't figure
it, the Chief must have been an awfully troubled man.

Obviously, it had something to do with microwave transmission and
reception. There was the usual high-frequency condensor, the magnatron
tubes, the tuning cavities. All company stock, of course. But then
none of us ever worried about cost. That was the Chief's problem.

He didn't worry much about it either, except at budget time. Then
there were screams of anguish from the front office over experimental
requisitions. Every year, Old Rock Jaw promised to fire us all, if we
didn't cut costs, but in a couple of weeks we always forgot about it.

Trouble was, the Chief had been getting edgy about costs lately, so we
knew it was about time for the annual budget battle. Significantly, he
didn't say a word to Kenzie about the gadget.

       *       *       *       *       *

As luck would have it, I was working late one night on a special
permit. My bench is over in a wing of the lab, and I guess the Chief
forgot I was around. I saw a very pretty scene.

The Chief had built up a habit of staying late so he could stand and
study over the Kenzie gadget. He never touched it, though. He knew
enough not to bother anything, because we all knew how bitter Kenzie
was when anybody touched his things.

The Chief was standing there this evening when the General Manager,
Old Rock Jaw, was showing some important personages through the plant
after hours. They came through the lab door, and I saw scrambled eggs
and fruit salad shining all over bulging uniforms. There was also one
little geezik in a pin-striped suit. Old Rock Jaw was talking, as
usual.

"... and it is from this room, gentlemen," he was saying, "That some
of those revolutionary discoveries emanate!"

Then he caught sight of the Chief, who had hastily picked up a cold
soldering iron and was tentatively touching a random point on the new
mechanism.

"Ah-h!" Old Rock Jaw exclaimed with satisfaction. "Here is our chief
scientist now. Still at work. He watches no clock, gentlemen. He knows
no time. His whole life is wrapped up in his research!"

The Chief didn't look around, but bent closer to the soldering point.
He looked like he hoped they would limit their inspection to a cursory
look about and then retire. I hoped they would too, I didn't want them
to see me.

But Old Rock Jaw, in more of a blowhard mood even than usual, couldn't
let well enough alone. He came up close to the Chief, and looked over
his shoulder at the mechanism. He was even more ignorant than the
Chief, so I knew he wouldn't recognize any of it.

"Don't let us disturb you, Alfred," he breathed in a hushed voice.
"But could you tell the gentlemen what you are working on now?" He
cleared his throat importantly and said, "I might add that everyone
here has been security cleared, Alfred, so you may speak freely."

The Chief still did not lift his eyes from his work. He didn't dare.
He carefully turned an unconnected control knob a hairsbreadth with
utmost deliberation and precision.

"Multimicrofrequidometer," the Chief mumbled, and buried his head
still deeper into the mechanism.

"Ah yes, of course. But you have a new hook up," the General Manager
bluffed. "I hardly recognized it at first. Startling!" he breathed.

He looked around triumphantly at the impressed brass and braid. He
looked pointedly at the pin-striped suit who probably controlled
congressional purse strings.

"Apparently he is at a point where he cannot divert his attention to
us, gentlemen," he breathed in a hushed voice. He placed his fingers
to his lips and began to tip-toe backwards toward the door.

The beef trust in fancy uniform came up on their own toesies, and also
tiptoed away from the genius scientist. By now, the genius was
beginning to exude large drops of sweat.

The door closed behind them, and the Chief dropped the cold soldering
iron with a sigh of relief. He took hold of his tongue, where he must
have been biting into it. He wiped his forehead and fingers with his
breast-pocket handkerchief.

Both the Chief and I heard the party walking down the hall and into
another wing of the building. I still didn't make a sound. It would
never do for the Chief to know he had been observed. After a suitable
time, the Chief, also, tiptoed out of the lab, and he was mumbling to
himself as I have never seen him mumble before.

       *       *       *       *       *

Several days later another thing appeared on Kenzie's work bench. This
time it was a large rectangular glass aquarium. It was filled with
moist earth. Now here was something new in electronics!

We shook our heads. One of the techs, who fancied himself a
psychologist, said the boys were suffering from retrogressive
dementia. They had gone so far back into childhood, they had to play
sand box. The Chief overheard the tech, and spoke up plaintively.

"But I don't see any celluloid spade and bucket," he said. He seemed
relieved when we burst out laughing.

His relief didn't last long, however. It changed to more worry when he
saw the boys carefully sprinkling bread and meat crumbs over the
surface of the sand. Then on top of that they dropped moist bits of
cake icing. When Pringle brought down a marigold plant, all covered
with aphis, and transplanted it in a corner of the aquarium, the
Chief again ran into his office and began to hold his head in his
hands.

More days passed. The gadget became a bristling porcupine of test
clips. By now the boys had forgotten they were working for the Company
and spent practically all their time on the whoozits. The Chief became
so fascinated, in a kind of horror-stricken manner, that he did not
mention the aquarium to Kenzie at all.

The rest of us also kept away from that side of the lab. Ever since
Kenzie had started on the gadget, he had no time for us, or helping us
with our problems. If we spoke to him he snapped back at us, until I
guess all our noses were out of joint. By the time the aquarium
appeared, we were ignoring him and everything he did.

In a few more weeks the aquarium was swarming with ants. It was easy
to see their tunnels running up and down the sides of the glass. I
will say this for the boys. They set it in a huge pan of water. None
of us could legitimately squawk about getting ants mixed up with our
anatomy.

The Chief showed he was mixed with disappointment and elation when the
boys asked clearance to work nights in the lab. Disappointed since he
could no longer stay late and follow the progress; elated because the
boys must really be getting hot.

Annual budget time was getting closer, and we could see the wheels
going around in his mind. It would be a nice thing if he could deliver
the multiwhoozits gadget just before the big fight for appropriations.

As far as we knew, the only interest the General Manager had shown was
the time he asked the Chief in the hall how that multiwhoozits was
coming along. Even in that question, it was evident Old Rock Jaw was
asking out of a rare politeness only--there being no big shots around
to impress.

It was doubtful if the G.M. heard the Chief's vague answer, because
the old boy was mumbling to himself about rising costs and having to
cut down expenses. He waddled on down the hall. He was still mumbling
as he went, but both the Chief and I heard one sentence clearly.

"And certain salaries and bonuses will have to be cut."

The Chief turned pale.

So he granted Kenzie's request with alacrity--and hoped he would
finish the gadget in time.

For two more weeks the Chief waited patiently, or maybe impatiently.
He knew the boys were working every night, because the security police
complained about their pinochle game being interrupted to let Kenzie
and Pringle in and out.

Both the boys began to get a feverish look in their faces. Their
cheeks grew hollow. Their eyes were bloodshot. Their regular work
suffered even more. The Chief thought he was being considerate when he
lifted some of their work and shoved it over to the rest of us.

We were already sore at the boys and we didn't take it too kindly.
Just the same, we didn't let our squawk get beyond the walls of the
lab. No use letting that nosy Personnel Department get an excuse to
start holding hands, patting on the back, and radiating aid and
comfort to all.

Then--a certain Monday came.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Chief came in, a little late as usual. Some of the newer guys
pretended to be busy, but we were all watching to see what he would
do. There is a back door to the Chief's office which he seldom uses
and which he always keeps locked. But it opens into the lab wing right
at my table. It wasn't my fault, in fiddling around a little with the
lock, it came unstuck and the door opened a little so I could hear
what went on.

When the Chief came in, both the boys were busy dismantling the
gadget. Discouragement and hopelessness were written all over their
faces, in the dejected slope of their shoulders, in the lackadaisical
movements of their arms. Piece by piece, through the glass partition
of his office wall, the Chief watched the gadget being taken apart.
Each piece was carefully taken back and placed in stock for re-use.

That alone was enough to create great alarm for their sanity. Imagine
a technician putting a piece back to be used over!

Finally the Chief could bear it no longer. He called them into his
office. He carefully shut the door, but he didn't notice the back door
swung open a little farther. I found it necessary to work close to the
crack, and if I turned around, I could get a good view of the entire
office.

The Chief waved the boys into chairs across from his desk. He sat down
and placed his fingertips together. Even then, I could see his hands
were shaking. He leaned forward and asked with careful sympathy in his
voice.

"Didn't it work?"

"Yeah," Kenzie answered in a bored voice. "It worked." I was surprised
at Kenzie's voice. Usually he talked with the concise enunciation of a
professor. Now he sounded like maybe just a good lab tech.

"Then why are you dismantling it?" the Chief asked with a worried
frown.

"It wouldn't be good for people to know about it," Pringle burst out.

"I don't understand," the Chief faltered. Then desperately, "Look,
fellows. I've given you a lotta leeway. You've sluffed your work
something terrible. That's all right to an extent. I've covered for
you."

"Thanks, Chief," Kenzie said drily.

"But Old Rock--er--the General Manager," the Chief complained, "knows
I've been working on something. Now what with budgets coming on, and
all, I gotta have something to show!"

"_You've_ been working on something--" Pringle exclaimed.

"I mean my department has," the Chief covered himself hastily. "I'm
responsible for what goes on in my department, you know. I gotta have
some kind of an explanation." He was almost wailing now. "What with
budgets coming on, and all."

"Make up your own explanation," Kenzie answered disinterestedly.
"It's a cinch you can't give out with the real one."

The Chief began to wheedle. "You two boys know the explanation. Why
can't you tell me? This is your Chief who's talking, boys. The one who
has always stood by you and covered for you. Remember? You just gotta
tell me, boys." I saw Pringle and Kenzie look at one another.

"I guess he's right, Ken," Pringle said. "That is, if he promises
never to tell anybody."

"Yeah. I guess so." Kenzie nodded his head in agreement. "We owe him
that much for just letting us alone."

The Chief let out a big sigh of relief.

"It's about ants," Kenzie began.

"Now, now, Kenzie boy," the Chief interrupted hurriedly. "Let's stay
on the subject, shall we? Let's not get off on that tangent again,
Kenzie boy. Shall we?"

"Nuts," Kenzie said.

"But this is about ants, Chief," Pringle answered. Then shrewdly, "But
first you gotta promise, Chief."

"All right, I promise," the Chief acceded testily.

"It's about ants," Kenzie repeated stubbornly. The Chief winced, but
he held his peace.

"They're intelligent," Kenzie said profoundly, and stopped.

"I know," the Chief prompted. "I know, Kenzie boy. You've been saying
that all along."

"I communicated with them," Kenzie said flatly.

"You what?" The Chief's eyes bugged out. I guess mine did too.

"Sure," Kenzie answered. "After a fashion, that is. In their anthers
they've got a chitin cell diaphragm. Modified cellular structure. They
communicate with a sort of microwave. Roughly you might say it
generates and radiates like our brain wave. Roughly, very roughly.
This chitin diaphragm picks up the microwave like our ears pick up
sound. Roughly, that is."

"But that's wonderful," the Chief glowed. It didn't take much
imagination to see him in the General Manager's office explaining how
his multiwhoozits gadget worked. Maybe nothing immediately commercial
about it, but when the publicity office got hold of it--man, it would
mean plenty of free publicity for the Company. And how Old Rock Jaw
loved free publicity!

"We tuned in on them," Kenzie was saying. "By putting different kinds
of food around, and by making different kinds of disturbances, we
worked out a crude sort of vocabulary."

"You did--" the Chief exclaimed.

"Nothing fancy, you understand," Kenzie belittled his achievement.
"But enough so when we broadcast a sugar wave, they came running to
the surface to see where it was. When we broadcast a water wave, they
rushed to the ant nursery and started carrying eggs to high ground."

"Glory be--" the Chief breathed. In his eyes there was the vision of
world renowned scientists patting him on the back. Maybe even more
important, Old Rock Jaw was actually smiling, and telling him he
could have unlimited funds in his budget.

"Sure," Kenzie said bitterly. "Sure that was all very fine. Big shots,
we were going to be, Pringle and me. First time in history man had
talked with an insect. Maybe even get our pictures in the paper, same
as if we'd murdered somebody. Fame!"

"Yeah," Pringle chimed in. "First step in learning how to communicate
with an alien mind. Nuts!"

"I don't get it," the Chief stammered. "What's wrong with that?"

"Well, we went on perfecting the vocabulary," Kenzie said. "You know.
Fining it down. Had the little beggars practically standing on their
heads at times with our wave." He grinned at the memory and seemed to
shake off some of his lethargy.

"You shoulda been here the night Pringle had them marching in
formation." His face fell again.

"We kept on improving the gadget," he said with hangdog attitude. "We
still hadn't made direct communication, you understand. Nothing like
'How do you do, Mrs. Ant? This is Kenzie MacKenzie, human, talking.'"
Then he sneered at his memory.

"With our microwave we could make them do things. But hell, you can
make them run out of the ground by pouring water down their hole.
That's not communication! We couldn't seem to contact them
direct--make them know we were communicating."

"But you still--" the Chief said. He had visions of every home using a
gadget to broadcast "keep away" signals to ant pests.

"Our gadget was still crude at that point," Kenzie interrupted. "We
fined it down, more and more. That's when we began to pick up the star
static."

"Star static?" the Chief faltered.

"He wouldn't know about that," Pringle said, and I could detect
contempt in his voice, even if the Chief didn't.

"Sure he would," Kenzie corrected. "Everybody knows about the fifty or
so stars that send out continuous radio signals, and how we've been
trying for years to unscramble them."

"Why certainly," the Chief said, so positively I knew he hadn't heard
of it before.

"Anyway," Kenzie said. "The more we worked out the vocabulary code,
the more the star signals began to fit right into it. So we decided to
break up the thing, and forget all about ants. Honest Chief, you'll
never hear me mention the word again."

"Termites either," Pringle chimed in.

"But I still don't understand," the Chief complained. "It still all
sounds marvelous. I just don't understand."

"Draw him a picture," Pringle said disgustedly.

"Okay," Kenzie acceded. "How many years would you say ants have been
on earth, Chief?"

"Oh, I don't know," the Chief answered. "Quite a few, I'd say."

"Yeah," Kenzie said drily. "Quite a few. At least a million.
Unchanged. A perfect life form with a perfect civilization. So
perfect, nature hasn't seen any need to change them for a million
years."

"So what?" the Chief asked. "They're nothing. We come along and make
them do nip ups."

"Yeah," Kenzie was bitter again. "We humans go around talking about
how brave and smart we are. How someday we might even get so smart
we'll contact other intelligent races on other worlds. Yeah, we're
smart. You know those star radiations?"

"That's not my specialty, you know," the Chief answered cautiously.

"Some of those radiations started out from their home planet a million
_light_ years ago," Pringle said quietly.

"So what again?" the Chief asked.

"Those radiations," Kenzie said, "happen to be communications between
the galaxies--beamed at the ants. Sort of a continuous radio program
broadcast universe wide. It happens the ants, maybe termites, maybe
other insects, are spread through all the galaxies. It happens _they_
are the dominant intelligent race throughout the universe." He
shrugged in disgust.

"Us big brave humans," he said contemptuously. "Someday we might even
reach Mars. Hell, those ants have been colonizing for hundreds of
millions of years. They're still communicating. They are the real
intelligence on the earth!"

He crushed a cigarette fiercely into a glass ash tray on the desk.

"Only thing man has got, or ever had, was his ego. He's got to believe
he's top dog, or else he folds and quits. Yeah, we're smart all right.
Hell, we're so far down the scale the ants don't even recognize us as
a life form at all."

Pringle nodded soberly. "Yeah," he said to the Chief, "how would you
like to explain a gadget that proved ants have more brains than you
have?"

The Chief looked at them with incredulous eyes.

He was still staring at them silently, with a bloodless face, when the
office messenger came in and told him the General Manager wished to
see him in his office to discuss budgets.

I closed the back office door quietly and went back to work. The other
guys clustered around and wanted to know what I heard.

"Nothing," I said, and looked them straight in the eye. "Nothing at
all."

----THE END----

       *       *       *       *       *






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Kenzie Report, by Mark Clifton

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE KENZIE REPORT ***

***** This file should be named 32131.txt or 32131.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/2/1/3/32131/

Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
