The Project Gutenberg EBook of Do Unto Others, by Mark Clifton

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Do Unto Others

Author: Mark Clifton

Illustrator: Ed Emsh

Release Date: April 29, 2010 [EBook #32181]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DO UNTO OTHERS ***




Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net








                         Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from If Worlds of Science Fiction June 1958.
    Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed.


                            DO UNTO OTHERS


                           BY MARK CLIFTON


                       _Illustrated by Ed Emsh_


                           [Illustration:]


    _Do unto others as you would have them do unto you.... And
     the natives of Capella IV, philosophers at heart, were not
     ones to ignore the Golden Rule...._

       *       *       *       *       *




My Aunt Mattie, Matthewa H. Tombs, is President of the Daughters of
Terra. I am her nephew, the one who didn't turn out well. Christened
Hapland Graves, after Earth President Hapland, a cousin by marriage,
the fellows at school naturally called me Happy Graves.

"Haphazard Graves, it should be," Aunt Mattie commented acidly the
first time she heard it. It was her not very subtle way of reminding
me of the way I lived my life and did things, or didn't do them. She
shuddered at anything disorderly, which of course included me, and it
was her beholden duty to right anything which to her appeared wrong.

"There won't be any evil to march on after you get through, Aunt
Mattie," I once said when I was a child. I like now to think that even
at the age of six I must have mastered the straight face, but I'm
afraid I was so awed by her that I was sincere.

"That will do, Hapland!" she said sternly. But I think she knew I
meant it--then--and I think that was the day I became her favorite
nephew. For some reason, never quite clear to me, she was my favorite
aunt. I think she liked me most because I was the cross she had to
bear. I liked her most, I'm sure, because it was such a comfortable
ride.

A few billions spent around the house can make things quite
comfortable.

She had need of her billions to carry out her hobbies, or, as she
called it, her "life's work." Aunt Mattie always spoke in clichés
because people could understand what you meant. One of these hobbies
was her collection of flora of the universe. It was begun by her
maternal grandfather, one of the wealthier Plots, and increased as the
family fortunes were increased by her father, one of the more ruthless
Tombs, but it was under Aunt Mattie's supervision that it came, so to
speak, into full flower.

"Love," she would say, "means more to a flower than all the
scientific knowledge in the world." Apparently she felt that the small
army of gardeners, each a graduate specialist in duplicating the right
planetary conditions, hardly mattered.

The collection covered some two hundred acres in our grounds at the
west side of the house. Small, perhaps, as some of the more vulgar
displays by others go, but very, very choice.

The other hobby, which she combines with the first, is equally
expensive. She and her club members, the Daughters of Terra (D.T.s for
short), often find it necessary to take junkets on the family space
yacht out to some distant planet--to straighten out reprehensible
conditions which have come to her attention. I usually went along to
take care of--symbolically, at least--the bags and (their) baggage.

My psychiatrist would say that expressing it in this way shows I have
never outgrown my juvenile attitudes. He says I am simply a case of
arrested development, mental, caused through too much over-shadowing
by the rest of the family. He says that, like the rest of them, I have
inherited the family compulsion to make the universe over to my own
liking so I can pass it on to posterity with a clear conscience, and
my negative attitude toward this is simply a defense mechanism because
I haven't had a chance to do it. He says I really hate my aunt's flora
collection because I see it as a rival for her affection. I tell him
if I have any resentments toward it at all it is for the long hours
spent in getting the latinized names of things drilled into me. I ask
him why gardeners always insist on forcing long meaningless names upon
non-gardeners who simply don't care. He ignores that, and says that
subconsciously I hate my Aunt Mattie because I secretly recognize that
she is a challenge too great for me to overcome. I ask him why, if I
subconsciously hate Aunt Mattie, why I would care about how much
affection she gives to her flora collection. He says, ahah! We are
making progress.

He says he can't cure me--of what, I'm never clear--until I find the
means to cut down and destroy my Aunt Mattie.

This is all patent nonsense because Aunt Mattie is the rock, the firm
foundation in a universe of shifting values. Even her clichés are
precious to me because they are unchanging. On her, I can depend.

He tells Aunt Mattie his diagnoses and conclusions, too. Unethical?
Well now! Between a mere psychiatrist and my Aunt Mattie is there any
doubt about who shall say what is ethical?

After one of their long conferences about me she calls me into her
study, looks at me wordlessly, sadly, shakes her head, sighs--then
squares her shoulders until the shelf of her broad, although maiden,
bosom becomes huge enough to carry any burden, even the burden of my
alleged hate. This she bears bravely, even gratefully. I might resent
this needless pain the psychiatrist gives her, except that it really
seems to make her happier in some obscure way.

Perhaps she has some kind of guilt complex, and I am her deserved
punishment? Aunt Mattie with a guilt complex? Never! Aunt Mattie knows
she is right, and goes ahead.

So all his nonsense is completely ridiculous. I love my Aunt Mattie. I
adore my Aunt Mattie. I would never do anything to hurt my Aunt
Mattie.

Or, well, I didn't mean to hurt her, anyway. All I did was wink. I
only meant....

       *       *       *       *       *

We were met at the space port of Capella IV by the planet
administrator, himself, one John J. McCabe.

It was no particular coincidence that I knew him. My school was
progressive. It admitted not only the scions of the established
families but those of the ambitious families as well. Its graduates,
naturally, went into the significant careers. Johnny McCabe was one of
the ambitious ones. We hadn't been anything like bosom pals at school;
but he'd been tolerant of me, and I'd admired him, and fitfully told
myself I should be more like him. Perhaps this was the reason Aunt
Mattie had insisted on this particular school, the hope that some of
the ambition would rub off on me.

Capella IV wasn't much of a post, not even for the early stages in a
young man's career, although, socially, it was perhaps the best
beginning Johnny's family could have expected. It was a small planet,
entirely covered by salt. Even inside the port bubble with its
duplication of Earth atmosphere, the salt lay like a permanent snow
scene. Actually it was little more than a way station along the space
route out in that direction, and Johnny's problems were little more
than the problems of a professional host at some obscure resort. But
no doubt his dad spoke pridefully of "My son, a planet administrator,"
and when I called on the family to tell them I'd visited their son, I
wouldn't be one to snitch.

There was doubt in my mind that even Johnny's ambition could make the
planet into anything more than it was already. It had nothing we
wanted, or at least was worth the space freight it would cost to ship
it. The natives had never given us any trouble, and, up until now, we
hadn't given them any. So Earth's brand upon it was simply a small
bubble enclosing a landing field, a hangar for checkup and repair of
ships requiring an emergency landing, some barracks for the men and
women of the port personnel, a small hotel to house stranded space
passengers while repairs were made to their ship, or stray V.I.P.'s.

A small administration building flying Federated Earth flag, and a
warehouse to contain supplies, which had to be shipped in, completed
the installation. The planet furnished man nothing but water pumped
from deep in the rock strata beneath the salt, and even that had to be
treated to remove enough of the saline content to make it usable. At
the time, I didn't know what the natives, outside our bubble, lived
on. The decision to come had been a sudden one, and I hadn't had more
than enough time to call the State Department to find out who the
planet administrator might be.

I was first out of the yacht and down the landing steps to the salt
covered ground. Aunt Mattie was still busy giving her ship captain his
instructions, and possibly inspecting the crew's teeth to see if
they'd brushed them this morning. The two members of her special
committee of the D.T.'s who'd come along, a Miss Point and a Mrs.
Waddle, naturally would be standing at her sides, and a half pace to
the rear, to be of assistance should she need them in dealing with
males.

There was a certain stiff formality in the way McCabe, flanked by his
own two selected subordinates, approached the ship--until I turned
around at the foot of the steps and he recognized me.

"Hap!" he yelled, then. "Happy Graves, you old son of a gun!" He broke
into a run, dignity forgotten, and when he got to me he grabbed both
my shoulders in his powerful hands to shake me as if he were some sort
of terrier--and I a rat. His joy seemed all out of proportion until I
remembered he probably hadn't seen anybody from school for a long
time; and until I further remembered that he would have been alerted
by the State Department to Aunt Mattie's visit and would have been
looking forward to it with dread and misgivings.

To realize he had a friend at court must really have overjoyed him.

"Johnny," I said. "Long time." It had been. Five-six years anyway. I
held out my hand in the old school gesture. He let loose my shoulders
and grabbed it in the traditional manner. We went through the ritual,
which my psychiatrist would have called juvenile, and then he looked
at me pointedly.

"You remember what it means," he said, a little anxiously I thought,
and looked significantly at my hand. "That we will always stand by
each other, through thick and thin." His eyes were pulled upward to
the open door of the yacht.

"You can expect it to be both thick and thin," I said drily. "If you
know my Aunt Mattie."

"She's your aunt?" he asked, his eyes widening. "Matthewa H. Tombs is
_your_ aunt. I never knew. To think, all those years at school, and I
never knew. Why, Hap, Happy, old boy, this is wonderful. Man, have I
been worried!"

"Don't stop on my account," I said, maybe a little dolefully.
"Somebody reported to the Daughters of Terra that you let the natives
run around out here stark naked, and if Aunt Mattie says she's going
to put mother hubbards on them, then that's exactly what she's going
to do. You can depend on that, old man."

"Mother Hub...." he gasped. He looked at me strangely. "It's a joke,"
he said. "Somebody's pulled a practical joke on the D.T.'s. Have you
ever seen our natives? Pictures of them? Didn't anybody check up on
what they're like before you came out here? It's a joke. A practical
joke on the D.T.'s. It has to be."

"I wouldn't know," I said. "But if they're naked they won't be for
long, I can tell you that. Aunt Mattie...."

His eyes left my face and darted up to the door of the ship which was
no longer a black oval. The unexplained bewilderment of his expression
was not diminished as Aunt Mattie came through the door, out on the
loading platform, and started down the steps. He grew a little white
around the mouth, licked his lips, and forgot all his joy at meeting
an old school mate. His two subordinates who had remained standing
just out of earshot, as if recognizing a crisis now, stepped briskly
up to his sides.

Aunt Mattie's two committee women, as if to match phalanx with
phalanx, came through the door and started down the steps behind her.
I stepped to one side as the two forces met face to face on the
crunching salt that covered the ground. It might look like a Christmas
scene, but under Capella's rays it was blazing hot, and I found myself
in sympathy with the men's open necked shirts and brief shorts. Still,
they should have known better than to dress like that. Somebody in the
State Department had goofed.

Aunt Mattie and her two committee women were dressed conservatively in
something that might have resembled an English Colonel's wife's idea
of the correct tweeds to wear on a cold, foggy night. If they were
already sweltering beneath these coverings, as I was beginning to in
my lighter suit, they were too ladylike to show it. Their acid glance
at the men's attire showed what they thought of the informality of
dress in which they'd been received. But they were too ladylike to
comment. After that first pointed look at bare knees, they had no need
of it.

"This is the official attire prescribed for us by the State
Department," Johnny said, a little anxiously, I thought. It was hardly
the formal speech of welcome he, as planet administrator, must have
prepared.

"I have no doubt of it," Aunt Mattie said, and her tone told them what
she thought of the State Department under the present administration.
"You would hardly have met ladies in such--ah--otherwise." I could see
that she was making a mental note to speak to the State Department
about it.

"Make a note," she said and turned to Miss Point. "I will speak to the
State Department. How can one expect natives to ... if our own
representatives don't ... etc., etc."

"May I show you to your quarters, ma'am?" Johnny asked humbly. "No
doubt you will wish to freshen up, or...."

Miss Point blushed furiously.

"We are already quite fresh, young man," Aunt Mattie said firmly.

I happened to know that Aunt Mattie didn't like to browbeat people,
not at all. It would all have been so much more pleasant, gracious, if
they'd been brought up to know right from wrong. But what parents and
schools had failed to do, she must correct as her duty. I thought it
about time I tried to smooth things over. I stepped up into their
focus.

"Aunt Mattie," I said. "This is Johnny McCabe. We were at school
together."

Her eyebrows shot upward.

"You were?" she asked, and looked piercingly at Johnny. "Then, I
realize, young man, that your attire is not your fault. You must have
been acting under orders, and against your personal knowledge of what
would be correct. I understand." She turned again to Miss Point.
"Underscore that note to the State Department," she said. "Mark it
emergency." She turned back to Johnny. "Very well, Mr. McCabe, we
would appreciate it, after all, if you would show us to our quarters
so that we may--ah--freshen up a bit. It is rather a warm day, isn't
it?"

She was quite gracious now, reassured because Johnny was an old school
mate of mine, and would therefore know right from wrong. If I
sometimes didn't seem to, she knew me well enough to know it had not
been the fault of the school.

The three of us, Johnny on one side of Aunt Mattie and I on the other
side, started toward the frame building on the other side of the
bubble, which I assumed was the hotel. The four subordinates trailed
along behind, silent, wary of one another.

Behind them the baggage truck, which had been piled high by the ship's
crew, hissed into life and started moving along on its tractor treads.
Johnny caught a glimpse of it, without actually turning around, and
his eyes opened wide. He misinterpreted, of course. From the mountain
of baggage it looked like our intention to stay a long time.

But then he wouldn't have been particularly reassured, either, had he
realized that our own supplies were quite scant and these bags, boxes,
and crates contained sewing machines and many, many bolts of gaily
colored cloth.

       *       *       *       *       *

I had hardly more than--ah--freshened up a bit myself in my hotel
room, when I heard a discreet knock on my door. I opened it and saw
Johnny McCabe.

"May I come in, Hap?" he asked. As if against his will, he glanced
quickly down the hall toward the suite where aunt and her committee
had been put.

"Sure, Johnny," I said, and opened the door wide. I pointed to an
aluminum tube torture rack, government issue's idea of a chair. "You
can have the chair," I said. "I'll sit on the edge of the bed."

"I'm sorry about the furnishings," he said apologetically as he sat
down and I closed the door. "It's the best government will issue us in
this hole."

"Aunt Mattie would be disappointed if it were better," I said as I sat
on the edge of the bed, which was little softer than the chair. "She
expects to rough it, and finds special virtue in doing her duty as
uncomfortably as possible."

He looked sharply at me, but I had merely stated an accepted fact, not
an opinion, and was therefore emotionless about it.

"I'm in trouble, Hap," he said desperately. He leaned forward with
his clasped hands held between his knees.

"Well, old man," I answered. "You know me."

"Yes," he said. "But there isn't anybody else I can turn to."

"Then we understand each other," I agreed. He looked both resentful
and puzzled.

"No, I never did understand you," he disagreed. "I suppose it's all
those billions that act as shock insulation for you. You never had to
plan, and scheme, and stand alert indefinitely like a terrier at a rat
hole waiting for opportunity to stick out its nose so you could pounce
on it. So I don't see how you can appreciate my problem now."

"I might try," I said humbly.

"This job," he said. "It's not much, and I know it. But it was a
start. The department doesn't expect anything from me but patience.
It's not so much ability, you know, just a matter of who can hang on
the longest without getting into trouble. I've been hanging on, and
keeping out of trouble."

"But you're in trouble now."

"I will be when your aunt fails to put mother hubbards on the
natives."

"She won't fail," I said confidently.

"And when she storms into the State Department with fire in her eye
and starts turning things upside down, it'll be my fault--somehow," he
said miserably.

"So let her put some clothes on some natives," I said. "She'll go away
happy and then, for all you care, they can take 'em off and burn 'em
if they insist on going around naked. Just swing with the punch, man.
Don't stand up and let 'em knock your block off. Surely you have some
influence with the natives. I don't hear any war drums, any tom-toms.
I don't see them trying to tear holes in the sides of your bubble to
let the air out. You must be at peace with them. You must have some
kind of mutual cooperation. So just get a tribe or so to go along with
the idea for a while."

He looked at me and shook his head sadly. Sort of the way Aunt Mattie
shook her head after a conference with my psychiatrist. But Johnny
didn't seem somehow happier. He had a pretty good chest, but it didn't
look enormous enough to carry any burden.

"I've been pretty proud of myself," he said. "After five years of
daily attempts, and after using everything I ever learned in school
courses on extraterrestrial psychology, plus some things I've made up
myself, I established a kind of communication with the natives--if you
could call it communication. I'd go out in my spacesuit into their
chlorinated atmosphere, I'd stand in front of one of them and talk a
blue streak, think a blue streak. After about five years of it, one of
them slowly closed his eye and then opened it again. I invited one of
them to come inside the bubble. I told him about the difference in
atmosphere, that it might be dangerous. I got one of them to come in.
It made no difference to him."

"Well, fine, then," I said. "Just get some of them to come in again,
let Aunt Mattie put some clothes on them, and everybody's happy."

He stood up suddenly.

"Take a walk with me, Hap," he said. It was more of a command than an
invitation. "Over to the edge of the bubble. I want to show you some
natives."

I was willing.

On the way around to the back of the building, over the crunching
salt, I had a thought.

"If all he did was close an eye," I said. "How did you learn their
language, so you could invite him inside, explain about the
atmosphere?"

"I don't even know they have a language," he said. "Maybe he learned
mine. I used to draw pictures in the salt, the way they taught us at
school, and say words. Maybe it took him five years to put the
thoughts together, maybe they don't have any concept of language at
all, or need it. Maybe he was thinking about something else all those
five years, and just got around to noticing me. I don't know, Hap."

We came around the edge of an outbuilding then to an unobstructed view
of the bubble edge. Even through dark glasses he'd cautioned me to
wear with a gesture, as he put on another pair for himself, the scene
through the clear plastic was blinding white. Scattered here and there
on the glistening salt were blobs of black.

"Why," I exclaimed. "Those are octopi. I suppose that's what the
natives use for food? I've wondered."

"Those _are_ the natives," he answered, drily.

By now we were up to the plastic barrier of our bubble and stood
looking out at the scene.

"Well," I said after some long moments of staring. "It will be a
challenge to the D.T.'s, won't it?"

He looked at me with disgust.

"What do they eat?" I asked. "Salt?"

"I don't know if they eat," he said. "Can't you get it through your
thick skull, man, that these things are alien? Completely alien? How
do I know?"

"Well you must know some things after five years of study. You must
have observed them. They must get food somehow, they must sleep and
wake, they must procreate. You must have observed something."

"I've observed the process of procreation," he answered cautiously.

"Well fine, then," I said. "That's what's going to concern Aunt Mattie
the most."

"Here's something that may help you understand them," he said, and I
felt a bit of the sardonic in his voice, a grimness. "When that one
visited me inside here," he said. "I took him into my office, so I
could photograph him better with all the equipment. I was explaining
everything, not knowing how much he understood. I happened to pick up
a cigarette and a lighter. Soon as I flipped the lighter on, he shot
up a tentacle and took it out of my hand. I let him keep it, of
course. Next day, when I went outside, everyone of them, as far as I
could see in the distance, had a lighter, exactly like the one I'd
given him. Furthermore, in a chlorinated atmosphere, without oxygen,
those lighters burned normally. Does that help you to understand them
better?" he asked with no attempt to hide the heavy irony.

I didn't have a chance to answer because we both heard a crunching in
the salt behind us. We turned about and there was Aunt Mattie and her
two committee women behind her also now in dark glasses. I waited
until the ladies had come up to us, then I waved my arm grandly at the
scene beyond the plastic.

"Behold the natives in all their nakedness, Aunt Mattie," I said.
Then, to soften the blow it must have been, "I'm afraid somebody was
pulling your leg when they reported it to the D.T.'s."

Miss Point gasped audibly.

Mrs. Waddle said, "Shocking!"

I couldn't tell whether it was the sight of the natives, or my remark
which indicated I knew they had legs to pull.

For the first time in my life I saw uncertainty in Aunt Mattie's eyes
as she looked, startled, at me, and then at Johnny. Then her chin
squared, her back straightened still more, the shelf of her bosom
firmed.

"It really won't be too much of a problem, girls," she said. "Actually
simpler than some we've solved. Take a square of cloth, cut a hole in
the center for that headlike pouch to come through where its eye is,
put in a draw string to cinch it up tight, above those--ah--those
protuberances, and let it flow out over those--ah--legs. Simple, and
quite attractive, don't you think?"

The girls nodded happily, and Johnny just stood there gasping for
breath.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was simpler than any of us had thought.

Johnny looked at me desperately when Aunt Mattie told him to have one
of the natives come in so she could fit a pattern on it, to see if any
gussets would be needed for fullness--whatever gussets might be.

"One of them came inside before," I said in answer to Johnny's
pleading look. "Ask him again. If he refuses, Mohammed will go to the
mountain. I'm sure you have extra space suits. I'm sure the ladies
won't mind going out to the natives if the natives won't come to
them."

"I don't know," Johnny said miserably. "He may have had sufficient
curiosity to come inside once, but not sufficient to bring him in
again. You see, ladies," he turned to them desperately. "They don't
seem to care about us, one way or the other."

The two committee women looked apprehensively at Aunt Mattie. Not to
care about her, one way or the other? This was beyond comprehension.
But Aunt Mattie was equal to it.

"Very well," she said crisply. "We shall not ask them to come to us.
We shall go to them. It is our duty to carry enlightenment to the
ignorant, wherever they may be, so that they can be taught to care. In
the performance of our duty, we have no room for pride. We shall go
to them, humbly, happily."

We did, too.

By the time we'd got into space suits and through the bubble lock out
into the ordinary landscape of Capella IV, Capella, the sun, was
sinking rapidly.

"We will just have time," Aunt Mattie said crisply, through the
intercom of our suits, "To set the pattern and get some idea of the
sizes needed. Then tomorrow we can begin our work."

Through his face plate I got a look at Johnny's wide, apprehensive
eyes.

"Ladies," he said desperately. "I must warn you again. I've never
tried to touch one of them. I don't know what will happen. I can't be
held responsible."

"You have been most remiss, young man," Aunt Mattie said sternly. "But
then," she added, as if remembering that he had gone to a proper
school, "you're young. No doubt overburdened by nonsensical red tape
in your administrative duties. And--if you had done this already,
there'd be no reason for my being here. I am always willing to help
wherever I'm needed."

All five of us marched silently, and bravely, on after that. A hundred
yards brought us to the first native. It lay there, spread eagled in
eight directions, on the salt. In the center of the tentacles there
arose a column of black rubbery flesh, topped by a rounded dome in the
center of which was one huge liquid black eye. There was not a twitch
of a tentacle as we came to a halt beside it.

"Is this the one you talked to, Johnny?" I asked.

"How should I know?" he asked bitterly. "I never knew if I talked to
the same one twice."

"They're much bigger than I thought," Miss Point said with a little
dismay in her voice.

"Some of them are ten feet in diameter," Johnny said, I thought with a
bit of vindictiveness in his tone.

"Never mind," Aunt Mattie said. "We'll simply sew three lengths of
cloth together to get our square. I'm sure they won't mind a neatly
done seam."

She had a length of cloth in one arm of her space suit, and a pair of
scissors in the mechanical claw of the other hand. With her eye she
seemed to measure the diameter of the dome and, manipulating the
scissors with the claw like an expert space mechanic, she cut a
sizable hole in the center of the cloth.

Entirely without fear or hesitation, she stepped into the triangle
between two long black tentacles that lay on the salt and walked up to
the erect column at the center. Expertly, she flipped the cloth so
that the hole settled over the creature's head, or whatever it was.
Fore and aft, the cloth rippled out to cover the tentacles. The
creature did not move.

With an amazing speed, she took some bundles of cloth from the arms of
Mrs. Waddle, and with even more amazing dexterity of the space claw,
which showed she was no amateur, she basted a length of cloth on
either side of the first strip. Then with her scissors, careful not to
gouge his hide, she cut off the corners so that the eight tentacles
barely peeped out from underneath the cloth.

Somehow, it reminded me of a huge red flower with a black pistil
laying there on the white salt.

"There, sir," my aunt said with satisfaction to the monster. "This
will hide your nakedness, instill in you a sense of true modesty." She
turned to Johnny. "They must not only know what," she instructed.
"They must also know why." She turned back and faced the monster
again. "It is not your fault," she said to it, "That you have been
living in a state of sin. On Earth, where I come from, we have a code
which must be followed. Do unto others as you would have them do unto
you. I'm sure that if I lived in a state of ignorant sin, I would
humbly appreciate the kindness of someone letting me know. I'm sure
that, in time, you will also come to appreciate it."

It was quite a noble speech, and her two companions bowed their space
suit helmets in acknowledgement. Johnny's mouth and eyes were wide,
and desperate. She stepped back then and we all stood there looking at
the monster.

The dome of its head began to tilt until the eye was fastened upon us.
It swept over the three ladies, hesitated on Johnny as if recognizing
him, but came to rest upon me. It stared at me for a full minute. I
stared back. In some strange way I felt as if my psychiatrist were
staring at me, as he often did.

Then the great eye slowly closed, and opened again. As slowly, and
somewhat to my amazement, I felt one of my eyes close and open. I
winked at it.

"That's all for this evening," Aunt Mattie said crisply. "Let it have
its clothes, get used to them. I have the pattern in my mind. Tomorrow
we will get out our sewing machines, and really get busy, girls."

All the way back to the entrance of the bubble, I felt that huge eye
upon me, following me.

Why me?

       *       *       *       *       *

The girls did not need to get busy the next morning.

I was awakened by a shout, there was the sound of running feet in the
hall, and a pounding on my door. Sleepy eyed, for I had dreamed of the
monster's eye all night long, I opened the door as soon as I had found
a robe to cover my own nakedness. It was Johnny, of course.

"Most amazing thing," he rushed in and collapsed into a sitting
position on the side of my bed. "Absolutely amazing. You should see
them."

"What?" I asked.

The rumpus must have disturbed the ladies, too, for there came another
knock on my door, and when I opened it all three of them stood there
fully dressed. Apparently they had arisen at the crack of dawn to get
busy with their sewing. Miss Point and Mrs. Waddle averted their eyes
modestly from the V neck of my robe and my bare legs. Aunt Mattie was
used to my shameless ways.

"What is it?" Aunt Mattie asked crisply.

Johnny leaped to his feet again.

"Amazing," he said again. "I'll have to show you. You'll never believe
it."

"Young man," Aunt Mattie said sharply. "No one has accused you of
untruthfulness, and you are hardly a judge of what we are capable of
believing."

He stood looking at her with his mouth open.

"Now ladies," I said, and started closing the door. "If you'll excuse
me for two minutes I'll dress and we'll go see what Mr. McCabe wants
to show us."

The door clicked on my last words, and I hastily doffed the robe and
slid into pants and a shirt. Oddly enough, I knew what he was going to
show us. I just knew. I slipped on some shoes without bothering about
socks.

"All right," I said. "I'm ready."

They had started down the hall, and we quickly overtook them. Johnny
went ahead, led us out of the hotel, around its side, and when we came
around the corner of the outbuilding which obscured the view, there
before us, through the bubble wall, we saw what I had expected.

As far as the eye could see, dotted here and there like poppies on
snow, the natives lay in the early sun, each dressed in flaring cloth
like that Aunt Mattie had designed the night before.

"You see?" Johnny cried out. "It's the same as with the lighter. One
liked it, so they all have it!"

By now we were up against the plastic barrier. The two subordinates
were gasping such words as "Fantastic, amazing, astounding,
incredible, wondrous, weird".

Aunt Mattie took it all in, and her face lit into a beatific smile.

"You see, young man," she said to Johnny. "They needed only to be
shown right from wrong. Let this be a lesson to you."

"But how did they do it?" Mrs. Waddle gasped.

"Give them some credit for diligence and ingenuity," Aunt Mattie
almost snapped at her assistant. "I always say we underrate the
intelligence and ingenuity of the lesser orders, and that it saps
their strengths if we are overprotective. I admire self-reliance, and
these have shown they have it. So we will not have to do the sewing
after all. Come girls, we must pack and be on our way back to Earth.
Our mission here is accomplished."

The two ladies obeyed their leader without question. The three of
them, in their sturdy walking shoes and their tweed suits, crunched
off across the salt back to their rooms to start packing.

Johnny and I walked along more slowly behind.

"The incredible Matthewa H. Tombs!" he breathed. "She's a legend, you
know, Hap. But I never believed it before." Then, in a complete and
sudden change of mood he snickered. Or, at least, it was the nearest
thing to a small boy snicker I'd heard since prep school. The snicker
turned into a roar of laughter, a grown man's laughter. "If they only
knew!" he shouted, apparently feeling secure because they'd turned the
corner and gone out of sight.

"Knew what?" I asked.

"Why," he said, and doubled up with laughter again. "They've covered
up all the innocent parts and left the reprehensible part, which is
right behind the eye, fully exposed."

"Johnny, my boy," I said with a chuckle. "Do you really believe there
are innocent parts and reprehensible parts of any creature in the
universe?"

He stood stock still and stared at me.

"It takes a nasty, salacious mind to make that kind of separation," I
said.

"But your aun ... the Daughters of...."

"I know my aunt and the Daughters of Terra," I said. "I've lived with
them for years. I know their kind of mind. Who would know it better?"

"But you...."

"The human race," I said, "is very young. It's only in the last few
thousand years that it has discovered sex as a concept. So like little
kids in kindergarten it goes around being embarrassed and snickering.
But we'll grow up. Give us time."

"But you...." he said again. "But they.... That's the kind of
organization that keeps us from growing up, Hap. Don't you see that?
They've kept us mentally retarded for generations, centuries. How can
we make progress when...."

"What's the hurry, Johnny? We've got millions of years, billions,
eternity."

He looked at me again, sharply, shrewdly.

"I've underestimated you, Hap," he said. "I'm afraid I always did. I
had no idea you...."

I shrugged and passed it off. I'd had no idea either, not until this
morning, last night, yesterday evening when that eye had turned on
me--and I'd winked back.

I didn't know how to tell him, or any reason why I should, that there
couldn't be anything right or wrong, good or bad; that nothing could
happen, nothing at all, excepting through the working of the law of
nature. Could one say that water running down hill is good, and water
being pumped up hill is bad? Both are operating within known physical
laws. With millions of years to go, wasn't it likely we would go on
discovering the laws governing how things worked? Until one by one we
had to give up all notion of good and bad happenings? Understood them
as only the operation of natural law? In all the universe, how could
there be any such thing as unnatural happenings?

"Don't worry about it, Johnny," I said as we started walking again.
"And don't worry about your career, either. Aunt Mattie likes you, and
she's mighty pleased with the results of her work out here. Certain
people in the State Department may consider her a bit of a meddlesome
pest, but make no mistake about it, every politician in the universe
trembles in his boots at the very mention of the D.T.'s. And she likes
you, Johnny."

"Thanks, Hap," he said as we came to a stop before the doorway of the
hotel. "I'll see you before your ship takes off. Oh--ah--you won't
tell her she covered up the wrong--well what she would think was the
wrong part?"

"I could have told her that last night," I said.

He walked away with that startled, incredulous look he'd worn ever
since our arrival.

       *       *       *       *       *

On Earth Aunt Mattie had to rush off to a convention of D.T.'s, where
I had no doubt her latest exploit in combating ignorance and sin would
be the main topic of conversation and add to the triumph of her
lionization. To give her credit, I think this lionization bothered
her, embarrassed her a little, and she probably wondered at times if
it were all sincere. But I also think she would have been lonely and
disappointed without it. When one is doing all he can to make the
universe we have inherited a better place for our posterity to inherit
one likes it to be appreciated.

For two or three weeks after she came back home, she was immersed in
administrative duties for the D.T., setting wheels in motion to carry
out all the promises she'd made at the convention.

I spent the time in my own suite in the south wing of our house.
Mostly, I just sat. No one bothered me except the servants necessary
to eating, dressing, sleeping, and they were all but mute about it. My
psychiatrist called once, but I sent word that I didn't need any
today. I called none of my regular friends and did not answer their
messages.

I did send to the Library of Science in Washington for the original
science survey report on Capella IV. It told me little, but allowed me
to surmise some things. Apparently the original scientists were
singularly uncurious about the octopoids, perhaps because they didn't
have five years to hang around and wait for one to blink an eye, as
Johnny had. As always, they were overworked and understaffed, they did
their quick survey and rushed on to some new planet job. If one hoped
that someday somebody might go back and take another look at the
octopoids I found no burning yearning for it in the dry reports.

As far as they went, their surmise was accurate. Some millions, many
millions of years ago, the planet had lost the last of its ocean
water. Apparently, as they failed to adapt to the increasing salinity
of the little left, one by one the original life forms died out.
Something in the octopoid metabolism (or mentality?) allowed them to
survive, to become land instead of water animals. Something in their
metabolism (or mentality?) allowed them to subsist on the air and
sunlight. (Really now? Did they even need these?) That was as far as
the reports went.

They did not draw the picture of highly developed mentalities who lay
there for millions of years and thought about the nature of being.
Such things as how mental manipulation of force fields can provide
each of them with a cigarette lighter that burns without any fluid in
it and any oxygen around its wick, or such things as mother hubbards
which had caught their fancy, or perhaps gave them some kind of
sensual kick caused by heat filtering through red cloth.

But mostly I just sat.

I went to see Aunt Mattie when she came back from the convention, of
course. She had the west wing where her sitting room looked out upon
her flora collection--and the gardeners who were supposed to keep
busy. Our greeting was fond, but brief. She did look at me rather
quizzically, rather shrewdly, but she made no comment. She did not
return my visit.

This was not unusual. She never visited my suite. When I was
twenty-one she took me into the south wing and said, "Choose your own
suite, Hapland. You are a man now, and I understand about young men."
If she had in mind what I thought she had it was a mighty big
concession to reality, although, of course, she was five years late in
coming around to it.

This older generation--so wise, so naive. She probably resolutely
refrained from imagining far worse things than really went on.

About two weeks after she'd come back from the convention, a month
since we returned from Capella IV, there was an interruption, an
excited one. For once in his life the butler forgot to touch my door
with feather fingertips and cough discreetly. Instead he knocked two
sharp raps, and opened the door without invitation.

"Come quickly, Master Hapland," he chittered urgently. "There are
creatures on our private landing field."

There were, too.

When I got there in my garden scooter, and pushed my way through the
crowd of gardeners who were clustered on the path and around the gate
to the landing field, I saw them. At least a dozen of the Capella IV
octopoids were spread eagled, their tentacles out flat on the hot
cement of the runway. Their eye stared unblinking into the sun. Over
their spread of tentacles, like inverted hibiscus blossoms, they wore
their mother hubbards.

Behind them, over at the far edge of the field, was an exact duplicate
of our own space yacht. I wondered, rather hysterically perhaps, if
each of them on Capella IV now had one. I suspected the yacht was
simply there for show, that they hadn't needed it, not any more than
they needed the mother hubbards.

There was the hiss of another scooter, and I turned around to see Aunt
Mattie come to a stop. She stepped out and came over to me.

"Our social call on Capella IV is being returned," I said with a grin
and twinkle at her.

She took in the sight with only one blink.

"Very well," she answered. "I shall receive them, of course." Somebody
once said that the most snobbish thing about the whole tribe of Tombs
was that they'd never learned the meaning of the word, or had to. But
I did wonder what the servants would think when the creatures started
slithering into our drawing room.

There was a gasp and a low rumble of protesting voices from the
gardeners as Aunt Mattie opened the gate and walked through it. I
followed, of course. We walked up to the nearest monster and came to
stop at the edge of its skirt.

"I'm deeply honored," Aunt Mattie said with more cordiality than I'd
seen her use on a Secretary of State. "What can I do to make your
visit to Earth more comfortable?"

There was no reply, not even the flicker of a tentacle.

They were even more unusual than one might expect. Aunt Mattie
resolutely went to each of the dozen and gave the same greeting. She
felt her duty as a hostess required it, although I knew that a
greeting to one was a greeting to all. Not one of them responded. It
seemed rather ridiculous. They'd come all this way to see us, then
didn't bother to acknowledge that we were there.

We spent more than an hour waiting for some kind of a response. None
came. Aunt Mattie showed no sign of impatience, which I thought was
rather praiseworthy, all things considered. But finally we left. She
didn't show what she felt, perhaps felt only that one had to be
patient with the lack of manners in the lower orders.

I was more interested in another kind of feeling, the one we left
behind. What was it? I couldn't put my finger on it. Sadness? Regret?
Distaste? Pity? Magnanimity? Give a basket of goodies to the poor at
Christmas? Give them some clothes to cover their nakedness? Teach them
a sense of shame?

No, I couldn't put my finger on it.

Hilarity?

I found myself regretting that back there on Capella IV, when Aunt
Mattie put clothes on him, and the monster had looked at me, I winked.

I wondered why I should regret that.

       *       *       *       *       *

I didn't have long to wonder.

Nothing happened during the rest of the day. We went back, together
and separately, several times during the daylight hours and during the
early hours of the night. For a wonder, nobody had leaked anything to
the newspapers, and for what it was worth, we had the show to
ourselves.

"Perhaps tomorrow," Aunt Mattie said around midnight, as we left the
field for the last time. "Perhaps they must rest."

"I could use some of that," I said with a yawn.

"Yes, Hapland," she agreed. "We must conserve our strength. Heaven
knows what may be required of us on the morrow."

Did she feel something, too? It was so strong, how could she help it?
And yet, the monster had not looked into her eye.

I didn't expect to sleep well, but I fooled myself. I was quite sure I
hadn't more than closed my eyes when I was roused by another excited
rapping on my bedroom door and again the butler rushed in without
ceremony.

"Look, Master Hapland," he shouted in a near falsetto.

He pulled so hard on my drapes they swept back from my windows like a
stage curtain--and I looked.

To the very limit of our grounds in the distance, but not beyond, the
trees, the shrubs, the drives and walkways, the lawns and ponds, all
were covered with a two foot thick blanket of glistening salt.

"And the monsters are gone," the butler was saying. "And I must go to
your aunt."

"So must I," I said, and grabbed up a robe.

As I ran, overtook him, passed him, from all over the house I could
hear excited outcries, wonder, amazement, anger, fear from the
servants. I finished the length of my wing, sprinted through the main
body of the house, and down the hallway of her wing to the door of her
suite. I didn't need to knock, someone had left it open.

Her own personal maid, I saw, as I ran past the little alcove into the
sitting room. The maid was standing beside Aunt Mattie, wringing her
hands and crying. The drapes here, too, were swept full back, and
through the windows I could see the collection, the highly prized,
wondrous collection of flora, all covered in salt.

Aunt Mattie stood there, without support, looking at it. When I came
up to her there were tears in her eyes and glistening streaks on her
wrinkled cheeks.

"Why?" she asked. It was very quietly spoken.

By now the butler had made the trip, and came into the room. I turned
to him.

"If we hurry," I said. "A good deal of the collection is enclosed
under plastic domes. If we don't wet the salt, and if we hurry and
have it scraped away from the buildings it won't poison the ground
inside them. We can save most of the collection that way."

"No, Master Hapland," he said, and shook his head. "The salt is inside
the buildings, just as much as here. A gardener shouted it at me as I
passed."

Aunt Mattie's closed fist came up to her lips, and then dropped again.
That was all.

"Why, Hapland?" she asked again. "Evil for good? Why?"

I motioned the maid and butler to leave--and take with them the
cluster of servants around the door in the hall. I took Aunt Mattie
over to her favorite chair, the one where she could sit and look out
at her collection; no point in pretending the salt wasn't there. I sat
down at her feet, the way I used to when I was ten years old. I looked
out at the salt, too. It was everywhere. Every inch of our grounds was
covered with it, to poison the earth so that nothing could grow in it.
It would take years to restore the grounds, and many more years to
restore the collection.

"Try to understand, Aunt Mattie," I said. "Not only what I say, but
all the implications of it. They didn't return evil for good. Let's
see it from what might have been their point of view. They live on a
world of salt, an antiseptic world. We went there, and you intended
good. You told them that our code was to do unto others as we would
have them do unto us.

"They returned our visit, and what did they find? What kind of a
pestilent horror did we live in? Bare ground, teeming with life,
billions of life forms in every cubic foot of ground beneath our feet.
Above the ground, too. Raw, growing life all around us, towering over
us.

"If they were doomed to live in such a world, they would want it
covered in salt, to kill all the life, make it antiseptic. They owed
nothing to the rest of Earth, but they owed this kindness to you. They
did unto others, as they would have others do unto them."

"I never realized--I was sure I couldn't be.... I've built my life
around it," she said.

"I know," I said with a regretful sigh. "So many people have."

And yet, I still wonder if it might not have happened at all--if I
hadn't winked. I wonder if that pesty psychiatrist has been right, all
along?

END

       *       *       *       *       *






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Do Unto Others, by Mark Clifton

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DO UNTO OTHERS ***

***** This file should be named 32181-8.txt or 32181-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/2/1/8/32181/

Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
