The Project Gutenberg EBook of A Mixture of Genius, by Arnold Castle

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: A Mixture of Genius

Author: Arnold Castle

Illustrator: Paul Orban

Release Date: May 2, 2010 [EBook #32207]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A MIXTURE OF GENIUS ***




Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







                         Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from If Worlds of Science Fiction June 1958.
    Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed.


                         A Mixture of Genius


                           BY ARNOLD CASTLE


                     _Illustrated by Paul Orban_


     _Who, but the imaginative young, shall inherit the stars?_

       *       *       *       *       *




The sleek transcontinental airliner settled onto one of the maze of
runways that was Stevenson Airport. With its turbojets fading into a
dense roar, it taxied across the field toward the central building.
Inside the plane a red light went off.

Senator Vance Duran unhooked the seat belt, reached for his briefcase,
and stepped into the crowded aisle. The other passengers were all
strangers, which had meant that for nearly an hour he had been able to
give his full attention to the several hundred pages of proposed
legislation and reports presented to the Committee on Extraterrestrial
Development, of which he was chairman. But now there would be
reporters, local political pleaders, the dinner at the Governor's, and
the inevitable unexpected interruptions which were a part of every
trip home.

As he strode through the door and onto the mobile escalator, he donned
his smile of tempered confidence in the economic future of the nation.
A television camera went into action at once and news-men formed a
small circle at the bottom of the ramp.

"That was a great little debate you put on with Ben Wickolm last
week," one of the reporters said. "You really tied him up."

"You can thank Senator Wickolm for arousing me," Duran answered,
observing to himself that perhaps _all_ of his efforts on the Hill did
not go unnoticed in his home state, if most of them seemed to.

"What do you think, Senator, of the FCC's modified ruling on the
integrated lunar relay station plan?" another asked.

"I haven't had time to get fully acquainted with it," the senator
evaded, stepping onto the ground and out of the way of the ramp.

"Say, Senator, what about the Mars colony project?" a third put in.
"How come it's bogged down?"

"No comment at present," the senator said. But he gave them an
ambiguous little grimace which was meant to suggest a minor but sticky
snarl behind the scenes. He hoped it would satisfy them for the
moment.

Making his escape as quickly as possible, he climbed onto the shuttle
car already loaded down with the other passengers. Finding an empty
seat, he folded himself into it, and was immediately joined by someone
else.

"Well, Senator, how does it feel to be home?" his companion asked with
sympathetic irony.

Duran turned, grinned, and reached for the man's hand.

"Great, Wayne," he answered, recognizing an old friend who had been of
no small aid during his earlier years in politics. "Say, I'd ask you
over for dinner if we weren't going to the Governor's tonight. Molly
would love to see you. Unfortunately I'm leaving for Washington again
in the morning."

"Why doesn't Molly move to D.C. with you, Vance?" the journalist
asked.

Duran hesitated. "Maybe in a year or so. After the boys are out of
highschool. _If_ I get the job again."

The smile on the younger man's face was heartening.

"Don't play coy with me, Vance. You know you've got this state sewed
up." Then came the slight frown of doubt. "Just one thing, though. A
lot of people are wondering why the hold up on the colony project.
You're bound to get a little of the criticism. What the hell's wrong,
anyway?"

"Can't you guess?"

"Yeah. I can guess. There's only one possibility, since the government
scientists assure us they've ironed out all the technical wrinkles.
But it's pretty hard to believe that out of the thousands of people
who volunteer every week, not even a couple of hundred are
acceptable."

Duran considered his answer carefully before voicing it.

"Ever ask yourself _who_ volunteers, Wayne?"

The journalist looked at him oddly, then nodded.

       *       *       *       *       *

The senator took an elevator directly to the helicopter landing on the
roof of the building. It was several minutes before he had located the
little runabout he had bought for his wife the previous Christmas.
Jack Woodvale, their caretaker, gardener, and chauffeur, was just
retrieving his suitcase from the baggage lift as the senator arrived.

Waiting until Woodvale had secured the suitcase in the luggage
compartment and climbed into the pilot's seat, Duran squeezed himself
into the cabin. A minute or two later the little craft was rising from
the port, directed automatically into the appropriate channel and
guided off toward the city.

"How've things been going, Jack?" the senator asked. He felt good.
Wayne's friendship and assurances had provided a needed boost.
"Everything okay?"

"I'd say so, sir," Woodvale told him. "Had a little trouble with the
solar screen. The store sent a man out to fix it. It's all right now."

The new power unit had been another of Molly's ideas, Duran recalled.
The old crystal sulfide screen had been perfectly reliable. But Molly
had thought it looked ugly up there on the roof. Molly's main faults,
he decided, derived from her concern with the neighbors' opinions.

"Oh, there was something else came up while I was on my way out to get
you," Woodvale continued abruptly. "The state's Attorney General
called--said it was important you contact him immediately."

Duran sensed anger surging up as he remembered the times when, as
District Attorney, Sig Loeffler had openly snubbed him. That, of
course, had been back in the days when Duran had been a junior partner
in one of the city's smaller law firms. He had not forgiven Loeffler,
nor had Loeffler given him any reason to do so. Only the Governor's
back-slapping mediation had allowed them to reach a politically stable
relationship. The relationship did not involve Duran's compliance with
the man's whims, however.

"Get him on the phone, Jack," Duran said at last. "But just make one
call. If he's not at his office, forget it."

In less than a minute Woodvale was turning around to say:

"He's in, sir. You want to talk to him?"

Duran grunted and lifted the phone from the clamp beside his seat.

"Senator Duran speaking," he said.

"Vance, this is Loeffler," boomed a voice in considerable contrast to
the senator's own mild tone. "Something pretty fantastic has happened.
We're trying to keep it quiet, at least until we decide on what action
to take. But if you can make it over here some time this evening, I'll
tell you the story. You're going to be in on it eventually, and I
thought you'd prefer getting in on it early."

Duran had intended quite bluntly to explain that he had more important
business. But there was something compelling about the man's
apparently ingenuous urgency that caused the senator to change his
mind.

"Okay, Loeffler. I'll be right over."

He broke the contact and told Woodvale to dial his home number.

"Ernie, this is Dad," he said at the sound of his younger son's voice.
"Tell Mother I'm going to stop off at the Attorney General's
office--that's right--but that I'll be home in plenty of time to get
ready for the dinner. Got that? That's right. How's school? Something
wrong? Okay, son, I'll see you later."

Ernie had said that everything was all right, but with an uneasiness
in the way he spoke. Grades, maybe, Duran thought. The boy had been
doing pretty well, almost as well as Roger, but was showing the
inevitable adolescent ramifications of interest. Duran found himself
musing briefly upon his own youthful extra-curricular forays up the
tree of knowledge and sighed.

"Go to the capitol building, Jack," he said.

"Which port should I use, sir?" the younger man asked.

"The official one," Duran told him. This was Loeffler's idea.

       *       *       *       *       *

The senator was surprised to find one of the Attorney General's
harried-looking secretaries working late. She glanced up from her
typewriter and gave him an equivocal smile of recognition.

"He's expecting you, Mr. Senator," she said, nodding toward the inner
office. "Go right in."

Sigmund Loeffler was not alone. But the two other visitors were paled
by the aura of importance which emanated from the large black-haired
man behind the desk. He rose grandly at Duran's entrance, and without
bothering to shake hands proceeded with introductions.

"Fritz Ambly, Senator Vance Duran. Fritz," he explained, "is chairman
of the state Youth Welfare Board."

Duran took the thin hand which the other extended to him and noted the
concern on the man's slim freckled face. His features were
appropriately almost those of a child, but of a worried child.

"And Bob Duff, Senator Duran," Loeffler went on. "Bob is head of our
Civil Defense now."

The second man was, in contrast, short and homely, but not without a
touch of the other's anxiety.

"Well, gentlemen, you're welcome to stay if you wish," the Attorney
General told them. "I'll have to repeat all the facts to Senator
Duran, of course."

"I'd better be off," Ambly said. "Perhaps I'll see you at the
Governor's tonight?"

"Not me, I'm afraid," Loeffler told him. "The DA and I have a little
problem to work out together. I'll call you both tomorrow about the
press release."

"We can't wait too long," said Duff. "Rumors can be a lot worse than
the truth. Especially about something like this. In fact, I don't see
the point in waiting at all."

"Tomorrow, Bob. Tomorrow," Loeffler promised. "Noon at the latest."

His heavy smile faded as the two visitors closed the door behind them.
With an unthrottled groan, he lowered himself into the chair and
turned his dark gaze upon the senator.

"They think _they_ have troubles," he said.

"And you think _I_ have," Duran returned, seating himself.

"I know _you_ do. Unfortunately I happen to share them to some
extent."

He paused to relight the stub of a cigar, then went on.

"It's a crazy world we live in, Vance. Things change. Sometimes it's
hard for us adults to keep up with it. The kids seem to, though."

Duran tried to appear suavely bored with the other's musings. But in
spite of himself he could sense his gaze becoming intently expectant.
Whatever connection there might be between himself, Ambly, and Duff
completely eluded him. And that elusive connection had aroused his
curiosity.

"Yeah, they keep up with things, all right," Loeffler went on. "And
sometimes they get some pretty big ideas."

He halted, puffed thoughtfully, then barked:

"Remember Mel Skinner's lodge out on that island in Wakataoga Lake?
Big Spanish-style place. Built it for that wife of his he brought back
from Chile or somewhere."

"Yes, I remember it. Molly and I spent a weekend there a couple of
years ago. Why?" the senator asked, realizing more than ever how much
he disliked Sigmund Loeffler. "What are you getting at?"

"Well, the next time you go you'd better take along some sleeping
bags," said Loeffler. "Because the house isn't there anymore."

"Okay," Duran said, strangely anxious. "Let's forget the riddles and
get down to business. What happened to Mel Skinner's hacienda?"

The Attorney General stared at his guest for a moment, before
remarking harshly:

"It got blown up."

"A bomb, you mean?" Duran asked.

"Oh, no, no--nothing so crude as that. This was a guided missile. With
a warhead."

The senator was thinking fast now, but still the pattern eluded him.

"Not an act of war, surely?" he remarked.

"More like an act of revolution," Loeffler told him. "Because the
agents behind it were _kids_. Kids from our state, our city. Kids
from decent homes, educated families. Bright kids. Happy kids. Kids
with every opportunity. _Kids who ought to know better--_"

"Hold it, Loeffler!" Duran interrupted, rising from the chair to place
both hands on the edge of the desk. "Just one question--was anyone
killed or injured?"

The other man hesitated melodramatically, then looked down at his
cigar.

"No. There was no one on the island. The place had been closed down
for the winter. That's the only pleasant thing about it."

Duran found it such unexpectedly good news that he was actually able
to smile when he dropped back into the chair.

"In other words, Loeffler, it was a prank."

But the Attorney General seemed not to see it in precisely that light.

"A prank, yes!" he exploded. "A hundred thousand dollar prank! My God,
Vance, don't you see what those boys did? They demonstrated the
grossest lack of respect for private property. And what if they'd
miscalculated? That rocket was fired from a distance of some fifty or
sixty miles. It could have killed any number of people along its
course had it fallen short."

"Well, I'll admit it's not the sort of thing I'd like to see
encouraged," said Duran. "Now give me the details. Who were they?
Where did they get the rocket? What was the point of it, anyway?"

Sigmund Loeffler opened a folder which lay on his desk and started
sifting through its contents. He pulled out several memoranda and a
list of names, closing the folder again.

"There was a gang of eight, all in the eleventh or twelfth grades at
Eisenhower High. Five of them were members of the school rocket club.
Three of them had juvenile delinquency records--minor stuff, mostly,
like copter stunting and public disturbance. The youngest had won a
couple of science awards for demonstrations in--" he glanced
significantly at the senator, "the chemistry of explosives."

Duran said nothing, but his sense of concern was growing.

"Let's see," Loeffler went on. "Two of the boys were taking vocational
courses. One had his own machine shop, in fact. Then there was the
electronics expert--Ceasar Grasso's son--know him?"

The senator nodded.

"He runs the highschool T-V station. Knows a lot about radio, I
understand. Oh, yes. There was also the lad who drew up the plans for
the gadget. Pretty sharp at engineering design, they say--"

Duran peered numbly across the desk at the grim faced official. This
was what he had been fearing all along. But despite his apprehension,
he was not entirely ready for it.

"That, I suppose," he said quietly, "was my son Roger."

Loeffler nodded slowly. "That was your boy, Vance. Sorry I had to be
the one to break it to you."

"But where is he?" Duran asked. "And does Molly know about it?"

"She knows he's been detained, but not how serious the charges are."

"Just how serious _are_ the charges?"

"I don't know yet," said Loeffler. "That's not really my province, of
course," said Loeffler. "But the problem is complicated by the fact
that Lake Wakataoga is state property, with the island merely leased
to Skinner."

Duran fumbled through his pockets for his cigarettes. He found them
and lit one.

"When did this happen?" he asked, aware that the painfully tangled
knot in his stomach was beginning to untie itself.

"This afternoon around one-thirty. A couple of guys fishing on the
lake saw the explosion and called the local civil defense
head-quarters. They claim they heard the rocket fall. Damned near had
a war scare till the pieces were found. They were easy enough to
trace, and the kids gave themselves away by all eight of them being
awol from their one o'clock classes. Especially since five of them
were absent from a physics class--that was one class they never cut."

"I don't see how they managed to go all the way through with it
without someone finding out," Duran said, bewilderedly.

"I know," agreed Loeffler, nodding. "That's the way we all felt. But
they admit doing it--hell, they're proud of it!--and we found the shed
where the thing was assembled."

"I don't suppose they offered any motive," Duran said.

"Oh, sure. They claim they'd been planning it ever since Skinner
wouldn't let them land copters on the island. Pretty weak, huh?"

The senator made no response.

"Well, Vance, I guess you'll want to talk to the boy," Loeffler
concluded. "I had him brought up here. Figured it would be best all
around that way. I knew you had to get back to Washington tomorrow and
probably wouldn't have time to see him then. Shall I have him come
in?"

When Duran hesitated, he added, "Oh, I've got to duck out for a few
minutes. Get some supper. Got a long evening ahead of me."

"Okay, Loeffler, send him in. And--" This was the hardest part. "And I
appreciate this."

"No trouble, Vance," the man said, rising and stepping around the
desk. "No more than we've got already."

He removed a suit coat from a hanger and left the office with it under
his arm. A moment later the door opened again and the senator saw the
shaggy head of his older son peer into the room. The boy was the one
who finally broke the silence which followed.

"Hi, Dad," he said, sauntering casually into the office. "Guess you're
pretty sore at me. Can't blame you."

Duran remained seated, indicating a chair against one wall. He waited
till his son had sat down.

"I'm a little dumbfounded, Rog, that's all. I suppose you had a good
reason for it."

"Sure. Old skinflint Skinner wouldn't let us--"

"_Roger!_" the senator growled threateningly. He was not going to
allow the interview to start off with a half-truth.

"Yeah, but that's state land," the boy persisted. "He hadn't any
right--"

"Roger, I said a _good_ reason."

"Okay, Dad," he sighed. "No, we didn't have _that_ kind of a reason."

"What it amounted to," Duran said, "was that you wanted to do
something spectacular like building a rocket and firing it at
something. Only to be fun it had to be illegal, if not immoral. And
Melvin Skinner's place seemed like the least objectionable target.
Isn't that about it?"

"Yeah, I guess so. Only we had just about finished the rocket before
we started wondering about a target. That was the trouble. Once we'd
built it, we had to do something with it."

"How do you think that's going to sound in court?"

"I don't know, Dad. You're the lawyer."

Duran cringed, but tried not to show it.

"Roger," he said slowly. "Flippancy is the easiest defense, and the
least effective. I hope you won't feel you have to resort to it too
often."

The boy said nothing.

"Well, tell me about it," his father suggested, sensing his son's
isolation.

"About what?"

"The rocket. Wouldn't a jet have been easier to make?"

"A rocket was cheaper."

The source of the money required for the project was something Duran
had overlooked. However, it was, he realized, one best postponed for
the present. The important thing now was to regain his son's
confidence.

"Did you design it?"

"Yeah. Well, I drew it up. Nothing very original about it. But it was
a good little machine."

Duran noticed the boy's restless squirming, saw him perfunctorily
place a hand to the baggy pocket of his jacket and quickly withdraw
it, then arrived at a decision. Reaching into his own coat, Duran took
out the pack of cigarettes, extending it to his son.

"Care for a cigarette?" he asked.

The youth looked at him doubtfully for an instant. Then he smiled his
first smile that evening.

"Thanks, Dad," he responded, taking one and lighting it
self-consciously. He added, "You've been out of town so much, I didn't
think you knew I'd started--"

"I know, Rog," the man said, aware of a rising flood of
self-condemnation. "Go on, son. About the rocket. What kind of fuel
did you use?"

"Oh, nothing special. It had a liquid bi-propellant motor. We used
ethanol and liquid oxygen. Pretty old-fashioned. But we didn't know
how to get hold of the fancier stuff, and didn't have any way of
synthesizing it. Then, at the last minute, we found that one of the
valves feeding into the nozzle was clogged up. That's why we were late
to class."

"Couldn't that have been dangerous?" Duran asked, and realized at once
that he had said the wrong thing.

The boy merely shrugged.

"Well, it must have been a pretty good machine if it flew sixty miles
and hit its target," Duran went on.

"Oh, we had it radio-controlled, with a midget T.V. transmitter
mounted in it. Grasso took care of that. He did a terrific job. Of
course, it was pretty expensive."

He glanced at his father tentatively for a moment, then bent his gaze
to the cigarette.

"I don't have my car any more. But I guess I won't be needing it now."

There was a cautious knock on the door.

"Listen, Rog," Duran began, "I'll try to get to see you tomorrow
before I leave. Remember that your mother and I are both on your side,
without qualification. You've done a pretty terrible thing, of course.
But I have to admit, at the same time, that I'm really rather proud of
you. Does that make sense?"

"Sure," said Roger huskily, "I guess so."

       *       *       *       *       *

The flight home was a quiet one. Duran found himself with many
thoughts to think, not the least of which was what his wife's reaction
would be. The difficulty lay in the fact that their married life had
been too easy, too free of tragedy, to enable him to foresee her
response. But life would not be quite the same now, even if Roger
escaped the more concrete forms of punishment. And perhaps it would be
the most difficult for Ernest, who would forever be expected either to
live up to or down to his older brother's reputation. When all poor
Ernest seemed to want these days was to play the saxophone.

And then there was his own political future to consider. This would
certainly not help it. But perhaps the affair would be forgotten in
the next three years. After all, it might have been far worse. It
might have happened in a campaign year. This way he still had a
fighting chance. Three sessions with a good record might overbalance
the loss in public confidence this would incur. And then he thought of
the Mars colony mess and winced.

Telling his wife about the matter was not nearly so difficult as the
senator had feared. She had been ready for news of a crime of passion,
or at least of armed robbery. What her husband had to relate stunned
her at first. But once she had ridden out the shock, she recovered
quickly.

"You don't have to go tonight, Molly," Duran told her.

"You think it might look better if I didn't?" she asked gently.

"That wasn't what I was getting at," he said. He thought it over for a
moment, then added, "No, I don't. In fact, I think it would look
better if we both went to the Governor's. Roger is not a juvenile
delinquent. That, I believe, is understood. If we must accept some of
the responsibility for what he did today, then let's do so gracefully.
Were you to stay home tonight, it might appear to some that you had
reason to be ashamed of the business, which you don't."

"It might also look as if I were afraid that Ernest might do
something similar, as if I felt I had to watch him," she said. "Oh,
people can be so ridiculous! Why wasn't Millie Gorton's boy in on it?"

Duran smiled at the idea of the Governor's tubby, obtuse son involved
in the construction of anything more demanding than a paper glider.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Governor's mansion, a century old edifice typifying the moribund
tendency to confuse dignity with discomfort, was teeming with
professional and political personages when the Durans arrived. The
dinner went off routinely, with no overt references made to the
missile matter. However, the senator noticed that no one inquired into
the health and happiness of his two sons, so that he presumed word had
got around.

It was not until after dinner, when he had seated himself alone in a
corner of the luxurious old living room, a B and B in one hand and a
cigar in the other, that his host approached him.

"Evenin', Vance. Sure glad you could make it," exclaimed the
familiarly jovial voice of Governor Will Gorton.

Duran sat down his drink and took the Governor's plump hand, shaking
it vigorously. Then the senator observed the intense youngish face of
Fritz Ambly, who had followed the Governor.

"Guess you know Fritz," Gorton went on, seating himself next to Duran.
"Says he met you at Sig's office this afternoon."

"That's right," Duran said. "Good to see you again, Ambly."

The Youth Welfare board chairman nodded affably and took the remaining
chair. His look of concern had mellowed somewhat with the evening. But
the pale close eyes remained set in an expression of aggressive
earnestness.

"How's Roger?" Gorton asked, after a moment's silence.

"As normal as ever," said Duran, unprepared for the question. Then,
slyly, he added, "Thanks for talking Loeffler into letting me see
him."

"Well, Sig agreed it was the only thing to do, after I told him you'd
be leaving for Washington again tomorrow," the Governor said.

Duran grinned wryly. It had been a guess, but a good one. And
Loeffler's having passed the interview off as a personal favor put
their relationship back in its proper perspective.

"Well, what's to be done about the boys? They're all under eighteen, I
suppose."

"That's right," Gorton said. "It's entirely a matter for the juvenile
authority. At least we're going to try to keep it there. But there's
more to it than that. Which is why Fritz is here. He has something on
his mind which he thinks is pretty important. I do too."

"You see, Senator," said Ambly, coming in promptly on his cue, "it's
this way. If the case were an isolated one, it would be easy enough
for us to deal with. But it's part of a pattern which few people have
yet noticed. Let me cite several other similar incidents.

"Perhaps you read about the group of fifty teen-aged copter jockeys
who decided to hold a transcontinental scavenger hunt. Ignoring all
air-traffic regulations, they managed to run up the magnificent total
of seventeen collisions and thirty-two casualties."

"Hear about that one, Vance?" the Governor asked, his earlier
festiveness gone.

"Yes, I think I saw something about it," Duran said. "It was pretty
unfortunate, but--"

"And then there was the case of the promising young New England
biologist who was discovered to have evolved a particularly deadly
strain of bacteria, which he had been toting around with him in an
aspirin bottle," Ambly went on, his thin hands clasped tightly in
front of him. "Of course, at the age of sixteen, one perhaps can't be
expected to foresee all of the possible consequences.

"So let us consider the two seventeen-year-olds who caused something
of a sensation in Florida when they used the Branski-Baker method of
genetic exchange to breed a quite fabulous species of winged
alligator. Several of these so called 'alli-bats' escaped into the
everglades, but it is doubted that they will be able to reproduce
themselves. At least there is _some_ doubt."

The senator reached for his drink and sipped it thoughtfully. He was
beginning to see Roger's gang's misadventure in a new light. But it
was an unfamiliar light, one that would take him a while to become
accustomed to.

"Perhaps the most startling case of all," Ambly went on, "concerns the
Nuclear Fission Society of Urania, Nevada. It is not a well publicized
fact that this quasi-academic group of adolescent physicists was
exposed in the act of assembling an elementary but workable atomic
bomb. Many of the elders in this fast-growing little community are
engaged, as you no doubt know, in atomic development of one sort or
another. It seemed that this interest had trickled down to their
offspring, who showed an impressive amount of ingenuity in getting the
necessary materials. Fortunately, one youngster asked his father
entirely too many questions concerning the actual fabrication of
fission weapons. The man investigated and--"

"Now, wait a minute," Duran interrupted, wondering momentarily if the
whole tale might not have been a hoax. "How much of this am I really
expected to believe?"

"It's all fact, Vance," Governor Gorton responded solemnly. "Fritz has
a couple of scrapbooks I'd like you to look at some time. Each case is
pretty well authenticated. But the important thing is the pattern.
It's really sort of frightening in a way."

"Many similar incidents have no doubt occurred of which I have no
record," said Ambly. "I'd estimate that ninety percent of such cases
are suppressed, either in the interest of national security or because
the children's parents are sufficiently influential to have the story
squelched."

"Just as we'd have sat on this one," added Gorton, "if the dang thing
hadn't actually been shot off."

Duran smiled inwardly at the picture evoked by the Governor's
metaphor. However, he had to admit that the press would in all
probability not have learned about the rocket at all, had it been
discovered prior to being launched.

"Still," he remarked, "it's odd that the papers haven't shown more of
an interest in it."

"I wrote an article on the subject some time ago," Ambly told him,
"but was never able to get it published. It seems that people, for the
most part, are more interested in the traditional sordid-sensational
type of juvenile delinquency.

"Whereas, this is something different, something unique. It isn't the
result of poverty or broken homes, ignorance or twisted
personalities--this is a mixture of genius, knowledge, restlessness,
and something else I don't think we understand."

"What do you suggest be done about it?" Duran asked.

"Well, the first step," said Ambly, "is to get Congress to recognize
the problem for what it is. And even that won't be easy."

"That's where you're supposed to come in," the Governor said, grinning
a little guiltily. "Fritz has been tryin' to get me to talk to you
about it for some months. I've got to admit, though, that the business
this afternoon involvin' your son was what finally convinced me you
might be sold."

"I'm sold, Will," Duran told him. "But what's the solution? We can't
supervise the activities of every kid in the country with an IQ above
a hundred and ten. Anyway, they're too limited as it is. That, it
seems to me, is part of the trouble. And we can't hold their parents
accountable. Responsibility has to be an individual matter. So what's
the solution?"

Governor Gorton raised a quizzical eyebrow at Fritz Ambly, who in turn
merely shrugged. The senator glanced at each of them, then down at his
drink.

"So there isn't one," he said.

"Whatever it is," said Ambly, "it won't be simple or painless. There's
only one such solution, and that's the time-honored technique of
letting them grow into maturity. And even that is far from painless
and simple to those doing the growing, nor is it always the solution."

"Yet you're convinced this--" the senator paused briefly, "phenomenon
constitutes a danger to the nation?"

Ambly merely smiled. But very, very grimly.

"Well, think it over, Vance," the Governor said, getting to his feet.
"Say, there are a couple of hydroponics men here somewhere who are
pretty interested in meetin' you. You've heard of Van Neef Industries.
He's one of 'em."

_So much for the welfare of the nation_, Duran thought with a taste of
bitterness. _Now back to politics._

But he finished off his drink, and put out his cigar, and rose to
follow the Governor. Politics, after all, was the reason he had come.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was two a.m. before Senator Vance Duran wearily dropped into bed.
But he found no rest in sleep that night. For in his dreams he seemed
to see a youngster walking, now through a forest, now through a city,
now through an autumn countryside. And in the boy's hand was a tightly
capped bottle. And the expression on his face was an enigma....

Early the next morning Jack Woodvale parked the helicopter in a lot
back of the city youth detention home. Five minutes later the senator
was again talking to his older son.

"I have to get back to Washington this morning, Roger," he said. "I've
scheduled a committee meeting for ten-thirty. I suppose I could call
it off, but we've got to do something about the Mars colony project
before public apathy forces us to drop the whole thing. You
understand, don't you?"

"Sure," the boy said with apparent indifference. "Maybe you should
have let _me_ volunteer. You'd have solved two problems at the same
time."

"Now, Roger--" Duran began. But he stopped, suddenly alert.

"Son, you weren't ever serious about that, were you? I mean all that
talk I used to hear about your wanting to go to one of the planets?"

"Ah, I don't know, Dad--"

"Please, Roger, you've got to be honest with me. I want to know
exactly how you feel about it. I know you've tried before, and I
refused to take you seriously. I realize that. But now--now tell me
the truth."

And the curious thing was, he realized, that he wanted to hear from
his son what he feared most to hear.

"Well--sure, I wanted to go," his son said. "I kept telling you,
didn't I? Of course, I wouldn't want to go unless some of the gang
were going too."

"You really think that you'd be willing to leave Earth, your home,
your family--"

Duran hesitated angrily, knowing it was the wrong approach. He waited
a moment, then began again.

"I'm not condemning you for it, Roger. I just find it hard to believe.
And I have to be sure you know what you'd be sacrificing."

"I think I do, Dad," Roger said. "But you've got to make a break
sometime. I guess there'd be some girls going along, wouldn't there?"

Duran grinned numbly.

"I guess there would, son," he said.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Senator watched the land of his home state sink rapidly into the
morning haze as the jetliner soared upward. It was a sight he had seen
often, but never with the sense of challenge he experienced now. For
every moment brought him closer to what beyond all doubt would be the
toughest fight of his political career. But he felt that he had logic
on his side, though sentiment would very probably be against him.

He sat back, lit a cigarette, and considered the irony of the
situation. When legislation had been passed authorizing the Department
of Extraterrestrial Development to start the colony project, a list of
criteria had been drawn up for the would-be settler. It had
meticulously specified the requirements of health, intelligence, and
adaptability. And most rigidly adhered to of all had been the
provision that the applicant be over the age of twenty-five. For,
above all, it was assumed, a colonist must be mature.

And in that assumption, Duran concluded, had been hidden the fallacy
which had made a fiasco of the project. For was not maturity largely a
matter of finding an acceptable place for oneself in the scheme of
things? Was not maturity essentially a realistic, but wholly
irrevocable, resignation? If so, it had been inevitable that those who
came to volunteer would, for the most part, be the misfits and the
malcontents, men who hoped to escape the imagined or to find the
imaginary.

The mature, the resigned, had assuredly inherited the earth. Only the
young could seek the stars.

END

       *       *       *       *       *






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of A Mixture of Genius, by Arnold Castle

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A MIXTURE OF GENIUS ***

***** This file should be named 32207.txt or 32207.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/2/2/0/32207/

Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
