The Project Gutenberg EBook of Pastoral Affair, by Charles A. Stearns

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Pastoral Affair

Author: Charles A. Stearns

Illustrator: Dick Francis

Release Date: May 9, 2010 [EBook #32303]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PASTORAL AFFAIR ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                              PASTORAL AFFAIR

                           By CHARLES A. STEARNS

                        Illustrated by DICK FRANCIS

[Transcriber Note: This etext was produced from Galaxy Science Fiction
February 1959. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the
U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]


[Sidenote: No wonder Stefanik meant to fight to the last--he wasn't
going to turn his kids over to an old goat like Glinka!]


The seaplane cast its silhouette from aloft upon the blue Arabian Sea,
left its white wake across the shallows, and taxied alongside the
ancient stone jetty, clawing into the sandy bottom with its small fore
and after anchors.

Colonel Glinka stepped out upon the wing, carefully measured the
distance to the jetty, and sprang for it, wetting himself up to the seat
of his voluminous khaki shorts.

This lonely sandspit, these barren slopes and frowning, ocher cliffs,
the oceanic silence around him, broken by the plaintive cries of
wheeling Caspian terns that were badly in need of laundering, were not,
he thought as he clambered ashore, exactly as one pictures a tropical
paradise.

And it helped the desolation of his mood not at all that upon these same
arid ridges scores of silent, burnoosed figures watched him as he stood
there, allowing the water to drain from his perforated white oxfords and
all unaware that his vast pith helmet, curiously heavy malacca cane and
formidable fundament cast a centaur's shadow upon the rocks in the later
afternoon sun.

Colonel Glinka took a pair of green sun goggles from his pocket and put
them on, resolutely hitched up his shorts, assumed the stern yet
conciliatory expression of a hedgehog in mating season, and set off up
the rocky path.

Ahead of him, the burnoosed ones scrambled nimbly up the slope, looking
over their shoulders, intent upon not missing a thing, yet endeavoring
to keep their distance. But two there had been who either had not seen
him arrive, or did not give a damn, for they suddenly appeared upon the
rise before him, racing down toward the sea with very little regard for
life or limb.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the lead, a brown young man in flying green turban and white duck
trousers appeared to be losing steadily to his pursuer, who, though
swathed from head to food in that featureless native garb of the others,
might yet be identified by subtle conformations as a female.

Both of them stopped at once upon sighting Colonel Glinka in the
pathway, the female hurriedly retreating to what might be deemed a safer
distance, the young man standing as if petrified, with one foot upraised
and a sun-snarl upon his mottled face, quivering at point.

"Oh, Effendi," he cried at last, "if you are looking for Aden, then you
are lost, for Aden is five hundred miles that way. And if you are
looking for Cairo--"

"I am hardly ever lost," Colonel Glinka said, and, eying the young
female, added, "Tell me, what is the name of that rather tasteless game
that you are playing?"

"No game, Effendi," the brown young man said. "That one chases me every
time I go outside. They are worse than Tuaregs, these people."

"Are you not a native, then?"

"I?" The young man placed a hand of scorn upon his breast. "Hadji Abdul
Hakkim ben Salazar? I am Saudi, and a Hadj besides. Say, Joe, have you
got an American cigarette?"

"A great deal better than that," Colonel Glinka said, proffering an
ornate golden cigarette case. "Try one of these, my boy."

Abdul Hakkim ben Salazar took two, sniffing them suspiciously. "They are
very brown," he said.

Less critically, Colonel Glinka lighted one for himself. "You know," he
said, "I was rather hoping that you might direct me to the house of a
very old friend of mine."

"What handle?"

"I cannot tell you what name he is presently affecting, but he is a
small, crooked man with a heavy black beard--or, at any rate, he once
had such a beard. I know that he is somewhere on this island; therefore
it will be useless for you to lie to me."

"Ah, that is the Sidi Doctor Stephens," Abdul said, puffing not too
happily upon his cigarette. "His is the only house upon this island;
also, I am his flunky and so I ought to know."

"'Stephens' will do," said Colonel Glinka, thwacking him smartly with
the Malacca cane. "Lead on. And you may dispense with the gutter
American dialect. I am not American, and besides I speak Arabic
fluently."

"But I not so well," Abdul said, "for I was raised in the Kuwait
oil-fields."

"By whom? A camel breeder?"

"Socony Vacuum," Abdul said.

They toiled up the face of the cliff. At once, half a dozen of the
white-robed gallery fell in behind them. When Colonel Glinka stopped and
looked back, they stopped. When he continued upon his way, they
continued.

"Have they no homes to which to go?" he complained. "Have they nothing
to do?"

"They are a very backward people, who live in the open," Abdul said.
"They do not work."

"How, then, do the wretches live? Wall Street charity, I presume."

"Oh, no, when they are not able to forage, the Sidi Doctor Stephens
feeds them."

"The reactionary old fool! But you may be sure that they knew how to
work in the old days, before he came."

"I do not think so."

"And why, in your ageless wisdom, not?"

"Because the Sidi Doctor made them," Abdul Hakkim ben Salazar said.

       *       *       *       *       *

Colonel Glinka did not reply, for they had reached the summit of the
path by this time and were looking down upon a small, white villa that
nestled in a green microcosm between the naked chines of the dark,
interior hills. A miniature Eden indeed, thought Colonel Glinka, of figs
and cinnamons, of date palms and patchouli, all enclosed within a high
wire fence.

They descended, and Abdul Hakkim ben Salazar, with a flourish, produced
a great bronze key and unlocked the iron gate. "The Sidi Doctor," he
said, "will doubtless be in his conservatory, making flowers."

"A godlike pastime," said Colonel Glinka with heavy irony. "And where
may this hotbed of new life be found?"

"Over there," Abdul said, pointing toward a narrow, screened,
quonsetlike annex which protruded from the rear of the villa. "Come with
me and I will show you."

"You will not," Colonel Glinka said, smiting him upon the thigh once
again with the heavy cane. "You will remain here and keep silent."

"Ouchdammit!" Abdul exclaimed. "You be careful with that thing, Joe,
okay?"

"_You_ be careful, my boy," Colonel Glinka said and marched swiftly
around the corner of the house, opened the screen door of the
conservatory, and entered.

Here, amid long, terraced rows of tropical plants, a bearded dwarf in a
green coat crouched before an earthen tray of lilies of the valley,
tranquilly puffing up a massive, tobacco-stained meerschaum. He did not
look up at the sound of the intruder, for he was engaged in a delicate
business, the transfer of pollen from corolla to corolla with a
toothpick.

"So you are, after all, only a minor god," Colonel Glinka said.

"I heard your plane and I watched you come up the path," the black
bearded little man said. "Glinka, is it not?"

"You remembered me!" Colonel Glinka, quite affectedly, removed his
goggles and dabbed at his eye with a perfumed handkerchief. "A humble
policeman, a fat little nobody, to be remembered by the great Dr.
Stefanik who was once our greatest scientist--yes, our most brilliant
geneticist--do not shake your head. Let me see, was it Ankara where last
we met? Yes, eight years ago in Ankara. You got away from me in Ankara.
I was so ashamed, Comrade, that I cried."

"Nine years," the other corrected. "For one remembers a mad dog. And do
not call me 'comrade,' Comrade. You know that I was never anything other
than a simple Cossack."

"And, as such, invariably troublesome to us," Colonel Glinka said. "Yet
you were our white hope, Comrade Stefanik. We might have led the world,
I am told, in organics as we now lead in physics. I have read all of
your books upon the fascinating subject of chromosomic change and the
morphology of rats. It was required reading for those of us who were
assigned to you. Most interesting, though I confess I did not understand
all of it."

       *       *       *       *       *

Dr. Stefanik got slowly to his feet. His back was now revealed to be so
cruelly deformed that his black beard curled against his smock, and he
walked with a shuffling, crablike motion as he limped over to pick up a
small rubber irrigation hose.

"Why did you leave us, Comrade Stefanik?" asked Colonel Glinka. "Why
shame us, discredit your government, by running away?"

"I did not like it there," Dr. Stefanik said.

"We knew, of course, that you were on the verge of some great discovery,
some new process, perhaps, of controlling human development. A genetical
means, our biologists tell me, which might have made us all supermen,
tall and brilliant, and immune to disease. A race of Pavlovs and
Stakhanovs. Do you deny this?"

Dr. Stefanik merely sucked upon his pipe calmly, twisted a valve half
hidden in the greenery. A spray of brilliant green liquid emerged from
the nozzle of the hose, bathing the plants in a gentle emerald mist.

"It is true," he said at last, "that I had experimented in those days
with a new process of alloploidy."

"And what is that?"

"Alloploidy is the manipulation of chromosomic patterns which allows us
to superimpose the character of our most perfect specimens upon those of
less fortunate hereditary traits within the species."

"I see," said Colonel Glinka, who had not really quite seen. "Exactly. A
super-race, to rule the world. Imagine, Comrade!"

"Only super-rats and the like," Dr. Stefanik told him calmly, "for you
may go home and tell them that I have never seen fit to experiment with
human beings, Glinka, and I never will."

"_I_ tell them _that_?" Colonel Glinka cried. "Would I dare? Oh, no, you
must tell them yourself. That is why you will have to return with me."

"Never!"

Colonel Glinka sighed prodigiously. "I am afraid that our country is
going to be dogs-in-the-manger in this matter," he said. "You see, we
are a jealous people by nature, and if we cannot have you, no one
shall." And, deliberately, he laid the Malacca cane across his left arm,
so that its tip was pointed squarely at Dr. Stefanik and the sinister
round hole there clearly revealed to him.

"How melodramatic that is," Dr. Stefanik said.

"I know it," said Colonel Glinka, "but you must remember that the
customs officials in this part of the world are exceedingly tiresome
about firearms. This little gem, now, is quite discreet, and very
accurate, and it will shoot you three times before you can say 'Never.'
Will you not change your mind?"

"No."

"I _did_ so want to become tall and brilliant," Colonel Glinka said
regretfully, and he started to press the handle of the cane.

[Illustration]

"We are as tall as we stand," said Dr. Stefanik, and, swiftly focusing
the nozzle of the irrigation hose to a thin stream, squirted the
stinging green fluid in Colonel Glinka's right and left eye.

       *       *       *       *       *

"I know that you are in here somewhere!" Colonel Glinka yelped. "Be
assured that I shall find you, Comrade, and when I do, it will not be
pleasant for you! Oh, my--no, indeed!"

His eyes were red and streaming. He wiped them with the lavender-scented
handkerchief, got down upon his hands and knees and started to crawl
along the terraced rows of tropical plants, looking under each bench as
he came to it. When he had reached the end, he turned and crawled up the
other side.

At the far end of the conservatory, he stood up with a baffled grunt. "I
know that you are in here," he said.

Something tickled the back of his neck. He whirled like a Dervish, but
found only a drooping, blood-red plant like nothing ever created by
nature confronting him.

"I am getting jumpy," Colonel Glinka growled. "A little jumpy in my
business is good, but too much is bad for the health." And he went,
straightway, and closed the back door of the conservatory and dragged a
heavy rack of trailing orchids in front of it, humming a furious little
march from _The Guardsman_ as he worked.

"You must know," he said loudly, "that I do not altogether believe you,
Stefanik, when you imply that you have abandoned this research. Nor will
they. For who, then, are these degenerate wretches who stand upon the
hills and gawk at us, and why must you feed them? I know that they were
not created by you, but it is possible that they are paid to be your
guinea pigs. Perhaps you are all in the pay of the British. Am I right?"

He listened. There was no answer.

Completing his examination of the conservatory, he entered the main
villa and searched it thoroughly, as he had been trained to do, looking
in every cupboard and closet and under the beds.

When he had exhausted these hiding places, he left by the front door and
closed it after him, with a narrow, jamming wedge that he had made of
half a lead pencil.

There were many places to hide in the garden, but Colonel Glinka took
them one by one, glancing behind him from time to time in order to make
certain that he was not being followed around and around the house in a
grim sort of Maypole dance.

"I know that you are out here, Comrade," he said.

Presently he had arrived back where he had started, sweating profusely,
and was about to retrace the entire circuit when he caught a glimpse of
something moving in the undergrowth of patchouli near the gate. He aimed
the Malacca cane and pressed a part of its handle with his thumb. A
bullet whined off the steel gatepost.

"Stop there, my friend!" he commanded.

Abdul Hakkim ben Salazar slowly rose from the bushes with his hands high
above his head.

"You got me, Joe," he said.

       *       *       *       *       *

The gate was wide open; Stefanik's route of escape now painfully
obvious.

Colonel Glinka stared thoughtfully up at the darkening ridges where the
sun set in that sanguinary glory observable only in these latitudes, and
the dusk crept swiftly up from the seaward-reaching ravines.

"So," Colonel Glinka said. "That is where he has gone, thinking to elude
me forever. But you--" he waggled the cane at Abdul, who was already
shaking his head in the negative--"will lead me to him. You know his
habits, and, what is more, you are almost certainly familiar with every
hiding place on this island, since it is your whim to be chased all over
it by the females."

"Too dark, Effendi," Abdul said. "If we go out now, they will not only
chase us; they will catch us, for they are able to see very well in the
dark."

"_Who_ will catch us?"

"These people. They are worse than Tuaregs. For all I know, they may be
descended from the Tuaregs, and everyone knows that a Tuareg would as
soon cut a man's throat as kiss the hem of his burnoose."

"So now they are Tuaregs." Colonel Glinka nodded, with a slow, ferocious
smile. "Yet you have hinted that they are the spawn of Comrade
Stefanik's genius, the children of genetical science, stamped with 'Made
in the Seychelles' upon their bottoms. Perhaps they were grown in the
conservatory, from Tuareg seed."

Abdul grimaced. "I do not remember saying that, though sometimes I say
things that I don't remember later. Perhaps they are not Tuaregs, then.
To tell the truth, they were already living here when I came to work for
the Sidi Doctor Stephens, and so naturally I thought that he had made
them, for there were no people upon this island in the old days. Only
the seabirds and a few wild goats, perhaps."

Colonel Glinka clasped his hand to his forehead. "Stop, stop, or I shall
go mad!"

Abdul Hakkim obediently sat down and crossed his legs, starting to light
the second of the very bad cigarettes that he had cadged.

"What are you doing?" Colonel Glinka said softly.

"Nothing, Effendi."

"Get up! Get up and get moving, my boy, or make your peace with Allah!
Did you suppose for one moment that I had forgotten what we were talking
about?"

       *       *       *       *       *

It was quite dark by the time they had reached the summit of the ridge,
but Colonel Glinka still marched along behind Abdul, high good humor
restored, prodding him from time to time with the Malacca cane and
lecturing him upon social equalities and other Party doctrine.

"Are we nearly there?" he would interrupt himself to ask from time to
time.

"I do not know."

"Call out, then."

"I am afraid."

A savage poke with the cane, a war whoop from Abdul Hakkim ben Salazar.
No answer.

"We'll get him," Colonel Glinka would say. "Oh, my, yes."

But an hour had passed and still they had encountered no living thing
upon the path.

At last Abdul stopped abruptly. They were in a little, narrow ravine,
high above the sea, with looming red cliffs all about them, and the
booming of the surf upon the distant, windward shore of the island
plainly audible.

"Why have we stopped here?" Colonel Glinka said, bumping into him.

"Look there, Effendi!" Abdul whispered, gesturing toward a ledge not ten
yards above their heads, where a burnoosed figure stood looking down
upon them.

"And there--and there--and there!" Abdul pointed at other little ledges
where similar ghostly sentries stood, barely visible in the gloom.

Colonel Glinka looked behind him and saw that there were others that
they had passed within a very few feet of, standing upon every shelf and
ledge that afforded a foot-hold above the trail. Dozens and dozens of
them.

"Maybe we had better scram out of here, Joe," Abdul suggested.

"I perceive that you are trying to frighten me," Colonel Glinka said.
"It won't work."

A stone rattled behind them.

"What was that?" Colonel Glinka demanded, turning around quickly. "Who's
there?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Something moved in the shadows, edging into the deeper shadows of the
rocks. It was the pursuing female of earlier that afternoon.

Abdul Hakkim ben Salazar, in deep, abdominal disgust, groaned.

"Come here, you!" Colonel Glinka commanded. "Come on over here. Don't be
afraid, my little one--I won't hurt you."

She advanced ever so little, a shapeless white wraith attracted by the
syrup in his voice. He took one step forward. Carefully she retreated a
step.

"Come now," Colonel Glinka said. "Surely it is time that we met. For you
may as well know that I am now the master of this island. Now and
forevermore, so far as you are concerned, my child. Perhaps I may let
you help me clear up a little of its mystery."

She kept a maddening five or six feet between them, somehow. He could
not lessen the distance without alarming her. And so he balanced himself
upon the balls of his feet and lunged.

She gave a little cry, stumbled and fell, rolling over and over into a
dark little depression beside the path as he clutched at her robe. The
garment, still in his hand, unwound easily, peeling her very much like
an apple.

"I beg your pardon," Colonel Glinka said, scrambling after her upon his
hands and knees, groping for her with outstretched arms. "I beg--" His
hand touched something which might have been her ankle. He seized it,
held it for a moment, and then, shuddering, let it go, drawing back his
hand as if it had been stabbed. By now the night was quite dark.

Colonel Glinka scrambled to his feet, half instinctively raised the
deadly Malacca cane.

"Don't do it, Joe!" cried Abdul, coming up from behind him and shoving
him hard.

The shot went wild, but the sound of it, echoing up and down the ravine,
started an ominous, new sound, the growing, staccato murmur of many
voices, a rattling of stones, a hundred different movements in the
blackness.

Colonel Glinka fired the last bullet more wildly still, hurled the
Malacca cane at them, and ran.

       *       *       *       *       *

Abdul Hakkim ben Salazar, who had been many leaps ahead of him, arrived
breathless at the front gate of the villa, opened it, dived through,
locked it behind him, and threw himself upon the grass to catch his
breath.

There was a cheerful glow in the darkness. The slight, grotesque figure
of Dr. Stefanik and his pipe emerged from the shadows.

"Ah," Abdul breathed, "where were you, Sidi, when I was out there dying
for you?"

"Hiding up the tallest cinnamon tree, like a monkey," Dr. Stefanik said.

They sat there upon the grass for a long while in companionable silence,
heeding the sounds of the night, which was balmy and infinitely
peaceful.

There came a high-pitched, long-drawn-out scream from somewhere on the
ridge.

"They got him," Abdul said.

"And now they will pluck him, I suppose," said Dr. Stefanik. "There, by
the way, is a thing that even _I_ have never completely understood about
them. Their insatiable curiosity, of course, is a vestigial trait that
will pass, but this other drive, I fear, this rather alarming passion
that they have shown for the up-breeding of the species may be some
universal of life itself that no man may touch or alter."

Down the path from the ridge, a small, white-robed figure came running,
far ahead of the others, bent upon her own schemes of evolution.

Abdul crouched lower in the shadows. "That one makes even the heart of a
man swell within his breast," he whispered, "for she does not ever give
up."

"That no man may touch," Dr. Stefanik repeated, and nodded his shaggy
head wisely. "As an idealist, I may have given them shoes and
enlightenment, but I did not give them this, and so they are not
altogether mine. _His_ kind still professes to believe in the common
denominator and the common level, seeking to drag down the few from
their gilt palaces and haul up the masses from the muck. Tell me, as a
Hadj who is, at the same time, undoubtedly vermin-ridden, do _you_
believe in the equality of men--or can you honestly wish it?"

"All of us to be Effendis?"

"Something like that."

Abdul Hakkim ben Salazar thought about it for a time with furrowed brow.
"No, Sidi," he said at last, "for then there would be no one to chase
us."

The female stopped, knelt in the path.

"What is she doing now?" Dr. Stefanik asked.

"She is taking off her shoes, in order to run faster than me."

"'... And cattle after their kind, and every thing that creepeth upon
the earth after his kind'! And yet you told Glinka _I_ made them!"

"Ah, but not out of _what_, Sidi," Abdul said.

The female, with a hopeful little bleat, arose and tucked her shoes
under her arm, for youth is hope and kids will be kids, and off she
went, clip-clop, clip-clop, down the rocky path to the sea.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Pastoral Affair, by Charles A. Stearns

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PASTORAL AFFAIR ***

***** This file should be named 32303.txt or 32303.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/2/3/0/32303/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
