The Project Gutenberg EBook of No Strings Attached, by Lester del Rey

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: No Strings Attached

Author: Lester del Rey

Illustrator: Kelly Freas

Release Date: May 16, 2010 [EBook #32395]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NO STRINGS ATTACHED ***




Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







                         Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from IF Worlds of Science Fiction June 1954.
    Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed.


                         No Strings Attached


                          By Lester del Rey


                      Illustrated by Kelly Freas


     _Poor Henry was an unhappy husband whose wife had a habit of
      using bad clichès. Alféar was a genii who was, quite like
      most humans, a creature of habit. Their murder compact was
      absolutely perfect, with--_

       *       *       *       *       *




Committing a perfect murder is a simple matter. Drive out some night
to a lonely road, find a single person walking along out of sight of
anyone else, offer him a ride, knife him, and go home. In such a
crime, there's no reason to connect killer and victim--no motive, no
clue, no suspect.

To achieve the perfect murder of a man's own wife, however, is a
different matter. For obvious reasons, husbands are always high on the
suspect list. Who has a better reason for such a crime?

Henry Aimsworth had been pondering the problem with more than academic
interest for some time. It wasn't that he hated his wife. He simply
couldn't stand the sight or sound of her; even thinking about her made
his flesh crawl. If she had been willing to give him a divorce, he'd
have been content to wish her all the happiness she was capable of
discovering. But Emma, unfortunately, was fond of being his wife;
perhaps she was even fond of him. Worse, she was too rigidly bound to
trite morality to give him grounds to sue.

There was no hope of her straying. What had been good enough for her
mother was good enough for her, and saved all need of thinking; a
woman needed a husband, her place was in the home, marriage was
forever, and what would the neighbors think? Anyhow, she'd have had
difficulty being unfaithful, even if she tried. She'd been gaining
some ten pounds every year for the eleven years they had been married,
and she'd long since stopped worrying about taking care of her
appearance.

He looked up at her now, letting the book drop to his lap. She sat
watching the television screen with a vacant look on her face, while
some comic went through a tired routine. If she enjoyed it, there was
no sign, though she spent half her life in front of the screen. Then
the comic went off, and dancers came on. She went back to darning a
pair of his socks, as seriously as if she didn't know that he had
always refused to wear the lumpy results. Her stockings had runs, and
she still wore the faded apron in which she'd cooked supper.

He contrasted her with Shirley unconsciously, and shuddered. In the
year since Shirley Bates had come to work in his rare book store, he'd
done a lot of such shuddering, and never because of the slim blonde
warmth of his assistant. Since that hot day in August when they'd
closed the shop early and he'd suggested a ride in the country to cool
off, he and Shirley....

He was interrupted in his more pleasant thoughts by the crash of
scissors onto the floor, and his eyes focussed on the deepening folds
of fat as Emma bent to retrieve them. "Company coming," she said,
before he could think of anything to prevent the mistaken cliché. Then
she became aware that he was staring at her. "Did you take the garbage
out, Henry?"

"Yes, dear," he answered woodenly. Then, because he knew it was coming
anyhow, he filled in the inevitable. "Cleanliness is next to
godliness."

She nodded solemnly, and began putting aside her darning. "That's
finished. Mama always said a stitch in time saves nine. If you'd cut
your toenails, Henry...."

He could feel his skin begin to tingle with irritation. But there was
no escape. If he went upstairs to his bedroom, she'd be up at once,
puttering about. If he went to the basement, she'd find the canned
food needed checking. A woman's place was with her husband, as she'd
repeatedly told him. Probably she couldn't stand her own company,
either.

Then he remembered something he'd stored away. "There's a new picture
at the Metro," he said as quietly as he could. "Taylor's starred, I
think. I was going to take you, before this extra work came up."

He could see her take the bait and nibble at it. She had some vague
crush left for Taylor. She stared at the television set, shifted her
bulk, and then shook her head reluctantly. "It'd be nice, Henry. But
going at night costs so much, and--well, a penny saved is a penny
earned."

"Exactly. That's what I meant to say." He even relaxed enough to
overlook the platitude, now that there was some hope. "I saved the
price of lunch today. The nut who wanted _King in Yellow_ was so
tickled to get the copy finally, he insisted on treating. You can even
take a cab home afterwards."

"That's nice. It'll probably rain, the way my bunion's been aching."
She considered it a second more, before cutting off the television. He
watched as she drew off the apron and went for her coat and hat,
making a pretense of dabbing on make-up. She might as well have worn
the apron, he decided, as she came over to kiss him a damp good-bye.

       *       *       *       *       *

He considered calling Shirley, but her mother was visiting her, and
the conversation would have to be too guarded at her end. If he could
find some way of getting rid of Emma....

It wouldn't even be murder, really. More like destroying a
vegetable--certainly no worse than ending the life of a dumb cow to
make man's life more worth living. It wasn't as if she had anything to
live for or to contribute. It would almost be a kindness, since she
lived in a perpetual state of vague discontent and unhappiness, as if
somehow aware that she had lost herself. But unfortunately, the law
wouldn't look at it in such a light.

He'd only been thinking actively of getting her out of the way since
August, however; and somehow, with time, there must be some fool-proof
scheme. There was that alcohol-injection system--but it required
someone who would drink pretty freely first, and Emma was a
teetotaler. Maybe, though, if he could get her to taking some of those
tonics for women....

He dropped it for the moment and turned back to the book. It was an
odd old volume he'd received with a shipment for appraisal. There was
no title or date, but the strange leather binding showed it was old.
Apparently it had been hand-set and printed on some tiny press by the
writer, whose name was omitted. It seemed to be a mixture of
instructions on how to work spells, conjure demons, and practice
witchcraft, along with bitter tirades against the group who had driven
the writer out and forced him, as he put it, to enter a compact with
the devil for to be a wizard, which is like to a male witch. Henry had
been reading it idly, slowly deciding the book was authentic enough,
however crazy the writer was. The book had no particular value as a
collector's item, but he could probably get a fine price from some of
the local cultists, particularly since there were constant promises in
it that the writer was going to give a surefire, positive and simple
recipe for conjuring up a demon without need of virgin blood,
graveyard earth or unicorn horn.

He skimmed through it, looking for the formula. It turned up on the
fifth page from the end, and was everything the writer had claimed. A
five-sided figure drawn on the floor with ordinary candle wax, a pinch
of sugar inside, a bit of something bitter outside, two odd but simple
finger gestures, and a string of words in bad Latin and worse Greek.
There was a warning that it would work without the pentagram, sugar
and bitters, but at parlous risk to the conjurer without such
protection.

He frowned. Too simple for the cultists, he realized--unless he could
somehow persuade them that the trick lay in some exact phrasing or
gesturing pattern which took experiment. They liked things made
difficult, so they'd have a good alibi for their faith when the
tricks failed. If he could show them in advance that it didn't work,
but hint that a good occultist might figure out the right rhythm, or
whatever....

He read it through again, trying to memorize the whole thing. The
gestures were--so--and the words--umm....

There was no flash of fire, no smell of sulphur, and no clap of
thunder. There was simply a tall creature with yellowish skin and
flashing yellow eyes standing in front of the television set. His head
was completely hairless, and he was so tall that he had to duck
slightly to keep from crashing into the ceiling. His features were too
sharp for any human face. There were no scales, however; his gold cape
and black tights were spangled, and he wore green shoes with turned up
toes. But generally, he wasn't bad looking.

"Mind if I sit down?" the creature asked. He took Henry's assent for
granted and dropped into Emma's chair, folding his cape over one arm
and reaching for an apple on the side table. "Glad to see you're not
superstitious enough to keep me locked up in one of those damned
pentagrams. Drat it, I thought the last copy of that book was burned
and I was free. Your signal caught me in the middle of dinner."

       *       *       *       *       *

Henry swallowed thickly, feeling the sweat trickle down his nose. The
book had warned against summoning the demon without the protective
devices! But the thing seemed peaceful enough for the moment. He
cleared his voice. "You mean--you mean magic works?"

"Magic--shmagic!" the creature snorted. He jerked his thumb toward the
television. "To old Ephriam--the crackpot who wrote the book before he
went completely crazy--that set would have been more magic than I am.
I thought this age knew about dimensions, planes of vibrations, and
simultaneous universes. You humans always were a backward race, but
you seemed to be learning the basic facts. Hell, I suppose that means
you'll lay a geas on me, after I was hoping it was just an
experimental summons!"

Henry puzzled it over, with some of the fright leaving him. The
scientific sounding terms somehow took some of the magic off the
appearance of the thing. "You mean those passes and words set up some
sort of vibrational pattern...."

The hairless fellow snorted again, and began attacking the grapes.
"Bunk, Henry! Oh, my name's Alféar, by the way. I mean I was a fool. I
should have gone to my psychiatrist and taken the fifty year course,
as he advised. But I thought the books were all burned and nobody knew
the summons. So here I am, stuck with the habit. Because that's all it
is--a conditioned reflex. Pure compulsory behavior. I'm sensitized to
receive the summons, and when it comes, I teleport into your plane
just the way you pull your hand off a hot stove. You read the whole
book, I suppose? Yeah, just my luck. Then you know I'm stuck with any
job you give me--practically your slave. I can't even get back without
dismissal or finishing your task! That's what comes of saving money
by not going to my psychiatrist."

He muttered unhappily, reaching for more grapes, while Henry began to
decide nothing was going to happen to him, at least physically. Souls
were things he wasn't quite sure of, but he couldn't see how just
talking to Alféar could endanger his.

"Still," the creature said thoughtfully, "it could be worse. No
pentagram. I never did get mixed up with some of the foul odors and
messes some of my friends had to take. And I've developed quite a
taste for sugar; tobacco, too." He reached out and plucked a cigarette
out of Henry's pack, then a book of matches. He lighted it, inhaled,
and rubbed the flame out on his other palm. "Kind of weak tobacco, but
not bad. Any more questions while I smoke this? There's no free oxygen
where I come from, so I can't smoke there."

"But if you demons answer such--such summons, why don't people know
about it now?" Henry asked. "I'd think more and more people would be
going in for this sort of thing. If the wizards were right all
along...."

"They weren't, and we're not demons. It didn't get started until your
Middle Ages. And if it hadn't been for old Apalon...." Alféar lighted
another cigarette off the butt, which he proceeded to extinguish on
the tip of his sharp tongue. He scratched his head thoughtfully, and
then went on.

"Apalon was studying your worship. You see, we've been studying your
race the way you study white rats, using lower races to explain our
own behavior. Anyhow, he got curious and figured out a way to
mentalize himself into your plane. He was sort of a practical joker,
you might say. So he picked a time when some half-crazy witch was
trying to call up the being you worship as Satan to make some kind of
a deal. Just as she finished, he popped up in front of her, spitting
out a bunch of phosphorus to make a nice smoke and fire effect, and
agreed with all her mumbo-jumbo about having to do what she wanted.
She wanted her heart fixed up then, so he showed her how to use
belladonna and went back, figuring it was a fine joke.

"Only he made a mistake. There's something about moving between planes
that lowers the resistance to conditioning. Some of our people can
take five or six trips, but Apalon was one of those who was so
conditioning-prone that he had the habit fixed after the first trip.
The next time she did the rigamarole, back he popped. He had to dig up
gold for her, hypnotize a local baron into marrying her, and generally
keep on the constant _qui vive_, until she got sloppy and forgot the
pentagram she thought protected her and which he was conditioned to.
But after he disintegrated her, he found she'd passed on the word to a
couple of other witches. And he knew somebody at the Institute was
bound to find what a fool he'd made of himself.

"So he began taking members aside and telling them about the trick of
getting into your world. Excellent chance for study. Have to humor the
humans by sticking to their superstitions, of course. One by one,
they went over on little trips. It wasn't hard to find some
superstitious dolt trying to summon something, since word had got
around in your world. One of us would pop up, and that spread the word
further. Anyhow, when Apalon was sure each member had made enough
trips to be conditioned, he'd tell him the sad truth, and swear him to
secrecy on penalty of being laughed out of the Institute. The old
blaggard wound up with all of us conditioned. There was quite a flurry
of witchcraft here, until we finally found a psychiatrist who could
break the habit for us. Even then, it was tough going. We'd never have
made it without the inquisitions and witch-burnings one of our
experimental sociologists managed to stir up."

Alféar put out the third cigarette butt and stood up slowly. "Look, I
don't mind a chat now and then, but my wives are waiting dinner. How
about dismissing me?"

"Umm." Henry had been thinking while he listened. It had sounded like
a reasonable explanation on the whole, except for the bit about
Apalon's disintegrating the witch. Apparently as long as a man wasn't
too unreasonable, there was a certain usefulness to having such
friends on call. "What about the price for your help? I mean--well,
about souls...."

Alféar twitched his ears disgustedly. "What the deuce would I do with
your soul, Henry? Eat it? Wear it? Don't be a shnook!"

"Well, then--well, I've heard about wishes that were granted, but they
all had a trick attached. If I asked for immortality, you'd give it,
say; but then I'd get some horrible disease and beg and plead for
death. Or ask for money, and then find the money was recorded as being
paid to a kidnapper, or something."

"In the first place, I couldn't give you immortality," Alféar said, as
patiently as he apparently could. "Your metabolism's not like ours. In
the second place, why should I look for tainted money? It's enough
nuisance doing what you ask, without looking for tricks to pull.
Anyhow, I told you I half-enjoy visiting here. As long as you're
reasonable about it, I don't mind keeping my end of the compulsion
going. If you've got something to ask, ask away. There are no strings
attached."

The creature seemed to be quite sincere. Henry considered it briefly,
staring at a large tinted picture of Emma, and took the plunge.
"Suppose I asked you to kill my wife for me--say by what looked like a
stroke, so nobody would blame me?"

"That seems reasonable enough," Alféar agreed easily. "I could break a
few blood vessels inside her skull.... Sure, why not? Only the picture
in your mind is so distorted, I wouldn't know her. If she's like that,
why'd you ever marry her?"

"Because she seemed different from other women, I guess," Henry
admitted. "When I tipped the canoe over, and I figured she'd be mad
because her dress was ruined, all she said was something about not
being sugar, so she wouldn't melt." He shuddered, remembering all the
times she'd said it since. "You won't have any trouble. Look, can you
really read my mind?"

"Naturally. But it's all disorganized."

"Umm. Well." It gave him a queasy feeling to think of anyone seeing
his secret thoughts. But this fellow apparently didn't work by human
attitudes, anyhow. He groped about, and then smiled grimly. "All
right, then. You can tell I think of her as my wife. And just to make
sure, she'll be sure to say something about early to bed and early to
rise; she says that every single damned night, Alféar! She never
misses."

Alféar grunted. "Sounds more reasonable every minute, Henry. All
right, when your wife says that, I pop out and give her a stroke that
will kill her. How about dismissing me now?"

"No strings?" Henry asked. He watched carefully as Alféar nodded
assent, and he could see no sign of cunning or trickery. He caught his
breath, nodded, and closed his eyes. Seeing something vanish was
nothing he wanted. "Dismissed."

       *       *       *       *       *

The fruit was still gone when he opened his eyes, but there was no
other sign of the thing. He found some fruit still in the refrigerator
and restocked the bowl. Then he closed the strange book and put it
away. He'd have to buy it himself, and burn it to make sure no one
else found the trick, of course. For a moment, uneasiness pricked at
him. Yet he was sure Alféar hadn't been lying, and the story the
creature had told made more sense than the older superstitions. Henry
adjusted his mind to having a well-conditioned demon on tap and then
began the harder job of bracing himself for Emma's incoherent but
detailed account of the movie when she came back.

Unfortunately, it was a more complicated plot than usual, and she went
on and on, from the moment she entered the door. He tried to close his
ears, but he'd never succeeded in that. He yawned, and she yawned
back, but went on until the last final morsel was covered for the
second or third time.

"He was wonderful," she finally concluded. "Just wonderful. Only I
wished you'd come with me. You'd have liked it. Henry, did you take
the garbage out?"

"Yes, dear," he answered. "Hours ago."

He yawned elaborately again. She mumbled something about having to
keep the kitchen clean because cleanliness was next to godliness, but
her automatic yawn muffled the words. Then she glanced at the clock.
"Heavens, it's almost one! And early to bed and early to rise...."

Henry jerked his eyes away, just as he caught the first glimpse of
Alféar popping into existence beside her. He heard the beginning of a
shriek change to a horrible gargling and then become a dying moan.
Something soft and heavy hit the floor with a dull thud. Henry turned
around slowly.

"Dead," Alféar said calmly, rubbing one of his fingers. "This business
of getting just one finger through the planes into her head cuts off
the circulation. There, that's better. Satisfied?"

Henry dropped beside the corpse. She was dead, according to the mirror
test, and there wasn't a mark on her. He stared at the puffy, relaxed
features; he'd expected an expression of horror, but she seemed simply
asleep. His initial feeling of pity and contrition vanished; after
all, it had been quick and nearly painless. Now he was free!

"Thanks, Alféar," he said. "It's fine--fine. Do I dismiss you now?"

"No need this time. I'm free as soon as the job's done. Unless you'd
like to talk awhile...."

Henry shook his head quickly. He had to telephone a doctor. Then he
could call Shirley--her mother would be gone by now. "Not now. Maybe
I'll summon you sometime for a smoke or something. But not now!"

"Okay," Alféar said, and vanished. Surprisingly, seeing him disappear
wasn't unpleasant, after all. He just wasn't there.

Waiting for the doctor was the worst part of it. All the legends Henry
knew ran through his mind. Alféar could have given her a stroke and
then added some violent poison that would show up in an autopsy. He
could be sitting wherever he was, chuckling because Henry hadn't
restricted his wish enough to be safe. Or any of a hundred things
could happen. There was the first witch, who had thought she had
Apalon under control, only to be turned to dust.

But the doctor took it calmly enough. "Stroke, all right," he decided.
"I warned her last year that she was putting on too much weight and
getting high blood pressure. Too bad, Mr. Aimsworth, but there was
nothing you could do. I'll turn in a certificate. Want me to contact a
mortician for you?"

Henry nodded, trying to appear properly grief-stricken. "I--I'd
appreciate it."

"Too late now," the doctor said. "But I'll be glad to send Mr. Glazier
around in the morning." He pulled the sheet up over Emma's body,
leaving it on the backroom couch to which they had carried it. "You'd
better go to a hotel for the night. And I'll give you something that
will make you sleep."

"I'd rather not," Henry said quickly. "I mean, I'd feel better here.
You know...."

"Certainly, certainly." The doctor nodded sympathetically, but as if
it were an old story to him. He left the pills with instructions, said
the proper things again, and finally went out.

       *       *       *       *       *

Shirley's voice was sleepy and cross when she answered, but it grew
alert as soon as he told her about Emma's stroke. He was almost
beginning to believe the simple version of the story himself.

"Poor Henry," she murmured. Her voice sharpened again. "It _was_ a
stroke? The doctor was sure?"

"Positive," he assured her, cursing himself for having let her guess
some of the thoughts that had been on his mind. "The doctor said she'd
had hypertension and such before."

She considered it a second, and then a faint laugh sounded. "Then I
guess there's no use in crying over spilled milk, is there, Henry? If
it had to happen, it just had to. And I mean, it's like fate,
almost!"

"It _is_ fate!" he agreed happily. Then he dropped his voice. "And now
I'm all alone here, baby lamb, and I had to call you up...."

She caught on at once, as she always did. "You can't stay there now!
It's so morbid. Henry, you come right over here!"

Demons, Henry thought as he drove the car through the quiet
residential streets toward her apartment, had their uses. They were a
much maligned breed. Probably the people who had summoned them before
had been ignorant, stupid people; they'd messed up their chances and
brought trouble on themselves by not finding out the facts and putting
it all down to superstitious magic. The fellows were almost
people--maybe even a little superior to humans. If a man would just
try to understand them, they could help him, and with no danger at
all.

"No strings attached," he said to himself, and then chuckled softly.
It fitted perfectly; now there were no strings attached to him. Emma
was at peace, and he was free. He'd have to wait a few months to marry
Shirley legally, of course. But already, she was as good as his wife.
And if he played up the shock angle just enough, this could be a
wonderful evening again....

Shirley was unusually lovely when she met him at the door. Her soft
golden hair made a halo for her face--a face that said she'd already
anticipated his ideas, and had decided he was a man who needed
sympathy and understanding for what had happened.

There was even time for the idea that he was free to be brought up,
tentatively at first, and then eventually as a matter of course. And
the plans expanded as he considered them. There was no need to worry
about things now. The quiet marriage became a trip around the world as
he confessed to having money that no one knew about. They could close
the shop. He could leave town almost at once, and she could follow
later. Nobody would know, and they wouldn't have to wait to avoid any
scandal. They could be married in two weeks!

Henry was just realizing the values of a friendly demon. With proper
handling, a lot of purely friendly summoning, and a reasonable
attitude, there was no reason why Alféar couldn't provide him with
every worldly comfort to share with Shirley.

He caught her to him again. "My own little wife! That's what you are,
lambkins! What's a mere piece of paper? I already think of you as my
wife. I feel you're my wife. That's what counts, isn't it?"

"That's all that counts," she agreed with a warmth that set fire to
his blood. Then she gasped. "Henry, darling, it's getting light
already! You'll have to get back. What will the neighbors say if they
see you coming from here now?"

He tore away reluctantly, swearing at the neighbors. But she was
right, of course. He had to go back and take the sleeping medicine to
be ready for the arrival of the mortician in the morning.

"It's still early," he protested, automatically trying to squeeze out
a few more minutes. "Nobody's up yet."

"I'll heat up the coffee, and then you'll have to go," Shirley said
firmly, heading for the kitchen. "Plenty of people get up early around
here. And besides, you need some sleep. Early to bed and early to
rise, makes a man healthy, wealthy and--"

From the kitchen came the beginning of a shriek. It changed to a
horrible gasp, and died away in a failing moan. There was the sound of
a body hitting the floor.

Alféar stood over Shirley's body, rubbing one finger tenderly. His
ears twitched uncertainly as he studied Henry's horror-frozen face. "I
told you," he said. "I warned you some of us get conditioned to a
habit the first time. And you thought of her as your wife and she
said...."

Abruptly, he vanished. Henry's screams were the only sound in the
apartment.

THE END

       *       *       *       *       *







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of No Strings Attached, by Lester del Rey

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NO STRINGS ATTACHED ***

***** This file should be named 32395-8.txt or 32395-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/2/3/9/32395/

Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
