The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Secret of Kralitz, by Henry Kuttner

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Secret of Kralitz

Author: Henry Kuttner

Release Date: May 29, 2010 [EBook #32584]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SECRET OF KRALITZ ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                        The Secret of Kralitz

                           By HENRY KUTTNER

[Transcriber Note: This etext was produced from Weird Tales October
1936. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
copyright on this publication was renewed.]


[Sidenote: _A story of the shocking revelation that came to the
twenty-first Baron Kralitz_]


I awoke from profound sleep to find two black-swathed forms standing
silently beside me, their faces pale blurs in the gloom. As I blinked to
clear my sleep-dimmed eyes, one of them beckoned impatiently, and
suddenly I realized the purpose of this midnight summons. For years I
had been expecting it, ever since my father, the Baron Kralitz, had
revealed to me the secret and the curse that hung over our ancient
house. And so, without a word, I rose and followed my guides as they led
me along the gloomy corridors of the castle that had been my home since
birth.

As I proceeded there rose up in my mind the stern face of my father, and
in my ears rang his solemn words as he told me of the legendary curse of
the House of Kralitz, the unknown secret that was imparted to the eldest
son of each generation--at a certain time.

"When?" I had asked my father as he lay on his death-bed, fighting back
the approach of dissolution.

"When you are able to understand," he had told me, watching my face
intently from beneath his tufted white brows. "Some are told the secret
sooner than others. Since the first Baron Kralitz the secret has been
handed down----"

He clutched at his breast and paused. It was fully five minutes before
he had gathered his strength to speak again in his rolling, powerful
voice. No gasping, death-bed confessions for the Baron Kralitz!

He said at last, "You have seen the ruins of the old monastery near the
village, Franz. The first Baron burnt it and put the monks to the sword.
The Abbot interfered too often with the Baron's whims. A girl sought
shelter and the Abbot refused to give her up at the Baron's demand. His
patience was at an end--you know the tales they still tell about him.

"He slew the Abbot, burned the monastery, and took the girl. Before he
died the Abbot cursed his slayer, and cursed his sons for unborn
generations. And it is the nature of this curse that is the secret of
our house.

"I may not tell you what the curse is. Do not seek to discover it before
it is revealed to you. Wait patiently, and in due time you will be taken
by the warders of the secret down the stairway to the underground
cavern. And then you will learn the secret of Kralitz."

As the last word passed my father's lips he died, his stern face still
set in its harsh lines.

       *       *       *       *       *

Deep in my memories, I had not noticed our path, but now the dark forms
of my guides paused beside a gap in the stone flagging, where a stairway
which I had never seen during my wanderings about the castle led into
subterranean depths. Down this stairway I was conducted, and presently I
came to realize that there was light of a sort--a dim, phosphorescent
radiance that came from no recognizable source, and seemed to be less
actual light than the accustoming of my eyes to the near-darkness.

I went down for a long time. The stairway turned and twisted in the
rock, and the bobbing forms ahead were my only relief from the monotony
of the interminable descent. And at last, deep underground, the long
stairway ended, and I gazed over the shoulders of my guides at the great
door that barred my path. It was roughly chiseled from the solid stone,
and upon it were curious and strangely disquieting carvings, symbols
which I did not recognize. It swung open, and I passed through and
paused, staring about me through a gray sea of mist.

I stood upon a gentle slope that fell away into the fog-hidden distance,
from which came a pandemonium of muffled bellowing and high-pitched,
shrill squeakings vaguely akin to obscene laughter. Dark, half-glimpsed
shapes swam into sight through the haze and disappeared again, and great
vague shadows swept overhead on silent wings. Almost beside me was a
long rectangular table of stone, and at this table two score of men were
seated, watching me from eyes that gleamed dully out of deep sockets. My
two guides silently took their places among them.

And suddenly the thick fog began to lift. It was swept raggedly away on
the breath of a chill wind. The far dim reaches of the cavern were
revealed as the mist swiftly dissipated, and I stood silent in the grip
of a mighty fear, and, strangely, an equally potent, unaccountable
thrill of delight. A part of my mind seemed to ask, "What horror is
this?" And another part whispered, "You know this place!"

But I could never have seen it before. If I had realized what lay far
beneath the castle I could never have slept at night for the fear that
would have obsessed me. For, standing silent with conflicting tides of
horror and ecstasy racing through me, I saw the weird inhabitants of the
underground world.

Demons, monsters, unnamable things! Nightmare colossi strode bellowing
through the murk, and amorphous gray things like giant slugs walked
upright on stumpy legs. Creatures of shapeless soft pulp, beings with
flame-shot eyes scattered over their misshapen bodies like fabled Argus,
writhed and twisted there in the evil glow. Winged things that were not
bats swooped and fluttered in the tenebrous air, whispering
sibilantly--whispering in _human_ voices.

Far away at the bottom of the slope I could see the chill gleam of
water, a hidden, sunless sea. Shapes mercifully almost hidden by
distance and the semi-darkness sported and cried, troubling the surface
of the lake, the size of which I could only conjecture. And a flapping
thing whose leathery wings stretched like a tent above my head swooped
and hovered for a moment, staring with flaming eyes, and then darted off
and was lost in the gloom.

And all the while, as I shuddered with fear and loathing, within me was
this evil glee--this voice which whispered, "You know this place! You
belong here! Is it not good to be home?"

I glanced behind me. The great door had swung silently shut, and escape
was impossible. And then pride came to my aid. I was a Kralitz. And a
Kralitz would not acknowledge fear in the face of the devil himself!

       *       *       *       *       *

I stepped forward and confronted the warders, who were still seated
regarding me intently from eyes in which a smoldering fire seemed to
burn. Fighting down an insane dread that I might find before me an array
of fleshless skeletons, I stepped to the head of the table, where there
was a sort of crude throne, and peered closely at the silent figure on
my right.

It was no bare skull at which I gazed, but a bearded, deadly-pale face.
The curved, voluptuous lips were crimson, looking almost rouged, and the
dull eyes stared through me bleakly. Inhuman agony had etched itself in
deep lines on the white face, and gnawing anguish smoldered in the
sunken eyes. I cannot hope to convey the utter strangeness, the
atmosphere of unearthliness that surrounded him, almost as palpable as
the fetid tomb-stench that welled from his dark garments. He waved a
black-swathed arm to the vacant seat at the head of the table, and I sat
down.

This nightmare sense of unreality! I seemed to be in a dream, with a
hidden part of my mind slowly waking from sleep into evil life to take
command of my faculties. The table was set with old-fashioned goblets
and trenchers such as had not been used for hundreds of years. There was
meat on the trenchers, and red liquor in the jeweled goblets. A heady,
overpowering fragrance swam up into my nostrils, mixed with the
grave-smell of my companions and the musty odor of a dank and sunless
place.

Every white face was turned to me, faces that seemed oddly familiar,
although I did not know why. Each face was alike in its blood-red,
sensual lips and its expression of gnawing agony, and burning black eyes
like the abysmal pits of Tartarus stared at me until I felt the short
hairs stir on my neck. But--I was a Kralitz! I stood up and said boldly
in archaic German that somehow came familiarly from my lips, "I am
Franz, twenty-first Baron Kralitz. What do you want with me?"

A murmur of approval went around the long table. There was a stir. From
the foot of the board a huge bearded man arose, a man with a frightful
scar that made the left side of his face a horror of healed white
tissue. Again the odd thrill of familiarity ran through me; I had seen
that face before, and vaguely I remembered looking at it through dim
twilight.

The man spoke in the old guttural German. "We greet you, Franz, Baron
Kralitz. We greet you and pledge you, Franz--and we pledge the House of
Kralitz!"

With that he caught up the goblet before him and held it high. All along
the long table the black-swathed ones arose, and each held high his
jeweled cup, and pledged me. They drank deeply, savoring the liquor, and
I made the bow custom demanded. I said, in words that sprang almost
unbidden from my mouth:

"I greet you, who are the warders of the secret of Kralitz, and I pledge
you in return."

All about me, to the farthermost reaches of the dim cavern, a hush fell,
and the bellows and howlings, and the insane tittering of the flying
things, were no longer heard. My companions leaned expectantly toward
me. Standing alone at the head of the board, I raised my goblet and
drank. The liquor was heady, exhilarating, with a faintly brackish
flavor.

And abruptly I knew why the pain-racked, ruined face of my companion had
seemed familiar; I had seen it often among the portraits of my
ancestors, the frowning, disfigured visage of the founder of the House
of Kralitz that glared down from the gloom of the great hall. In that
fierce white light of revelation I knew my companions for what they
were; I recognized them, one by one, remembering their canvas
counterparts. But there was a change! Like an impalpable veil, the stamp
of ineradicable evil lay on the tortured faces of my hosts, strangely
altering their features, so that I could not always be sure I recognized
them. One pale, sardonic face reminded me of my father, but I could not
be sure, so monstrously altered was its expression.

I was dining with my ancestors--the House of Kralitz!

My cup was still held high, and I drained it, for somehow the grim
revelation was not entirely unexpected. A strange glow thrilled through
my veins, and I laughed aloud for the evil delight that was in me. The
others laughed too, a deep-throated merriment like the barking of
wolves--tortured laughter from men stretched on the rack, mad laughter
in hell! And all through the hazy cavern came the clamor of the devil's
brood! Great figures that towered many spans high rocked with thundering
glee, and the flying things tittered slyly overhead. And out over the
vast expanse swept the wave of frightful mirth, until the half-seen
things in the black waters sent out bellows that tore at my eardrums,
and the unseen roof far overhead sent back roaring echoes of the clamor.

And I laughed with them, laughed insanely, until I dropped exhausted
into my seat and watched the scarred man at the other end of the table
as he spoke.

"You are worthy to be of our company, and worthy to eat at the same
board. We have pledged each other, and you are one of us; we shall eat
together."

And we fell to, tearing like hungry beasts at the succulent white meat
in the jeweled trenchers. Strange monsters served us, and at a chill
touch on my arm I turned to find a dreadful crimson thing, like a
skinned child, refilling my goblet. Strange, strange and utterly
blasphemous was our feast. We shouted and laughed and fed there in the
hazy light, while all around us thundered the evil horde. There was hell
beneath Castle Kralitz, and it held high carnival this night.

       *       *       *       *       *

Presently we sang a fierce drinking-song, swinging the deep cups back
and forth in rhythm with our shouted chant. It was an archaic song, but
the obsolete words were no handicap, for I mouthed them as though they
had been learned at my mother's knee. And at the thought of my mother a
trembling and a weakness ran through me abruptly, but I banished it with
a draft of the heady liquor.

Long, long we shouted and sang and caroused there in the great cavern,
and after a time we arose together and trooped to where a narrow,
high-arched bridge spanned the tenebrous waters of the lake. But I may
not speak of what was at the other end of the bridge, nor of the
unnamable things that I saw--and did! I learned of the fungoid, inhuman
beings that dwell on far cold Yuggoth, of the cyclopean shapes that
attend unsleeping Cthulhu in his submarine city, of the strange
pleasures that the followers of leprous, subterranean Yog-Sothoth may
possess, and I learned, too, of the unbelievable manner in which Iod,
the Source, is worshipped beyond the outer galaxies. I plumbed the
blackest pits of hell and came back--laughing. I was one with the rest
of those dark warders, and I joined them in the saturnalia of horror
until the scarred man spoke to us again.

"Our time grows short," he said, his scarred and bearded white face like
a gargoyle's in the half-light. "We must depart soon. But you are a true
Kralitz, Franz, and we shall meet again, and feast again, and make merry
for longer than you think. One last pledge!"

I gave it to him. "To the House of Kralitz! May it never fall!"

And with an exultant shout we drained the pungent dregs of the liquor.

Then a strange lassitude fell upon me. With the others I turned my back
on the cavern and the shapes that pranced and bellowed and crawled
there, and I went up through the carved stone portal. We filed up the
stairs, up and up, endlessly, until at last we emerged through the
gaping hole in the stone flags and proceeded, a dark, silent company,
back through those interminable corridors. The surroundings began to
grow strangely familiar, and suddenly I recognized them.

We were in the great burial vaults below the castle, where the Barons
Kralitz were ceremoniously entombed. Each Baron had been placed in his
stone casket in his separate chamber, and each chamber lay, like beads
on a necklace, adjacent to the next, so that we proceeded from the
farthermost tombs of the early Barons Kralitz toward the unoccupied
vaults. By immemorial custom, each tomb lay bare, an empty mausoleum,
until the time had come for its use, when the great stone coffin, with
the memorial inscription carved upon it, would be carried to its place.
It was fitting, indeed, for the secret of Kralitz to be hidden here.

Abruptly I realized that I was alone, save for the bearded man with the
disfiguring scar. The others had vanished, and, deep in my thoughts, I
had not missed them. My companion stretched out his black-swathed arm
and halted my progress, and I turned to him questioningly. He said in
his sonorous voice, "I must leave you now. I must go back to my own
place." And he pointed to the way whence we had come.

I nodded, for I had already recognized my companions for what they were.
I knew that each Baron Kralitz had been laid in his tomb, only to arise
as a monstrous thing neither dead nor alive, to descend into the cavern
below and take part in the evil saturnalia. I realized, too, that with
the approach of dawn they had returned to their stone coffins, to lie in
a death-like trance until the setting sun should bring brief liberation.
My own occult studies had enabled me to recognize these dreadful
manifestations.

I bowed to my companion and would have proceeded on my way to the upper
parts of the castle, but he barred my path. He shook his head slowly,
his scar hideous in the phosphorescent gloom.

I said, "May I not go yet?"

He stared at me with tortured, smoldering eyes that had looked into hell
itself, and he pointed to what lay beside me, and in a flash of
nightmare realization I knew the secret of the curse of Kralitz. There
came to me the knowledge that made my brain a frightful thing in which
shapes of darkness would ever swirl and scream; the dreadful
comprehension of _when_ each Baron Kralitz was initiated into the
brotherhood of blood. I knew--_I knew_--that no coffin had ever been
placed unoccupied in the tombs, and I read upon the stone sarcophagus at
my feet the inscription that made my doom known to me--_my own name,
"Franz, twenty-first Baron Kralitz."_





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Secret of Kralitz, by Henry Kuttner

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SECRET OF KRALITZ ***

***** This file should be named 32584.txt or 32584.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/2/5/8/32584/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
