The Project Gutenberg EBook of Tabby, by Winston Marks

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Tabby

Author: Winston Marks

Illustrator: Rudolph Palais

Release Date: May 30, 2010 [EBook #32613]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TABBY ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                                  TABBY

                             By Winston Marks

                       Illustrated by Rudolph Palais

[Transcriber Note: This etext was produced from IF Worlds of Science
Fiction March 1954. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]


[Sidenote: _Tabby was peculiar, of course, but seemed harmless: just a
little green fly that couldn't even protect itself from ordinary
spiders. So the spiders fed, and grew, and fed, and grew...._]

       *       *       *       *       *

                                       April 18, 1956

Dear Ben: It breaks my heart you didn't sign on for this trip. Your
replacement, who _calls_ himself an ichthyologist, has only one talent
that pertains to fish--he drinks like one. There are nine of us in the
expedition, and every one of us is fed up with this joker, Cleveland,
already. We've only been on the island a week, and he's gone native,
complete with beard, bare feet and bone laziness. He slops around the
lagoon like a beachcomber and hasn't brought in a decent specimen yet.

The island is a bit of paradise, though. Wouldn't be hard to let
yourself relax under the palms all day instead of collecting blisters
and coral gashes out in the bright sun of the atoll. No complaints,
however. We aren't killing ourselves, and our little camp is very
comfortable. The portable lab is working out fine, and the screened
sleeping tent-houses have solved the one big nuisance we've suffered
before: _Insects_. I think an entomologist would find more to keep him
busy here than we will.

Your ankle should be useable by the time our next supply plane from
Hawaii takes off. If you apply again at the Foundation right now I'm
sure Sellers and the others will help me get rid of Cleveland, and
there'll be an open berth here.

Got to close now. Our amphib jets off in an hour for the return trip.
Hope this note is properly seductive. Come to the isles, boy, and
live!--Cordially, Fred

       *       *       *       *       *

                                       May 26, 1956

Dear Ben: Now, aren't you sorry you didn't take my advice?!!!! I'm
assuming you read the papers, and also, that too tight a censorship
hasn't clamped down on this thing yet. Maybe I'm assuming too much on
the latter. Anyhow, here's a detailed version from an actual eyewitness.

That's right! I was right there on the beach when the "saucer" landed.
Only it looked more like a king-size pokerchip. About six feet across
and eight inches thick with a little hemispherical dome dead center on
top. It hit offshore about seventy-five yards with a splash that sounded
like a whale's tail. Jenner and I dropped our seine, waded to shore and
started running along the beach to get opposite it. Cleveland came out
of the shade and helped us launch a small boat.

We got within twenty feet of the thing when it started moving out,
slowly, just fast enough to keep ahead of us. I was in the bow looking
right at it when the lid popped open with a sound like a cork coming out
of a wine bottle. The little dome had split. Sellers quit rowing and we
all hit the bottom of the boat. I peeked over the gunwale right away,
and it's a good thing. All that came out of the dome was a little cloud
of flies, maybe a hundred or so, and the breeze picked them up and blew
them over us inshore so fast that Cleveland and Sellers never did see
them.

I yelled at them to look, but by then the flies were in mingling with
the local varieties of sudden itch, and they figured I was seeing
things. Cleveland, though, listened with the most interest. It develops
that his specialty _is_ entomology. He took this job because he was out
of work. Don't know how he bluffed his way past the Foundation, but here
he is, and it looks like he might be useful after all.

He was all for going ashore, but Sellers and I rowed after the white
disk for awhile until it became apparent we couldn't catch it. It's a
good thing we didn't. A half hour later, Olafsen caught up to it in the
power launch. We were watching from shore. It was about a half mile out
when Ole cut his speed. Luckily he was alone. We had yelled at him to
pick us up and take us along, but he was too excited to stop. He passed
us up, went out there and boom!

It wasn't exactly an A-bomb, but the spray hit us a half mile away, and
the surface wave swamped us.

Sellers radioed the whole incident to Honolulu right away, and they are
sending out a plane with a diver, but we don't think he'll find
anything. Things really blew! So far we haven't even found any
identifiable driftwood from the launch, let alone Ole's body or traces
of the disk.

Meanwhile, Cleveland has come to believe my story, and he's out prowling
around with an insect net. Most energy he's shown in weeks.

       *       *       *       *       *

May 28--Looks like this letter will be delayed a bit. We are under
quarantine. The government plane came this morning. They sent along a
diver, two reporters and a navy officer. The diver went down right away,
but it's several hundred feet deep out there and slants off fast. This
island is the tip of a sunken mountain, and the diver gave up after less
than an hour. Personally I think a couple of sharks scared him off, but
he claims there's so much vegetable ruck down there he couldn't expect
to find anything smaller than the launch's motor.

Cleveland hasn't found anything unusual in his bug net, but everyone is
excited here, and you can guess why.

When the "saucer" reports stopped cold about a year ago, you'll
remember, it made almost as much news for a while as when they were
first spotted. Now the people out here are speculating that maybe this
disc thing came from the same source as the _saucers_, after they had a
chance to look us over, study our ecology and return to their base.
Cleveland is the one who started this trend of thought with his
obsession that the flies I reported seeing are an attack on our planet
from someone out in space.

Commander Clawson, the navy officer, doesn't know what to think. He
won't believe Cleveland until he produces a specimen of the
"fly-from-Mars", but then he turns around and contradicts himself by
declaring a temporary quarantine until he gets further orders from
Honolulu.

The reporters are damned nuisances. They're turning out reams of Sunday
supplement type stuff and pestering the devil out of Sparks to let them
wire it back, but our radio is now under navy control, too.

Sure is crowded in the bunk-house with the six additional people, but no
one will sleep outside the screen.

       *       *       *       *       *

May 29--Cleveland thinks he has his specimen. He went out at dawn this
morning and came in before breakfast. He's quit drinking but he hasn't
slept in three days now and looks like hell. I thought he was getting
his fancy imagination out of the bottle, but the soberer he got the more
worried he looked over this "invasion" idea of his.

Now he claims that his catch is definitely a sample of something new
under our particular sun. He hustled it under a glass and started
classifying it. It filled the bill for the arthropods, class Insecta. It
looked to me, in fact, just like a small, ordinary blowfly, except that
it has green wings. And I mean _green_, not just a little iridescent
color.

Cleve very gently pulled one wing off and we looked at it under low
power. There is more similarity to a leaf than to a wing. In the bug's
back is a tiny pocket, a sort of reservoir of the green stuff, and
Cleve's dissection shows tiny veins running up into the wings. It seems
to be a closed system with no connection with the rest of the body
except the restraining membrane.

Cleveland now rests his extraterrestrial origin theory on an idea that
the green stuff is chlorophyll. If it is chlorophyll, either Cleve is
right or else he's discovered a new class of arthropods. In other
respects the critter is an ordinary biting and sucking bug with the
potentials of about a deerfly for making life miserable. The high-power
lens showed no sign of unusual or malignant microscopic life inside or
out of the thing. Cleve can't say how bad a bite would be, because he
doesn't have his entomologist kit with him, and he can't analyze the
secretion from the poison gland.

The commander has let him radio for a botanist and some micro-analysis
equipment.

Everyone was so pitched up that Cleve's findings have been rather
anti-climactic. I guess we were giving more credence to the
space-invader theory than we thought. But even if Cleve has proved it,
this fly doesn't look like much to be frightened over. The reporters are
clamoring to be let loose, but the quarantine still holds.

       *       *       *       *       *

June 1--By the time the plane with the botanist arrived we were able to
gather all the specimens of _Tabanidae viridis_ (Cleveland's
designation) that he wanted. Seems like every tenth flying creature you
meet is a green "Tabby" now.

The botanist helped Cleve and me set up the bio kit, and he confirmed
Cleve's guess. The green stuff is chlorophyll. Which makes Tabby quite a
bug.

Kyser, the youngest reporter, volunteered to let a Tabby bite him. It
did without too much coaxing. Now he has a little, itchy bump on his
wrist, and he's happily banging away at his typewriter on a story
titled, "I Was Bitten by the Bug from Space!" That was hours ago, and we
haven't learned anything sinister about the green fly except that it
does have a remarkable breeding ability.

One thing the reporter accomplished: we can go outside the screened
quarters now without wondering about catching space-typhus.

       *       *       *       *       *

June 2--The quarantine was probably a pretty good idea. Cleve has turned
up some dope on Tabby's life cycle that makes us glad all over that we
are surrounded by a thousand miles of salt water. Tabby's adult life is
only a couple of days, but she is viviparous, prolific (some thousand
young at a sitting), and her green little microscopic babies combine the
best survival features of spores and plankton, minus one: they don't
live in salt water. But they do very well almost anyplace else. We have
watched them grow on hot rocks, leaves, in the sand and best of all,
filtered down a little into the moist earth.

They grow incredibly fast with a little sun, so the chlorophyll is
biologically justified in the life-cycle. This puzzled us at first,
because the adult Tabby turns into a blood-sucking little brute.
Deprived of any organic matter, our bottled specimens die in a short
time, in or out of the sunlight, indicating the green stuff doesn't
provide them with much if any nourishment after they are full-grown.

Now we are waiting for a supply of assorted insecticides to find the
best controls over the pests. The few things we had on hand worked quite
well, but I guess they aren't forgetting our sad experience with DDT a
few years back.

The Tabbies now outnumber all the other insects here, and most outside
work has been halted. The little green devils make life miserable
outside the tent-houses. We have built another screened shelter to
accommodate the latest arrivals. We are getting quite a fleet of
amphibian aircraft floating around our lagoon. No one will be allowed to
return until we come up with all the answers to the question of
controlling our insect invasion.

Cleveland is trying to convince Sellers and the commander that we should
get out and send in atomic fire to blow the whole island into the sea.
They forwarded his suggestion to the U. N. committee which now has
jurisdiction, but they wired back that if the insect is from space, we
couldn't stop other discs from landing on the mainlands. Our orders are
to study the bug and learn all we can.

Opinion is mixed here. I can't explain the flying disc unless it's
extraterrestrial, but why would an invader choose an isolated spot like
this to attack? Cleve says this is just a "test patch" and probably
under surveillance. But why such an innocuous little fly if they mean
business?

The newsmen are really bored now. They see no doom in the bugs, and
since they can't file their stories they take a dim view of the
quarantine. They have gotten up an evening fishing derby with the crew
members of the planes. Have to fish after dusk. The Tabbies bite too
often as long as the sun is up.

Cleve has turned into a different man. He is soft-spoken and intense.
His hands tremble so much that he is conducting most of his work by
verbal directions with the botanist and me to carry them out. When his
suggestion about blowing up the atoll was turned down he quit talking
except to conduct his work. If things were half as ominous as he makes
out we'd be pretty worried.

       *       *       *       *       *

June 4--The spray planes got here and none too soon. We were running out
of drinking water. The Tabbies got so thick that even at night a man
would get stung insane if he went outside the screen.

The various sprays all worked well. This evening the air is relatively
clear. Incidentally, the birds have been having a feast. Now the gulls
are congregating to help us out like they did the Mormons in the cricket
plague. The spiders are doing all right for themselves, too. In fact,
now that we have sprayed the place the spiders and their confounded webs
are the biggest nuisance we have to contend with. They are getting fat
and sassy. Spin their webs between your legs if you stand still a minute
too long. Remind me of real estate speculators in a land boom, the
little bastardly opportunists. As you might gather, I don't care for
brothers Arachnidae. They make everyone else nervous, too. Strangely,
Cleveland, the entomologist, gets the worst jolt out of them. He'll
stand for minutes at the screen watching them spin their nasty webs and
skipping out to de-juice a stray Tabby that the spray missed. And he'll
mutter to himself and scowl and curse them. It is hard to include them
as God's creatures.

Cleve still isn't giving out with the opinions. He works incessantly and
has filled two notebooks full of data. Looks to me like our work is
almost done.

       *       *       *       *       *

August 7, Year of our Lord 1956--To whom it will never concern: I can no
longer make believe this is addressed to my friend, Ben Tobin. Cleveland
has convinced me of the implications of our tragedy here. But somehow it
gives me some crazy, necessary ray of hope to keep this journal until
the end.

I think the real horror of this thing started to penetrate to me about
June 6. Our big spray job lasted less than 24 hours, and on that morning
I was watching for the planes to come in for a second try at it when I
noticed the heavy spider webbing in the upper tree foliage. As I looked
a gull dove through the trees, mouth open, eating Tabbies. Damned if the
webs didn't foul his wings. At first he tore at them bravely and it
looked like he was trying to swim in thin mud--sort of slow motion. Then
he headed into a thick patch, slewed around at right angles and did a
complete flip. Instantly three mammoth spiders the size of my fist
pounced out on him and trussed him up before he could tear loose with
his feet.

His pitiful squawking was what made me feel that horror for the first
time. And the scene was repeated more and more often. The planes dusted
us with everything they had, and it cut down the Tabbies pretty well
again, but it didn't touch the spiders, of course.

And then our return radio messages started getting very vague. We were
transmitting Cleve's data hourly as he compiled it, and we had been
getting ordinary chatter and speculation from the Honolulu operator at
the end of our message. That stopped on the sixth of June. Since then,
we've had only curt acknowledgements of our data and sign-offs.

At the same time, we noticed that complete censorship on news of our
situation and progress apparently hit all the long-wave radio
broadcasts. Up to that time the newscasts had been feeding out a dilute
and very cautious pablum about our fight against Tabby. Immediately when
we noticed this news blind spot Cleve went all to pieces and started
drinking again.

Cleve, Sellers and I had the lab tent to ourselves, having moved our
bunks in there, so we got a little out of touch with the others. It
wasn't the way Sellers and I liked it, but none of us liked the trip
from lab to living quarters any more, although it was only fifty feet or
so.

Then Sparks moved in, too. For the same reason. He said it was getting
on his nerves running back and forth to the lab to pick up our outgoing
bulletins. So he shifted the generator, radio gear and all over to a
corner of the lab and brought in his bunk.

By the tenth of June we could see that the spraying was a losing battle.
And it finally took the big tragedy to drive home the truth that was all
about us already. When the crew got ready to go out to their planes on
the eleventh, everyone except the four of us in the lab tent was drafted
to help clear webs between the tents and the beach. We could hear them
shouting from tent to tent as they made up their work party. We could no
longer see across the distance. Everywhere outside, vision was obscured
by the grayish film of webs on which little droplets caught the tropical
sun like a million tiny mirrors. In the shade it was like trying to peer
through thin milk, with the vicious, leggy little shadows skittering
about restlessly.

As usual in the morning, the hum of the Tabbies had risen above the
normal jungle buzzing, and this morning it was the loudest we'd heard
it.

Well, we heard the first screen door squeak open, and someone let out a
whoop as the group moved out with brooms, palm fronds and sticks to
snatch a path through the nightmare of spider webs. The other two doors
opened and slammed, and we could hear many sounds of deep disgust voiced
amid the grunts and thrashings.

They must have been almost to the beach when the first scream reached
us. Cleve had been listening in fascination, and the awful sound tore
him loose of his senses. He screamed back. The rest of us had to sit on
him to quiet him. Then the others outside all began screaming--not
words, just shattering screams of pure terror, mixed with roars of pain
and anger. Soon there was no more anger. Just horror. And in a few
minutes they died away.

       *       *       *       *       *

Sellers and Sparks and I looked at each other. Cleve had vomited and
passed out. Sparks got out Cleve's whiskey, and we spilled half of it
trying to get drinks into us.

Sparks snapped out of it first. He didn't try to talk to us. He just
went to his gear, turned on the generator and warmed up the radio. He
told Honolulu what had happened as we had heard it.

When he finished, he keyed over for an acknowledgment. The operator said
to hold on for a minute. Then he said they would _try_ to dispatch an
air task force to get us off, but they couldn't be sure just when.

While this was coming in Cleve came to his senses and listened. He was
deadly calm now, and when Honolulu finished he grabbed the mike from
Sparks, cut in the TX and asked, "Are they landing discs on the
mainlands?"

The operator answered, "Sorry, that's classified."

"For God's sake," Cleve demanded, "if you are ready to write us off you
can at least answer our questions. Are there any of the green
sonsofbitches on the mainland?"

There was another little pause, and then, "Yes."

That was all. Sparks ran down the batteries trying to raise them again
for more answers, but no response. When the batteries went dead he
checked the generator that had kicked off. It was out of gasoline. The
drums were on the beach. Now we were without lights, power and juice for
our other radios.

We kept alive the first few days by staying half drunk. Then Cleve's
case of whiskey gave out and we began to get hungry. Sparks and Sellers
set fire to one of our straw-ticking mattresses and used it as a torch
to burn their way over to the supply tent about thirty feet away. It
worked fairly well. The silky webs flashed into nothing as the flames
hit them, but they wouldn't support the fire, and other webs streamed
down behind the two. They had to burn another mattress to get back with
a few cases of food.

Then we dug a well under the floor of our tent. Hit water within a few
feet. But when we cut through the screen floor it cost us sentry duty.
We had to have one person awake all night long to stamp on the spiders
that slipped in around the edge of the well.

Through all of this Cleveland has been out on his feet. He has just
stood and stared out through the screen all day. We had to force him to
eat. He didn't snap out of it until this morning.

Sparks couldn't stand our radio silence any longer, so he talked Sellers
into helping him make a dash for the gas drums on the beach. They set
fire to two mattresses and disappeared into the tunnel of burned webs
that tangled and caved in behind them.

When they were gone, Cleveland suddenly came out of his trance and put a
hand on my shoulder. I thought for a moment he was going to jump me, but
his eyes were calm. He said, "Well, Fred, are you convinced now that
we've been attacked?"

I said, "It makes no sense to me at all. Why these little flies?"

Cleve said, "They couldn't have done better so easily. They studied our
ecology well. They saw that our greatest potential enemy was the insect
population, and the most vicious part of it was the spider. _Tabanidae
viridis_ was not sent just to plague us with horsefly bites. Tabby was
sent to multiply and feed the arachnids. There are durable species in
all climates. And if our botanist were still alive he could explain in
detail how long our plant life can last under this spider infestation.

"Look for yourself," he said pointing outside. "Not only are the regular
pollenizing insects doomed, but the density of those webs will choke out
even wind pollinated grains."

He stared down our shallow well hole and stamped on a small, black, flat
spider that had slithered under the screening. "I suppose you realize
the spiders got the others. Down here in the tropics the big varieties
could do it by working together. Sellers and Sparks won't return. Sounds
like they got through all right, but they'll be bitten so badly they
won't try to get back."

And even as he spoke we heard one of the aircraft engines start up. The
sound was muffled as under a bed quilt.

Cleve said, "I don't blame them. I'd rather die in the sun, too. The
beach should be fairly clear of webs. We've got one mattress left. What
do you say?"

He's standing there now holding the mattress with the ticking sticking
out. I don't think one torch will get us through. But it will be worth a
try for one more look at the sun.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Tabby, by Winston Marks

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TABBY ***

***** This file should be named 32613.txt or 32613.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/2/6/1/32613/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
