The Project Gutenberg EBook of Project Hush, by Philip Klass

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Project Hush

Author: Philip Klass

Illustrator: Dick Francis

Release Date: June 2, 2010 [EBook #32654]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PROJECT HUSH ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                             PROJECT HUSH

                            By WILLIAM TENN

                      Illustrated by DICK FRANCIS

[Transcriber Note: This etext was produced from Galaxy Science Fiction
February 1954. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the
U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]


[Sidenote: The biggest job in history and it had to be done with
complete secrecy. It was--which was just the trouble!]


I guess I'm just a stickler, a perfectionist, but if you do a thing, I
always say, you might as well do it right. Everything satisfied me about
the security measures on our assignment except one--the official Army
designation.

Project Hush.

I don't know who thought it up, and I certainly would never ask, but
whoever it was, he should have known better. Damn it, when you want a
project kept secret, you _don't_ give it a designation like that! You
give it something neutral, some name like the Manhattan and Overlord
they used in World War II, which won't excite anybody's curiosity.

But we were stuck with Project Hush and we had to take extra measures to
ensure secrecy. A couple of times a week, everyone on the project had to
report to Psycho for DD & HA--dream detailing and hypnoanalysis--instead
of the usual monthly visit. Naturally, the commanding general of the
heavily fortified research post to which we were attached could not ask
what we were doing, under penalty of court-martial, but he had to be
given further instructions to shut off his imagination like a faucet
every time he heard an explosion. Some idiot in Washington was actually
going to list Project Hush in the military budget by name! It took fast
action, I can tell you, to have it entered under Miscellaneous "X"
Research.

Well, we'd covered the unforgivable blunder, though not easily, and now
we could get down to the real business of the project. You know, of
course, about the A-bomb, H-bomb and C-bomb because information that
they existed had been declassified. You don't know about the other
weapons being devised--and neither did we, reasonably enough, since they
weren't our business--but we had been given properly guarded
notification that they were in the works. Project Hush was set up to
counter the new weapons.

Our goal was not just to reach the Moon. We had done that on 24 June
1967 with an unmanned ship that carried instruments to report back data
on soil, temperature, cosmic rays and so on. Unfortunately, it was put
out of commission by a rock slide.

An unmanned rocket would be useless against the new weapons. We had to
get to the Moon before any other country did and set up a permanent
station--an armed one--and do it without anybody else knowing about it.

I guess you see now why we on (_damn_ the name!) Project Hush were so
concerned about security. But we felt pretty sure, before we took off,
that we had plugged every possible leak.

We had, all right. Nobody even knew we had raised ship.

       *       *       *       *       *

We landed at the northern tip of Mare Nubium, just off Regiomontanus,
and, after planting a flag with appropriate throat-catching ceremony,
had swung into the realities of the tasks we had practiced on so many
dry runs back on Earth. Major Monroe Gridley prepared the big rocket,
with its tiny cubicle of living space, for the return journey to Earth
which he alone would make.

Lieutenant-colonel Thomas Hawthorne painstakingly examined our
provisions and portable quarters for any damage that might have been
incurred in landing.

And I, Colonel Benjamin Rice, first commanding officer of Army Base No.
1 on the Moon, dragged crate after enormous crate out of the ship on my
aching academic back, and piled them in the spot two hundred feet away
where the plastic dome would be built.

We all finished at just about the same time, as per schedule, and went
into Phase Two.

Monroe and I started work on building the dome. It was a simple pre-fab
affair, but big enough to require an awful lot of assembling. Then,
after it was built, we faced the real problem--getting all the complex
internal machinery in place and in operating order.

Meanwhile, Tom Hawthorne took his plump self off in the single-seater
rocket which, up to then, had doubled as a lifeboat.

The schedule called for him to make a rough three-hour scouting survey
in an ever-widening spiral from our dome. This had been regarded as a
probable waste of time, rocket fuel and manpower--but a necessary
precaution. He was supposed to watch for such things as bug-eyed
monsters out for a stroll on the Lunar landscape. Basically, however,
Tom's survey was intended to supply extra geological and astronomical
meat for the report which Monroe was to carry back to Army HQ on Earth.

Tom was back in forty minutes. His round face, inside its transparent
bubble helmet, was fish-belly white. And so were ours, once he told us
what he'd seen.

He had seen another dome.

"The other side of Mare Nubium--in the Riphaen Mountains," he babbled
excitedly. "It's a little bigger than ours, and it's a little flatter on
top. And it's not translucent, either, with splotches of different
colors here and there--it's a dull, dark, heavy gray. But that's all
there is to see."

"No markings on the dome?" I asked worriedly. "No signs of anyone--or
anything--around it?"

"Neither, Colonel." I noticed he was calling me by my rank for the first
time since the trip started, which meant he was saying in effect, "Man,
have you got a decision to make!"

"Hey, Tom," Monroe put in. "Couldn't be just a regularly shaped bump in
the ground, could it?"

"I'm a geologist, Monroe. I can distinguish artificial from natural
topography. Besides--" he looked up--"I just remembered something I left
out. There's a brand-new tiny crater near the dome--the kind usually
left by a rocket exhaust."

"Rocket exhaust?" I seized on that. "_Rockets_, eh?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Tom grinned a little sympathetically. "Spaceship exhaust, I should have
said. You can't tell from the crater what kind of propulsive device
these characters are using. It's not the same kind of crater our
rear-jets leave, if that helps any."

Of course it didn't. So we went into our ship and had a council of war.
And I do mean war. Both Tom and Monroe were calling me Colonel in every
other sentence. I used their first names every chance I got.

Still, no one but me could reach a decision. About what to do, I mean.

"Look," I said at last, "here are the possibilities. They know we are
here--either from watching us land a couple of hours ago or from
observing Tom's scout-ship--or they do not know we are here. They are
either humans from Earth--in which case they are in all probability
enemy nationals--or they are alien creatures from another planet--in
which case they may be friends, enemies or what-have-you. I think common
sense and standard military procedure demand that we consider them
hostile until we have evidence to the contrary. Meanwhile, we proceed
with extreme caution, so as not to precipitate an interplanetary war
with potentially friendly Martians, or whatever they are.

"All right. It's vitally important that Army Headquarters be informed of
this immediately. But since Moon-to-Earth radio is still on the drawing
boards, the only way we can get through is to send Monroe back with the
ship. If we do, we run the risk of having our garrison force, Tom and
me, captured while he's making the return trip. In that case, their side
winds up in possession of important information concerning our personnel
and equipment, while our side has only the bare knowledge that somebody
or something else has a base on the Moon. So our primary need is more
information.

"Therefore, I suggest that I sit in the dome on one end of a telephone
hookup with Tom, who will sit in the ship, his hand over the firing
button, ready to blast off for Earth the moment he gets the order from
me. Monroe will take the single-seater down to the Riphaen Mountains,
landing as close to the other dome as he thinks safe. He will then
proceed the rest of the way on foot, doing the best scouting job he can
in a spacesuit.

"He will not use his radio, except for agreed-upon nonsense syllables to
designate landing the single-seater, coming upon the dome by foot, and
warning me to tell Tom to take off. If he's captured, remembering that
the first purpose of a scout is acquiring and transmitting knowledge of
the enemy, he will snap his suit radio on full volume and pass on as
much data as time and the enemy's reflexes permit. How does that sound
to you?"

They both nodded. As far as they were concerned, the command decision
had been made. But I was sitting under two inches of sweat.

"One question," Tom said. "Why did you pick Monroe for the scout?"

"I was afraid you'd ask that," I told him. "We're three extremely
unathletic Ph.D.s who have been in the Army since we finished our
schooling. There isn't too much choice. But I remembered that Monroe is
half Indian--Arapahoe, isn't it, Monroe?--and I'm hoping blood will
tell."

"Only trouble, Colonel," Monroe said slowly as he rose, "is that I'm
one-_fourth_ Indian and even that.... Didn't I ever tell you that my
great-grandfather was the only Arapahoe scout who was with Custer at the
Little Big Horn? He'd been positive Sitting Bull was miles away.
However, I'll do my best. And if I heroically don't come back, would you
please persuade the Security Officer of our section to clear my name for
use in the history books? Under the circumstances, I think it's the
least he could do."

I promised to do my best, of course.

       *       *       *       *       *

After he took off, I sat in the dome over the telephone connection to
Tom and hated myself for picking Monroe to do the job. But I'd have
hated myself just as much for picking Tom. And if anything happened and
I had to tell Tom to blast off, I'd probably be sitting here in the dome
all by myself after that, waiting....

"_Broz neggle!_" came over the radio in Monroe's resonant voice. He had
landed the single-seater.

I didn't dare use the telephone to chat with Tom in the ship, for fear I
might miss an important word or phrase from our scout. So I sat and sat
and strained my ears. After a while, I heard "_Mishgashu!_" which told
me that Monroe was in the neighborhood of the other dome and was
creeping toward it under cover of whatever boulders were around.

[Illustration]

And then, abruptly, I heard Monroe yell my name and there was a terrific
clattering in my headphones. Radio interference! He'd been caught, and
whoever had caught him had simultaneously jammed his suit transmitter
with a larger transmitter from the alien dome.

Then there was silence.

After a while, I told Tom what had happened. He just said, "Poor
Monroe." I had a good idea of what his expression was like.

"Look, Tom," I said, "if you take off now, you still won't have anything
important to tell. After capturing Monroe, whatever's in that other dome
will come looking for us, I think. I'll let them get close enough for us
to learn something of their appearance--at least if they're human or
non-human. Any bit of information about them is important. I'll shout it
up to you and you'll still be able to take off in plenty of time. All
right?"

"You're the boss, Colonel," he said in a mournful voice. "Lots of luck."

And then there was nothing to do but wait. There was no oxygen system in
the dome yet, so I had to squeeze up a sandwich from the food
compartment in my suit. I sat there, thinking about the expedition. Nine
years, and all that careful secrecy, all that expenditure of money and
mind-cracking research--and it had come to this. Waiting to be wiped
out, in a blast from some unimaginable weapon. I understood Monroe's
last request. We often felt we were so secret that our immediate
superiors didn't even want us to know what we we were working on.
Scientists are people--they wish for recognition, too. I was hoping the
whole expedition would be written up in the history books, but it looked
unpromising.

       *       *       *       *       *

Two hours later, the scout ship landed near the dome. The lock opened
and, from where I stood in the open door of our dome, I saw Monroe come
out and walk toward me.

I alerted Tom and told him to listen carefully. "It may be a trick--he
might be drugged...."

He didn't act drugged, though--not exactly. He pushed his way past me
and sat down on a box to one side of the dome. He put his booted feet up
on another, smaller box.

"How are you, Ben?" he asked. "How's every little thing?"

I grunted. "_Well?_" I know my voice skittered a bit.

He pretended puzzlement. "Well _what_? Oh, I see what you mean. The
other dome--you want to know who's in it. You have a right to be
curious, Ben. Certainly. The leader of a top-secret expedition like
this--Project Hush they call us, huh, Ben--finds another dome on the
Moon. He thinks he's been the first to land on it, so naturally he wants
to--"

"Major Monroe Gridley!" I rapped out. "You will come to attention and
deliver your report. Now!" Honestly, I felt my neck swelling up inside
my helmet.

Monroe just leaned back against the side of the dome. "That's the _Army_
way of doing things," he commented admiringly. "Like the recruits say,
there's a right way, a wrong way and an Army way. Only there are other
ways, too." He chuckled. "Lots of other ways."

"He's off," I heard Tom whisper over the telephone. "Ben, Monroe has
gone and blown his stack."

"They aren't extraterrestrials in the other dome, Ben," Monroe
volunteered in a sudden burst of sanity. "No, they're human, all right,
and from Earth. Guess _where_."

"I'll kill you," I warned him. "I swear I'll kill you, Monroe. Where are
they from--Russia, China, Argentina?"

He grimaced. "What's so secret about those places? Go on!--guess again."

I stared at him long and hard. "The only place else--"

"Sure," he said. "You got it, Colonel. The other dome is owned and
operated by the Navy. The goddam United States Navy!"





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Project Hush, by Philip Klass

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PROJECT HUSH ***

***** This file should be named 32654.txt or 32654.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/2/6/5/32654/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
