The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Test Colony, by Winston Marks

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Test Colony

Author: Winston Marks

Illustrator: Kelly Freas

Release Date: June 3, 2010 [EBook #32676]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE TEST COLONY ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                            THE TEST COLONY

                            BY WINSTON MARKS

                       Illustrated by Kelly Freas

[Transcriber Note: This etext was produced from If Worlds of Science
Fiction September 1954. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence
that the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]


[Sidenote: _Benson did his best to keep his colony from going native,
but what can you do when the Natives have a rare human intelligence and
know all about the facts of life?_]


It was the afternoon of our arrival. Our fellow members of the "test
colony" were back in the clearing at the edge of the lake, getting their
ground-legs and drinking in the sweet, clean air of Sirius XXII. I was
strolling along the strip of sandy beach with Phillip Benson, leader of
our group, sniffing the spicy perfume of the forest that crowded within
twenty feet of the water's edge.

Half a billion miles overhead, Sirius shone with an artificially white
glow. Somewhere on the horizon, Earth lay, an invisible, remote speck of
dust we had forsaken 24 dreary, claustrophobic months ago.

The trip had taken its toll from all of us, even tough-minded Phil
Benson. We both found it difficult to relax and enjoy the invigorating,
oxygen-rich air and the balmy climate. As official recorder, I was
trying to think of words suitable to capture the magnificence, the sheer
loveliness of the planet which would be our home for at least four
years, perhaps forever.

Each absorbed in his own thoughts, Benson and I were some 500 yards from
the clearing when he stopped me with a hand on my arm. "Who is that?" he
demanded.

Up the beach where he pointed, two naked forms emerged from the calm
waters. They skipped across the sand and began rolling together
playfully in the soft grasses at the forest's edge. Even at this
distance they were visibly male and female.

"I can't make them out," I said. My only thought was that one of the
young couples had swum down ahead of us and was enjoying the first
privacy attainable in two years.

Benson's eyes were sharper. "Sam, they--they look like--"

Our voices must have reached them, for they sprang apart and rose to
their feet facing us.

"Like youngsters," I supplied.

"We have no kids with us," Benson reminded me. He began to move forward,
slowly, as though stalking a wild animal.

"Wait, Phil," I said. "The planet is uninhabited. They can't be--"

He continued shuffling ahead, and I followed. Within 20 paces I knew he
was right. Whoever they were they hadn't come with us!

Benson stopped so quickly I bumped into him. "Look, Sam! Their hands and
feet! Four digits and--no thumbs!"

I could now make out the details. The two forms were not quite human.
The toes were long and prehensile. The fingers, too, were exceptionally
long, appearing to have an extra joint, but as Benson mentioned, there
was no opposing thumb.

They stood well apart now, the female seeking no protection from the
male. Curiosity was written in their faces, and when we stopped
advancing they began edging forward until they were only five yards
away.

Their outlines, instead of becoming clearer, had fuzzed up more as they
approached. Now it was evident that their bodies were lightly covered
with a silky hair, some two or three inches long. It had already dried
out in the warm sun and was standing out away from their skins like
golden haloes.

They stood well under five feet tall, and in every detail, except the
body hair and digits, appeared to be miniature adults, complete with
navels.

Even in the midst of the shock of surprise, I was taken by their
remarkable beauty. "They're true mammals!" I exclaimed.

"Without a doubt," Benson said, eyeing the full contours of the lithe
little female. Her pink flesh tones were a full shade lighter than those
of the male. Both had well-spaced eyes under broad foreheads. Their fine
features were drawn into fearless, half-quizzical, half-good-natured
expressions of deep interest. They stood relaxed as if waiting for a
parley to begin.

"This," said Benson, "is one hell of a note!"

They cocked their heads at the sound like robins. I said, "Why? They
don't appear very vicious to me."

"Neither does man," Benson replied. "It's his brain that makes him
deadly. Look at those skulls, the ear placement, the eyes and forehead.
If I know my skull formations, I think man has met his intellectual
equal at last--maybe, even, his superior."

"What makes you think they may have superior minds?" As a psychologist I
felt Benson was jumping to a pretty quick conclusion.

"The atmosphere. Forty percent oxygen. Invariably, on other planets,
that has meant higher metabolisms in the fauna. In a humanoid animal
that strongly implies high mental as well as physical activity."

As if to prove his point, the two little creatures tired of the
one-sided interview, bent slightly at the knees and leaped at a
forty-five degree angle high into the tree branches. The female caught
the first limb with her long fingers and swung out of sight into the
foliage. The male hung by his long toes for a moment, regarding us with
an inverted impish expression, then he, too, vanished.

I grunted with disappointment. Benson said, "Don't worry, they'll be
back. Soon enough."

       *       *       *       *       *

As we returned to the clearing Jane Benson and Susan, my wife, came to
meet us. Although both brunettes rated high in feminine charms among the
forty women of our group, somehow they appeared a little ungainly and
uncommonly tall against my mental image of the little people we had just
left. Their faces were pale from the long interment in the ship, and
bright spots of sunburn on cheekbones and forehead gave them a clownish,
made-up appearance.

"We've sorted and identified the fruits," Sue called to us. "The
handbook is right. They're delicious! We've got a feast spread. Just
wait until you--" She caught our expressions. "What's wrong?"

Benson shrugged. "You girls go on ahead and get the crowd together. I
have an important announcement to make." Jane pouted a little and
hesitated, but Benson insisted. "Run along now, please. I want to gather
my thoughts."

We trailed after them slowly. I didn't like Benson's moody reaction to
our discovery of an intelligent life-form. To me it was exciting. What
fabulous news I would have to send back with the first liaison ship to
contact us four years hence! And it would be entirely unexpected,
because the original exploration party had failed to make the discovery.
That in itself was an intriguing mystery. How could twenty-two
scientists, bent on a minute examination of a planet's flora and fauna,
overlook the most fabulous creation of all--an animal virtually in men's
image? The only guess I could make was that they must belong to a
nomadic tribe small enough to escape discovery.

Benson broke silence as the narrow beach strip began to widen into the
grassy plain where our ship squatted like a hemispherical cathedral.
"This poses so many problems," he said shaking his head.

I said, "Phil, I think you're taking your job too seriously. You just
can't plan every detail of organizing our community down to the
rationing of tooth-powder."

"Planning never hurt any project," Benson said.

"I disagree," I told him. "You've had too long to dwell on your plans.
Now the first unpredictable incident throws you into an uproar. Relax,
Phil. Take your problems one at a time. We don't even know that we'll
ever see the little creatures again. Maybe they're shy."

He scarcely heard me. He was a large, well-muscled man of 46 years, an
ex-college president and an able administrator. He and Jane, his wife,
were the only two of our party older than the 35-year age limit. His
background as a sociologist and anthropologist and his greater maturity
were important factors in stabilizing a new colony, but his point of
view had grown excessively conservative, it seemed to me.

A crew of craftsmen with their busy little power saws had constructed a
sloping ship's ramp of rough planks sawed from the nearest trees. We
stepped through and over the assembled people who were lying around in
the grass at the base of the ramp, and Benson mounted twenty feet above
us at the entrance to the ship.

Everyone was in high spirits, and a light cheer rippled through the
assembly. Benson, however, ignored it and bent a thoroughly serious gaze
out over his "flock".

"Please give me your closest attention," he began and waited until
everyone was quiet. "Until further notice, we must proceed under a
yellow alert during daylight hours and a red alert at night. All work
parties leaving the ship will check with the scribe every hour on the
hour. We will resume sleeping in the ship. Women are restricted to
within 100 yards of the ship at all times. Men will go armed and will
please inform themselves of their position on the security watch list
which will be posted tonight." He squinted in the bright sunlight. "For
the moment, you men with sidearms, post yourselves around the ship.
Sound off loud if you sight anything larger than a rabbit."

The men named got slowly to their feet, fingering their light hunting
pistols self-consciously. Benson continued, "You may appreciate these
precautions when I tell you that Sam Rogers and I just encountered two
remarkably humanoid animals on the beach less than half a mile from
here."

Tension replaced levity, as Benson described our meeting with the
natives. I thought he gave it a needlessly grim emphasis with such terms
as, "_quicker than cats_", and "_devilishly intelligent_", but I held my
peace.

He summarized, "I do not want to alarm anyone unduly, but we must face
up to the fact that we are totally unprepared for such a contingency.
The exploration group failed us badly in overlooking these creatures.
They may not be inimical to our culture, but until this is established
we must consider them prime threats. That is all," he concluded.

No one grumbled aloud, but their faces showed keen disappointment at the
resumption of quartering in the ship. Reluctantly, the women began
rolling up the still-deflated air-mattresses that were scattered about
the soft, deep grass. Sue complained, "Sam, if these people don't get a
little privacy pretty soon we'll turn into an ant colony. There'll be
lovin' in the streets."

"It's not my idea," I said. "I'll be nailed to a table at the foot of
the ramp all day making check marks. Phil is taking this entirely too
big. The little people are really charming. He neglected to mention that
they are beautifully formed and quite gentle in their--their actions."

"Actions?" she said. "What happened, really?"

I described the conditions under which we first saw the natives, and she
laughed a little strainedly. "I can just imagine the look on Phil
Benson's face."

I knew what she meant. In trying to enforce the shipboard rule of
segregation of the sexes, our leader had developed an oversensitive
attitude toward certain aspects of modesty. In the unutterable boredom
of space, the pledge we had all taken to complete continence for the
voyage was a severe test to all forty couples.

Had propriety and space considerations been the only reasons for the
infamous "no-romance" regulation, it would never have held up. But all
concerned realized the problem of childbirth in space under the
jam-packed living conditions, tight water and food rationing and the
fetid, recirculated air.

Now the second honeymoons were over before they started. It was back to
the ship and the night-life of monks and nuns.

That night, Sue and I joined the four ship's officers, their wives,
Phillip Benson and Jane in the navigation cupola atop our doomed ship
that had become a "fortress". The small control room was the only
semi-private room in the ship, and even Benson was admitted by
invitation only. The meeting was a council of war, so to speak, and the
officers were pressed into service to organize and operate the security
guard.

When the guard watch was worked out for a week in advance, I spoke up.
"I think we're getting off on the wrong foot, Phil. We can't stay penned
up like animals at night and expect to function as humans."

Benson argued: "We are a carefully balanced group, Sam. We can't afford
casualties. Look at our medical corps, two doctors and four nurses.
Suppose we were attacked and lost them?"

Captain Spooner, whose authority had lapsed when we touched down, backed
up Benson. "I see no great hardship in the precautions. Inconvenience,
yes, but nothing that the danger doesn't fully justify."

He was a cocky, virile, bald-headed little terrier of 35 years. His very
young wife and the wives of the other three officers seemed only lightly
perturbed at the prospects of continuing celibacy, which confirmed my
suspicions.

I said, "That's gritty of you, Captain, but remember, the rest of us
haven't had the relative privacy of the bridge. If this restriction
continues long I predict violations of the discipline, and probably some
serious behaviour problems."

My position as colony psychologist had become somewhat obscured under
the snowstorm of paperwork that my secondary job as official scribe had
brought. Benson seemed now to recall that mental health _was_ my
concern. He said, "I thought you reported high morale upon arrival."

"I did, but the tensions are there, and it's foolish to draw them too
tightly. We have a well-picked, highly adaptable group of people. Let's
keep them that way. The quicker we hit a more normal existence the less
risk we run of emotional disturbances."

"They'll take it," Benson said positively, and Spooner nodded in
arrogant agreement.

       *       *       *       *       *

My 20-hour wristwatch, geared to the shorter rotation of Sirius XXII,
said nine o'clock, one hour before noon, when the women began
undressing.

There had been an air of conspiracy among them all morning, a studied
casualness as they wandered around near the ship, forming small
conversational eddies, dispersing and reforming elsewhere. I had just
finished checking in the 11-man fruit-gathering detail. I looked up from
my roster in time to see the first motions of the "great disrobing".
Zippers unzipped, snaps popped open, slacks, skirts, blouses and jumpers
fell to the grass, and a dazzling spectacle of space-bleached feminine
epidermis burst into view.

The ladies were very calm about it, but a chorus of yips sounded and
swelled into a circus of cheers from the male working parties.

Before I could fathom it Benson came charging down the ramp followed by
his fruit-stowing detail. He stopped at the foot of the ramp, mouth open
and eyes pinched with annoyance.

[Illustration]

He spotted Jane and Sue. "What is going on out here?" he demanded
loudly.

Our two wives waved at us and strolled over, doing a splendid job of
acting unconcerned. "Just a little sun-bathing," Jane said, shooing a
small insect from a pale shoulder.

Susan refused to meet my eye. She was watching two birds soar overhead.
"It's fantastic," she said. "If you don't look at things too closely,
you'd never know we weren't at a summer camp up in Wisconsin--except for
the fruits. They remind me more of Tahiti. It's marvelous! The
mosquitoes don't even bite."

"They will," I said, "as soon as they get a good taste of human blood.
And baby, you're sure making it easy for them."

Benson was distracted from the conversation by the converging male
colonists, who were whooping and yelling like a horde of school boys. He
backed up the ramp and ordered, "Let's get on with the work. You've seen
your wives in the altogether before."

The men quieted a little, but one yelled, "Yeah, but not lately!"

Another added, "And not _all together_."

In spite of the fact that nude sun-bathing was a commonplace,
twenty-second-century custom on Earth, by tacit consent clothes had been
worn at all times aboard ship. The women had gone along with Benson for
two years on such matters, so this was clearly a feminine protest
against the spirit of the yellow alert.

Young doctors Sorenson and Bailey came trotting up, grinning
appreciatively but wagging their fingers. Without consulting Benson,
Bailey mounted the ramp and shouted, "Blondes and redheads, ten minutes
exposure. Brunettes, fifteen."

A great booing issued from the men, but Bailey held up his hand for
silence. "The medical staff will make no effort to enforce these
exposure maximums, but be advised that the radiation here is about the
same as Miami Beach in June, so don't let the air-conditioning fool
you."

Benson was spared further decisions on the issue, because at that moment
one of the sentries remembered to take a quick look at the vector of
forest he was supposed to be guarding. Unable to make his voice heard
over the hub-hub, the guard fired his pistol in the air.

We all jumped up and stared, and Benson muttered, "Dear God!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Our people were scattered over an acre around the ramp, and encompassing
them was a semi-circle of at least a hundred "savages", frozen like
bronze statues at the sound of the gun-shot. They curved in an arc less
than a hundred yards from the ship.

Their hands were empty of weapons, and their motionless attitudes were
in no way threatening. To the contrary, they seemed small and quite
inoffensive except for their numbers.

Acting in my capacity as psychologist, I ran up the ramp and called out
as calmly as a shout would permit, "Everybody take it easy! Don't make
any quick moves. Above all, don't anyone fire off a weapon again unless
there is an obvious attack."

Benson clutched my arm. "Are you mad? We've got to get the women
inside."

"That's what I'm thinking," I said. "But if we invite attack by running
they won't all make it."

"They aren't armed. The men can stand them off."

"Then what are you worrying about?" I demanded. "Relax for a minute and
see what happens."

Benson simmered and reluctantly accepted my logic. Meanwhile, the line
of natives became mobile again. They closed in at a casual saunter,
rolling off the balls of their long feet with a peculiar, slow, bouncing
motion.

A ripple of subdued exclamations ran through our people, and in turn the
little natives moved their lips, turned their heads to one another and
seemed to be commenting among themselves.

Benson began hissing futile commands for the women to start boarding the
ship. No one paid any attention. I could sense no great danger in the
situation. In fact I felt more attracted than repelled by the little
golden-haired creatures.

Bailey, who was still on the ramp, took a different view. He called out,
"They don't look dangerous, but keep away from them. Lord knows what
kind of bugs they may have in them."

It was a sobering thought. Their most insignificant disease germ might
easily wipe out our colony if it proved contagious.

Yet, how could we stop these natives without inflicting bloodshed? On
they came in their shambling, loose-gaited walk. Benson was unsnapping
his holster flap, and even the highly curious women were beginning to
shrink back toward the gangplank, when a light breeze swept through us
from behind. It rustled the grass softly and moved into the natives,
only 20 yards away.

The wavering line stopped again. Segments began to retreat, first
singly, then in pairs and groups. All but a handful of the most curious
suddenly bounded for the forest and disappeared.

The others came forward again, but with increasing bewilderment.
Repeatedly, they raised their noses and sniffed the air.

Bailey said from behind us, "They catch our scent and don't know what to
make of it. Thank heavens most of them took off. We can handle a dozen
of them easily enough."

Our people opened ranks and let the little creatures infiltrate. Sue
squeezed my arm. "Why, they're beautiful little things! They make me
feel self-conscious with my bleached-out skin. They certainly look
intelligent, those eyes--no fear in them at all--look, they're even
smiling!"

Indeed, several of the creatures were grinning broadly at the male
members of our party. They found our clothing amusing.

Now we could hear their soft voices conversing in a language that was
liquid with a great many compound vowel sounds, not unlike Earth's
Finnish tongue. Their quick, dark eyes seemed to take in everything.
They seemed torn between a consuming curiosity and a strong aversion to
our scent. One by one they satisfied the former and yielded to the
latter, dropping back and racing for the forest in great, joyous bounds
punctuated with happy little whoops of undefinable emotion.

At last only one, chesty little male was left. Benson exhaled heavily
beside me. "It's the little fellow we saw on the beach, Sam. Look, he's
coming through."

A tawny stripe of brown, furry hair ran from his high forehead, over the
crown of his proud skull and down his neck to fade into the typical,
deep, golden fuzz of his body. As he approached the ramp I saw that his
face was smooth, entirely free of hair as though clean-shaven.

By now Benson was as fascinated as the rest of us. I stepped down in
front of him to confront our visitor. I placed a hand on my chest and
said, "Sam Rogers!"

The dark eyes swept from my feet to my head and fastened upon my face.
He pointed four long fingers at me and repeated distinctly, "Samrogers."

My name is easy to pronounce, but it was a shock to hear it from the
lips of an extra-terrestrial being.

Then he placed the same hand on his own chest and said, "Joe!" Actually,
it came out with a rapid widening and narrowing of his lips that sounded
like a quick version of, "Jo-ah-o-ah-oh," but the vowel echoes were so
rapid that for practical purposes it read, "Joe," to me.

I pointed my hand at him and repeated, "Joe!" He looked vaguely
disappointed at my crude aspiratory control, but then a bright smile
creased his cocky little face. His hand flicked out and back.

"Samrogers--Joe."

Involuntarily I nodded my head. He nodded back and smiled again. Before
I could think of what comes after, "Dr. Livingstone, I presume," he
wrinkled his nose, squinted his eyes, whirled and darted off for the
timber.

We stood rooted for a minute, then Bailey said, "We must really stink.
Plucky little fellow took it as long as he could."

Benson looked back at Bailey and me. "Well, what do you think?"

I looked at Bailey, and he looked at Dr. Sorenson. "Lord, I don't know.
Except for the possibility of microbe infection, they appear perfectly
harmless to me," Sorenson said.

I said, "Since they don't like our scent there doesn't seem to be much
danger of contact. Phil, why don't we call off the yellow alert with the
exception of a rule or two about fraternization in closed spaces?"

Benson looked over his people. All were paired off now, husband with
wife. And to a man their arms were wrapped protectively around their
respective spouses, watching for the decision. Their faces read, "Is
this innocuous little race of people the cause of all the trouble?"

Benson rubbed the gray of his temple with a knuckle. He mounted the ramp
and announced, "The emergency is reduced to a blue alert. Women will
have the freedom of the clearing and the visible beach, but only
authorized working parties will enter the forest. Men will continue to
wear sidearms. When outside shelters are complete we will sleep in them,
but until then, or until we are better informed about the natives, we
shall continue sleeping in the ship."

       *       *       *       *       *

The new order of the day did nothing to mitigate the resentment and
tension, but it did accelerate assembly of the lumber mill and house
construction. The little Sirians seemed to have satisfied their
curiosity, for they left us to our labors for a whole week.

The first building of our projected village was completed on the seventh
day. It was little more than a two-room shanty, but it represented the
most sought after prize of the moment, _privacy_!

We drew lots for it, and, with the uncommon justice, one of the hardest
working amateur carpenters won. The women brought in armloads of grass
for a couch and decorated it with wild-flowers. When evening fell it
seemed like an occasion for a celebration, and Benson relented on the
evening curfew.

We gathered scraps from the lumber mill, carefully cleared a sandy strip
on the beach of all inflammable matter and built a huge bonfire. In the
rich atmosphere even the green wood burned merrily, spitting green sap
and sending up clouds of pungent, aromatic smoke.

Sue had just curled up in the crook of my arm, and we were working on a
case of Earth-nostalgia, when we noticed our visitors again. They came
bounding, up to the wide rim of the firelight. They jabbered in excited,
ecstatic voices but stopped short of our human assembly. Only one, I
recognized him as Joe, picked his way through us and came close to
inspect the crackling blaze.

Fascinated, Sue and I watched his profile contort with an expression of
immense admiration. It was not the awe of a savage, but the heartfelt
appreciation of a human for a rare and beautiful spectacle.

"Fire must be unknown to them," Sue whispered.

"At least mighty rare," I said. "The handbook says no volcanoes and no
thunderstorms."

Joe turned at the sound of our low voices. With eyes half-blinded by the
glare he searched for me. "Samrogers!" he called clearly. "Samrogers!"

I rose to my feet and answered, "Joe! Right here, Joe."

He picked his way over to me, smiling broadly and glancing back at the
fire every step or two. A pace away he stopped, pointed at me, said,
"Samrogers," pointed at himself, said, "Joe!" _then pointed at the fire
and waited_.

It was a clearly indicated question. I answered it respectfully, "Fire!"

He repeated, "Fire," and his eyes glowed like sparks. Then he made
gestures of picking up some of the fire and taking it away, turning to
me to pose the question.

Sorenson, propped up on an elbow, said, "I'll be damned. He's asking you
to give him some of the fire."

"No," Benson said. "He knows fire, knows you can't take the flames. He's
asking for _the means to build a fire_."

I faced Joe, shook my head solemnly and said, "No!" To give meaning to
the word I sat down and turned my head away for a moment. When I looked
back Joe was looking very disappointed. It made Sue so sad that she held
out a wedge of sweet melon to him. Joe accepted the gift easily,
gracefully and with a small smile of "thank you". He turned back,
squatted as near the blaze as comfort would permit and chewed absently
at the melon.

Thereafter he ignored the animated conversation that sprang up among us.
Jane wanted to know why we didn't give him one of our lighters. "He's
just as intelligent as we are," she insisted. She got no argument on
that score, but her husband pointed out that the golden people were
unaccustomed to handling fire, and that during the present dry season
even the green foliage might take off in a holocaust if ignited in this
rich, oxygen air.

Even as he spoke, a long, slender pole, flaming at one end, toppled from
the settling fire and rolled near Joe. With scarcely a pause to debate,
he leaped to his feet, grabbed the pole by the cool end and waved it
aloft like a torch.

With a triumphant yell he plunged through us and out across the field
bearing his prize aloft trailing sparks.

I tried to shoot low, but my light caliber pellet caught him rather high
in the thigh. He dived to the ground senseless in a shower of sparks.
His fellow creatures immediately gathered around him. When we closed in
to retrieve the fire-wand and stamp out the sparks, the other natives
faded away, crinkling their noses. They made no effort to remove Joe,
but cast many admiring glances back at the fire he had stolen.

Sue came up storming at me. "You didn't have to _shoot_ him." She
started to kneel down beside him, but Dr. Bailey restrained her.

"Easy, Susan. Remember the quarantine."

"We can't let him lie there and bleed to death," I said, feeling
unaccountably ashamed for my deed, although there was scarcely an
alternative.

Benson came up, "Nice shot, Sam."

I said, "Phil, I want permission to enter quarantine with Joe, here. Let
me have the instruments, and I'll probe for the bullet and take care of
him."

Benson shook his head. "We can't take that chance. We couldn't spare you
if you caught something."

"Who could you spare better?" I demanded. "See here, we've got to find
out sooner or later whether these little fellows carry anything
contagious. If they do, well, then we have a decision to face, but we
can't decide anything until we know."

Sue was at my side now. She said. "You have a dozen people who can punch
a micro-writer. Sam and I aren't indispensable. Besides, it was he who
crippled the poor little fellow."

Without waiting for an answer she called out, "Larson, where are you?"
The lucky carpenter tried to draw back in the shadows, knowing full well
what she had in mind.

Benson stared at me for a minute. He said gruffly, "Very well, if you
can talk Larson out of his cottage, go ahead, play hero!"

I didn't feel very heroic right then. Two hours later, when we had the
bullet out of Joe and had him bedded down comfortably for the night, Sue
cosied up to me in our double sleeping silks and murmured, "What a guy
has to go through out here to get a little privacy!"

Poor Larson!

       *       *       *       *       *

Bailey and Sorenson set up their lab outside our cabin door. Joe's wound
was seriously infected, and none of our cautiously applied remedies
would control the raging fever with which he awoke the first morning. He
lay, apathetic, eyes half closed, murmuring, "Tala! Tala!"

The doctors seized the opportunity to launch a study of Sirian microbes,
diseases and earth molds. Sue and I took cultures from Joe's wound, and
the medics experimented with the effects of local mold products similar
to the penicillin series. By force-feeding we managed to keep Joe alive
until Bailey, one morning, held up a hypo full of clear liquid and told
us how to administer it.

Joe responded at once. The following day he began sitting up and
vociferously demanding, "Tala, Tala!"

"Must be his wife or girl-friend," Sue deduced. She was wrong. Joe began
making motions of a person lifting a vessel and drinking. When we
offered him water he refused, repeating, "Tala!" and making more
drinking motions. He tried to rise, but the pain in his swollen thigh
stopped him. He sank back licking his lips like a man dying of thirst,
and in spite of his general improvement, he stayed in a sullen, subdued
attitude.

As his wound closed and the swelling reduced, Joe's temperature, which
had reached a fabulous 142 degrees F., stabilized at 137 F., thereby
confirming Benson's prediction that the natives would display a much
higher metabolism. Sue, who had spent hours stroking the fevered brow,
had grown used to Joe's hot-bloodedness, and she teased me about my
relative "frigidity".

Until Joe got his "tala" I made disappointing progress at teaching him
our language. He picked up our words for those few items that pertained
to his comfort, such as food, drink, bedpan and pillow--he revelled in
the luxury of our down-filled pillows. But at first he evinced little
interest in communication.

Then one morning we arose to find him standing and clinging weakly to
the door jamb, searching the perimeter of the clearing with frantic
eyes.

We scolded him, but he ignored us. He spotted a fellow native examining
one of the unfinished huts, which were going up at the rate of one a
day. He called out in a loud, clear voice, and the little golden
creature came running over to investigate.

It was a lovely little female, and I told Sue, "We have a reunion on our
hands. Must be his mate."

But Joe was quite indifferent to her charms. She seemed tolerably happy
to see him, touched his bandages with long, gentle fingers, then hurried
off to the forest as if in response to his commands. Joe made no effort
to follow. He seemed still to realize that he was in good hands and was
profiting by the care he was receiving.

However, he chafed for the ten minutes or so before her return. We
waited with high curiosity. I bet Sue that we were about to learn what
"tala" was. When the female approached again we were mystified. "Why
it's just a mango," Sue said. Indeed, the yellow-skinned, kidney-shaped
fruit which the little native bore carefully in both hands appeared to
be one of the over-sized specimens we had named after its smaller Earth
counterpart.

Joe reached greedily for the fruit, poked a hole in the rind with a
pointed forefinger and drank deeply. Watching from the door of our
bedroom, we could smell a delightful, tangy scent that was only vaguely
typical of the Sirian mangoes we had eaten.

To our surprise, as Joe drank, the skin collapsed like a plastic bag.
"It must be a different species, or else it's much riper than any we've
gathered," Sue said.

When Joe paused to breathe, the female took the fruit from him and
sucked at it enthusiastically. They sank down on Joe's bed and took
turns drinking the juice until the quart-sized skin was crumpled and
empty.

I fear I interrupted an incipient romance in order to retrieve the
discarded skin. The female wrinkled her nose and made for the door. I
watched her roll unsteadily across the clearing with eccentric little
lurches. The bland smile on Joe's handsome face deepened my suspicion. I
pointed to the skin and asked, "Tala?"

He nodded, patted his stomach and repeated, "Tala!"

From that moment our relations improved immensely. Joe enlisted the help
of various females to keep him supplied with skins of tala, and with the
satiation of his craving he took a completely new interest in life.

       *       *       *       *       *

We spent hours every day working out our language difficulties. He
learned so rapidly that I abandoned learning his language in favor of
teaching him ours. Even such abstract concepts as time and space proved
no obstacles. He grasped the purpose of my wristwatch after a single
day's demonstration of its relationship to the passage of Sirius across
the sky.

Using a pencil I had managed to convey our symbols for large numbers.
Joe could count up to any number now, and he seemed actually to
understand the open-end nature of our system of enumeration.

It made possible a mutual agreement on such matters as the number of
"days" in a year, which he was mildly interested to learn numbered 440
on his planet. Then a startling piece of information came from him when
I asked how long his people lived.

"Two years. Maybe three," he replied. Because of the shorter days, a
Sirian year about equalled an Earth year, and I found it difficult to
believe that these wonderful little animals lived only two or three
years. He persisted until I believed him.

He was strangely vague when I tried to determine the common manner of
death. Indeed, personal death was a concept either so hazy or
distasteful to him that he refused to dwell on it. The most he would
convey was that there were always new faces in the tribe, and the old
faces rarely remained more than three years. At this time, he described
himself as being more than a year old.

This was only one of several startling items that were revealed in our
conversations. The golden people matured in three months to fully grown
adults. A female could bear several babies a year and usually did. Yet
Joe insisted that his tribe was the only clan on the face of the planet,
so far as he knew, and that it numbered fewer than a thousand
individuals.

There was no such thing as monogamy or even polygamy. True, at night
when the air was cooler, they paired off, male and female, and each male
chose from among several favorites. But there was no formal nor
permanent mating arrangement.

Benson, who had set up a sheltered desk outside Joe's window in order to
listen in with an anthropologist's avid interest, posed the question
which grew into quite a mystery. Under such fruitful conditions and
ideal environment, why hadn't Joe's people overrun the planet? Even with
the brief life-span, each female should produce many babies.

Joe had no answer. The problem didn't interest him, and he refused to
ponder it. He'd squat in the corner jealously guarding his limp-skinned
mango, nipping at it occasionally when our questions failed to make
sense.

We were all, incidentally, quite curious to taste Joe's tala juice, but
it was his sole property. His lady-friends would hand it to no one but
him, and he guarded it selfishly. Bailey and Sorenson had enlisted the
help of our two organic chemists to examine the moist residue of the
empty skins, but with their limited lab facilities all they could do was
make guesses that the coveted juice was the product of fermentation or
enzymic action with which we were unfamiliar.

As a psychologist I knew that Joe responded to the tala similarly to the
way a human dipsomaniac does to alcohol. When he was well-supplied he
was cheerful and happy. When he ran out, he became taciturn and
irritable. His frequent resort to the liquor, when we tried to force him
to answer troublesome questions, confirmed my suspicion that there were
certain matters his brilliant mind simply refused to embrace, and the
simplest way to avoid worrying about them was to take another drink of
tala.

Benson and I discussed this one afternoon while Joe was taking a nap. We
sat in the shade of my hut spooning the lush pulp of a mango into our
mouths. He said, "Everything points to a race of super-intelligence held
down by sheer degeneracy."

"You mean the tala-drinking?" I asked.

He nodded. "For one thing. Our work parties report that they never stop
drinking the stuff. The older ones get quite plastered. I've seen it
myself. Disgusting. And they have no common sense of, of--well, I
shouldn't say decency, because obviously morality as we know it just
doesn't exist. But thank heavens they don't care for the scent of
humans."

I said, "Don't depend on that too much. I asked Joe about it, and he
said that we don't necessarily smell bad to them. It's just so alien to
any scent they've known that they tend to shy off. Joe is quite used to
it now. He lets Sue rub his back and his head. She's made quite a pet of
him."

Benson didn't like this news at all. He pondered thoughtfully for a
moment. "That means that they'll all gradually get used to being around
us. I don't like it, Phil. They're just human enough to have a bad
influence on the colony. They're dissolute and entirely without
ambition. In fact they seem to have damned little race survival instinct
at all."

I had pondered this many times, but it hadn't struck me as especially
dangerous to the colony. Benson went on, "We have a glorious planet
here, rich in minerals and other natural resources. By comparison, Earth
is so worn-out and depleted and over-crowded that the contrast is almost
too great."

"What are you driving at?" I demanded.

"Just this. From the first the biggest problem here has been to prod
everyone to work. We have a civilization to build here, and that means
clearing more land, breaking the soil, mining, construction,
manufacturing."

"Look," I said somewhat impatiently, "you don't expect 80 people to
accomplish all this in four years, surely?"

"I expect progress," he said firmly. "Do you realize that when we
finished the last of the forty houses that virtually ended the building
program? Work on the two warehouses, the water system, sewage disposal
plant and the commissary we planned is almost at a standstill."

"The people want time to finish up their homes and make them
comfortable," I objected.

"That's what they say," he told me, "but they're fooling away their
time."

"Phil, we've only been here a month, and--"

"And if I hadn't pulled a blue alert," he interrupted, "we wouldn't even
have the residentials built yet. Now they've got their precious privacy,
and the pressure is off. They'd rather go chasing off into the woods to
hunt exotic fruit and peek at the natives than get on with the project."

I hadn't realized things were this serious. "Don't they obey orders any
more? What about your work schedules?"

"I've pushed them as hard as I can without forcing a test of my
authority," he said. "They claim they deserve time to get adjusted and
relax a little before buckling down."

"I agree with them," I said. "They're all serious, industrious people,
and this is still an adventure with them. It will wear off pretty soon,
and they'll be yearning for comforts of Earth. They'll buckle down when
the rainy season hits," I predicted.

"I wonder. Here's one good example. Look over there. Donnegan's food
detail is just now returning with its first load. They left three hours
ago." He yelled over to the foreman.

Donnegan, a large, pleasant-faced biologist sauntered over to us. Benson
said, "Was the _expedition_ successful?"

Donnegan brushed off the sarcasm. "Fooling aside, it is getting to be
something of an expedition to find fruit. The natives are cleaning it
out near at hand."

Turning to me Benson said, "There's another thing. The little devils
have settled all around us, and everything is community property with
them. Not only do they strip the fruit but they pick up anything that
isn't nailed down and wander off with it."

"That's odd," I said. "Joe indicates that they place no value on
possessions normally."

"Oh, they don't keep things," Donnegan explained. "They pack them off,
fiddle with them and then we find them strewn all over the forest.
Sometimes I'd like to wring their little necks!"

Benson looked up at him quickly. "Sounds funny coming from you, Paul.
You were one of their chief defenders at the meeting last week."

Donnegan's face darkened. "That was last week, before I found out a few
things. As a matter of fact, I think it's time you knew about them,
too." He squatted down by us and unburdened himself.

       *       *       *       *       *

As it so often will, a barrier had erected itself between the colony
members and their leader, Phillip Benson. Donnegan somewhat shamefacedly
confessed what had gone on behind this curtain of silence.

It seemed that two weeks earlier Bromley, one of the chemists, had
contrived some rather crude, old-fashioned, sulphur-and-phosphorus,
friction matches. Trading on the native's delight with fire, he had
bribed them with matches to give him one of the tala-mangoes which he
tasted, then promptly proceeded to swill until he was quite drunk.

In a generous mood he passed out matches to other male members of the
colony who, in turn, made the barter and joined the party.

"The stuff is really delicious," Donnegan admitted. "And it doesn't even
give you a hang-over."

"Go on," Benson invited coldly.

Within a few days, Donnegan related, everybody was nipping on the tala.
Bromley was turning out a steady supply of matches from his lab, and
they were now the going currency for trading with the natives. In order
to keep their wives quiet the men brought the super-ripe mangoes home
and shared them.

The precious fruit, it developed, came from regular mango trees but
reached the desired, fermented condition only at the leafy crowns of the
trees where even the nimble, light-weight natives found it hazardous and
difficult to reach them. Bromley said that he knew of several native
casualties from fatal falls that had occurred since the traffic in tala
increased.

Benson asked the question that was in my mind. "What caused you to come
to me at this late date?" he demanded. "Something more serious must have
happened."

"Well, I didn't mind the tala-drinking so much--but, well, Captain
Spooner and I came back to his hut one afternoon this week and found his
pretty little wife with one of the natives--a male. Spooner thought it
was a big joke--he was a little drunk at the time, and so was his wife.
But I don't think it's any joke at all."

Benson was on his feet, his face livid. "What else?"

Bromley said, "I checked around a little bit, and I found that quite a
few of our people are making pets out of the natives. The little devils
have got used to our scent, and they'll do anything just to watch a
match burn."

"But the quarantine?" I said.

"I guess they figure it's safe enough. Personally, I don't. But they
feel that since you and Sue have escaped any disease there's no reason
for the non-fraternizing rule, not even in closed spaces. Several
couples I know hold parties every night in their huts after dark. They
invite a couple of natives who supply the tala. They all sit around a
candle. The natives sleep there."

He kicked at an empty tala skin that Joe had tossed out the door
earlier. "Things are out of hand, and I'm ashamed I haven't come to you
sooner, Benson."

Phil was so outraged he couldn't speak. I said, "Thanks, Donnegan. You
did the right thing."

He left us, and while Benson was struggling to control his anger I said,
"It's a wonder they haven't burned the place down. The forest must be
damp enough to sustain fire, or they certainly would have set one."

"It might have been better," Benson said, "if they had burned the whole
damned planet up! And you thought I was exaggerating! There you have it,
a perfect set-up to make beachcombers out of the whole colony. Plenty of
free food, liquor, beautiful native girls and a mild climate."

"And native boys," I added, remembering suddenly that I was harboring
one of the "pets" under my own roof.

Benson clenched his fists. "From the first I knew what the answer must
come to. I just didn't have the guts to face it."

I nodded. "I suppose we'll have to drive them off."

"Drive them off, _nothing_! They're nomads, and they'd be back sooner or
later. There will always be people in the colony willing to deal with
them secretly, and the natives are clever enough to circumvent any
discipline I aim against them."

"What else can you do, short of--genocide?"

"Why rule out genocide? Sam, face it! Race extermination is the only
permanent and satisfactory solution."

The thought was abhorrent to me, but he argued, "If we don't eliminate
them entirely they'll always be around to plague us. Just picture what
this or any future colony would look like after a year or two of
uninhibited mingling and loafing and swilling down that tala. Is that
the civilization that Earth sent us out here to establish?"

In every part of the universe where living conditions have been too kind
and discipline too lax, men have been known to _go native_, and suddenly
I felt that Benson had been much more acute in his apprehensions than I,
a graduate psychologist who was supposed to understand human nature.

Somewhat subdued I said, "How do you plan to accomplish a complete
extermination? If we start hunting them down they'll just fade into the
woods. Besides, you'd have a devil of a time getting agreement among our
people to take on such a messy project."

"It has to be done, that's all. I want you to keep completely quiet
about what we've learned until I can think about it. Bromley should have
some ideas. He's a biologist."

When Benson said, "biologist", the obvious solution popped into my head.
"If we could sterilize them--all the males, anyway--they have such a
short life-span--"

"Too slow. Besides, how are you going to coax all the males to lie down
and--" His eyes opened wider, "Radiation!"

"Exactly. We take them for a tour of the ship, including the X-ray
booth, and pour on the power."

"Might be done at that. But it would be so slow."

       *       *       *       *       *

Slow or not, no better plan was conceived among six of us who met
secretly that night in Benson's new ship quarters. Donnegan brought his
fellow biologist, Terrence Frost, and I had contacted the two medics. We
reached swift agreement as to the necessity of taking steps, and decided
to work on my rough plan. It was also voted not to divulge our
intentions to the others, and then the meeting broke up.

When I returned to my hut, Jane was sitting cross-legged just outside my
door visiting with Susan. I thought she would be curious about the
confidential nature of the meeting from which she was excluded, but she
had other things on her mind. She stood up and said, "I think your
patient is recovered, and you've got a problem, mister." She stalked off
into the night.

I looked at Sue's pink face and half-guessed the answer before she told
me. It seemed that Joe had suddenly developed amorous inclinations. Sue
had the habit of stroking his head like a pet dog, and this evening,
without warning, Joe had begun returning the caresses in a manner so
casual and gentle that Sue hadn't noticed the trend.

From a more objective viewpoint, however, Jane had observed the rather
unplatonic indications of Joe's attitude and mortified Sue by drawing
her attention to it with an acid remark.

In my fury I fancied that Joe had tried to take advantage of my absence.
His cleverness in avoiding such advances in my presence was nullified by
his error of assuming that Jane would pose no obstacle.

At present he sprawled in his corner beside an empty mango skin,
breathing rapidly, innocently asleep. The incident served to drive home
Donnegan's story and steel me against the many twinges of conscience I
was to suffer in our campaign to wipe out Joe's race.

It also served as an adequate excuse, in Sue's eyes, when I told Joe the
next morning that he was quite well enough to return to the forest. This
was a fact we both had known for over a week, but Joe in his indolent
way, had been quite content to remain and talk with me endlessly. Until
now, I had welcomed his presence as an inexhaustible source of
information.

He accepted the dismissal without rancor and promised to return and
visit us next spring.

"Next spring?" I said.

"We will leave soon," he said. "We go south in the autumn."

"Wait," I said. And I told him that as a gesture of friendship we had
decided to take all males of his race for a tour through the ship. Would
he take this word to his people?

He said he would, but his face became very thoughtful.

That afternoon they formed a short line at the ramp, and the "tours"
began. The line was short because they refused to wait long for
anything, but as the line shortened, others came from the woods to take
their places. To produce a favorable "press" on our show and thus assure
perfect attendance by _all_ the males, Benson rigged several mechanical
displays of flashing lights and whirling devices.

They were delighted, and when they got to the X-ray booth, to induce
them to stand still we set up a gas torch with a beautiful, vermilion,
strontium flame. The only problem at this point was to get them to move
on after they got their painless dose of sterilizing radiation.

Every tenth "golden boy" was shunted into a small chamber filled with
_orgon_, the instant anaesthetizing gas, and Dr. Sorenson, wearing an
oxygen mask, would catch him as he fell, take his specimen, hand it
through a slot to Dr. Bailey and then drag the unsuspecting victim into
the fresh air where the nurses took over with more wonders to distract
his attention.

This running spot-check on the collected semen samples assured us that
our radiation was effectively destroying the spermatozoa.

I sat at my old place at the base of the ramp, weeding out the
occasional females who tried to sneak in and also checking to see that
we had no repeats.

Our method was simplicity itself. As each native finished our tour an
attendant atomized a faint but very permanent stain of waterproof dye on
the hair of the right shoulder blade. It was hardly noticeable unless
you were looking for it, and that was one of my jobs.

In two days we "toured" 481 males.

A week later the night rains began, and our unwelcomed neighbors
vanished.

       *       *       *       *       *

Benson had postponed his little lecture deliberately, and now he called
us all together for a fatherly talk which I helped him prepare. He began
abruptly.

"Since nature has been so bountiful in providing us with tala, I don't
intend to proclaim any silly prohibition regarding its consumption. With
a little reflection, however, I hope that all of you can understand that
we must have some control. I am fully aware that many of you arranged
your own private channels for obtaining this liquor, but with the
departure of our tree-climbing friends the easy source has dried up.

"Now, to prevent some of you from breaking your fool necks trying to
climb the trees yourselves, I propose that we place tala in the
commissary as a normal ration to be issued equitably to all--when it is
available. And working together, our clearing parties will, no doubt,
fell enough mango trees to give us all a fair taste."

Benson's unexpected tolerance and remarkable proposal was received with
mixed embarrassment, relief and enthusiasm. He went on, "We have enjoyed
almost two months of rather unrestrained partying, and I'm not going to
rail at you for some of the illicit behaviour that came to my attention.
So far the intimacies which some of you took with the natives have
produced no epidemics nor bastard offspring on either side. However,
were I to accept your actions as typical of the future, I would consider
our colony doomed already and write off this planet as unfit for further
investment by Earth civilization.

"Instead, I feel you will, during the winter months, regain your
perspective and apply yourself to the principles which brought us here
and must continue to bind us together if we are to survive as a
permanent culture."

Benson's speech had the desired effect. Without the little people around
to distract us, the colonists plunged into their work, and things got
done. True, a rather disproportionate number of logs brought in by the
falling crews turned out to be mango-wood, but the tala-rationing
program added incentive precisely where it was needed. The perimeter of
our clearing advanced rapidly, the cultivating and planting parties
followed closely behind, and the sawmill added an industrious sound to
the whole operation.

As Benson had hoped, when the people buckled down they once again began
yearning for the conveniences they had left on earth. The chemists
finally contrived suitable raw materials for the plasticizer and began
manufacturing screens for our gaping windows, much-needed pipe for our
water and sewage systems and even a few "frivolous" luxuries such as
cups, saucers and fruit bowls. The commissary and other public buildings
were planked out roughly, and the hospital-clinic was completed before
the first two babies arrived.

The history-making blessed event was an honor and an onus to Captain
Spooner and his young wife. To father the first human offspring on
Sirius XXII was the fond hope of many of us, but Spooner and the Second
Officer had something over a light-year head-start on the rest of us.

Infant Spooner arrived just 5-1/2 months after our landing. The Mate's
baby came two weeks later. Sue herself was satisfyingly pregnant. By
spring it was obvious that Earth's gynecologists had chosen the members
of our colony well, and there would be no dearth of young blood. Fully a
third of the women were expecting, and Sue's date indicated she would
have won the derby if it hadn't been for the ship's officers' perfidy.

The colony as a whole was in good shape. As the most pressing work was
disposed of, the men took turns at the pleasant hunting details, and we
began enjoying fresh meat from the small game of the forest.

On one such trip I brought back a live little animal that looked like a
cross between a three-toed sloth and a teddy bear, except that he had a
long, woofly snout like an ant-eater. He seemed to be hibernating in the
crotch of a small tree, and when I shook him down he cuddled up and
clung to my neck so lovingly that I decided he'd make a good pet for
Sue.

The little cub kept nipping affectionately at my neck on the hike back,
and he clung so close he was a nuisance, but Sue was delighted. We had
to improvise a cage at night to keep him from mauling us and keeping us
awake.

Sue named him, "Toots", and we were the envy of all the camp. When Joe
and his people returned three weeks later, and we discovered the truth
about Toots, the others were happy they hadn't acquired a similar pet.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was late spring, and the mango trees were rapidly refilling their
high branches with the tala-fruit. We now had a roofed central kitchen
where the women prepared our meals. We ate at long tables in the open.

Shortly after the noon meal one day, Joe and his people returned. He
caught up to Sue and me as we were strolling to our hut for our daily
fifteen-minute siesta. He appeared tired from the journey but quite glad
to see us. I felt the pangs of conscience as I added my hypocritical
welcome to Sue's warm greeting.

In his old room we sat on the rough furniture I had fashioned, and Joe
eyed Sue's fruitful contours. "A baby soon, eh? We have many babies
among us."

"You--have?" I said.

"Many were born on the return trip. They slowed up the females with
their sucking. For eight days they are a burden on the mother."

Sue exclaimed, "Eight days? Then what happens?"

The subject did not greatly interest Joe. "Then they find their own
food--if the _koodi_ does not find them first."

"What in the world is a _koodi_?" Sue asked with a shiver.

Joe was silent for a minute. He wrinkled his broad brow and looked at
me. "Samrogers, you asked me many questions about how we die. I did not
understand this death for a long time. Now I know. It is when the
_koodi_ comes. He comes to the very young and to the old. The babies are
too small to hold him off. The old drink much tala, then the _koodi_
comes to them. This is my third year, and my thirst for tala is great.
The _koodi_ will come."

His words painted a clear picture of a superstitious concept of death,
personifying it even as humans refer to the "grim reaper". But Sue took
a different view. "What does the _koodi_ look like?" she persisted.

Joe looked puzzled. He raised a long, four-segmented finger and pointed
to a corner of the room where Toots was curled up like a fur neck-piece.
"He looks like that. There is a _koodi_."

My first impulse was to reject the statement as ridiculous. Toots was as
harmless as an over-sized kitten. Besides, the manual made no mention
of--

Sue made a small sound in her throat. Her face was colorless. "Sam! Get
him out of here!"

"But the manual--"

"The manual didn't mention Joe's people, either," she said
half-hysterically. "_Get Toots out of here._"

Still unbelieving I walked over and hauled the little fuzzy animal up
into my arms. Instantly, he cuddled close and rammed his pointed snout
under my open collar and began nibbling at my neck. I took him outside,
and out of perverse curiosity I let him have his way with my neck. At
first it tickled, as always, but instead of batting his head away I let
him nibble with his soft, pointed lips.

Sue called out, "Sam what are you doing? Kill him, Sam!"

His lips spread into a little circle on my flesh and began sucking
gently. There was no pain, just the throb of my jugular under his mouth.
Now his long, soft, hairy arms became firmer around my neck. I jerked
back and they gripped hard. A chill of panic stabbed me, and I could
feel the taut flesh of my neck drawn more deeply into his puckered lips.

I tugged at him silently, not wishing to frighten Sue. He wouldn't come
loose. In broad, noon-daylight I had a Sirian vampire in my arms,
threatening to rupture my jugular vein and kill me within speaking
distance of half a hundred people. I tried to level my voice. "Joe,
would you come out here, please?"

He came at once, stared with a blank expression and said, "You have been
drinking much tala?"

"Help me, dammit!" I said, holding my voice down. "I can't shake him
loose. He's trying to--" The long, tight arm squeezed off my breath. In
turn I tried to strangle him, but under the thick fur was a bony
protection where there should have been soft neck.

"It does no good to kill the _koodi_," Joe said. "There is always
another. Once they hold you tightly it is too late."

Sue thought differently. She came through the door like a hell-cat.
Catching up her garden hoe she swung a blow that, had it missed Toots,
would have crushed my skull. But Sue didn't miss. I fell on my back, and
Toots let go, dead of a broken spine.

       *       *       *       *       *

The "liquor control board" was Benson's best idea. Not only did it put
tala on a legitimate basis, but it controlled our dealings with the
natives. Bromley, the chemist, who was the original offender, was
charged with manufacturing the wooden matches, and the medium of
exchange was concentrated in the hands of the commissary "purchasing
agent".

The reason that Benson sanctioned the controlled tala trade with the
natives stemmed from our apparent failure to sterilize the males. There
was, indeed, a huge crop of native babies, tiny little dolls that looked
like spider monkeys and dropped from their mothers' breasts after little
more than a week.

The brisk tala trade was part of our program to keep the natives in
close association while we devised ways and means to discover the cause
of our failure. All quarantine rules had long since been dropped, and
Sorenson and Bailey began inventing ruses to lure the males into the gas
chamber again.

Weeks passed while we worked our way through the whole male population
again, testing for fertility and X-raying it wherever we found it.
Through Joe we advertised new wonders to be seen in the ship, and as the
sight-seers left we tagged each with an atomized spot on the other
shoulder, indicating that he was still sterile or had just become so.

This time we tallied 496 males which, according to Joe, was certainly
the whole masculine population. The mystery of our failure at genocide
forced an unpleasant decision on Benson. The biologists and medics
insisted that we must win the natives' confidence even further to gain
their cooperation. As the heat of summer bore down and the mercury rose,
we eased off on the work schedule and deliberately planned social
functions to which we had Joe invite a group of natives. There were
picnics and beach parties where our guests brought their own tala, and
ours was carefully rationed. Group singing entranced the little golden
people, and they took remarkable delight in the discovery of their own,
sweetly pitched voices. Enterprising Joe, with his remarkable memory,
soon became unofficial song leader, and all day long we would hear the
natives practicing.

Sue's baby came, a sturdy little boy whom we named Richard Joseph--Sue
insisted on the second name, and I couldn't argue her out of it without
revealing my reasons. Within two weeks the clinic's nursery was full of
babies, and it was at this point that the natives' interest became
deeply stirred.

The language barriers were breaking down rapidly. Many of our regular
visitors were females, and with Joe's help as an interpreter they were
soon able to ask questions. Their greatest curiosity hinged on the
fabulous care we gave our infants.

Although I wouldn't permit Sue to do it, several of our women began
using female natives for baby-sitters. This led to the first basic
behaviour change we had noticed. The females began to pay more attention
to their own offspring. It was as if they had just discovered the
pleasure of fondling their babies and watching them crawl and kick and
gurgle. Even after the first week they were still carrying them around,
finding choice morsels of fruit for them, fanning off the insects and
singing them to sleep with their new-found abilities to make music.

Benson noticed it and called a meeting of the secret six. He said, "Our
little program had better work this time or we are in for it. Apparently
this _koodi_ animal that Sam had the tussle with is the principal
population control, and now the mothers are packing their kids around
until they're old enough to fight off the _koodi_."

Donnegan shook his head. "Damned if I can find out where we slipped up.
Frost and I just finished a series of tests with native ova and human
sperm. They don't mix. Of course, we didn't expect them to, but what in
hell is the answer?"

I hadn't known of this project. I said, "You didn't think that our male
colonists--"

Benson scowled with exasperation. "We don't know what to think, Sam! We
sterilized 481 native males last fall, and the babies are just as thick
as ever."

I said, "Well, we got to 496 of them this time. That should do it for
sure. Joe says he'll keep a lookout for any males without the two stains
on his shoulder."

Benson narrowed his eyes. "You know, it strikes me that Joe is being
awfully helpful. What reason did you give him for wanting this
information?"

"He didn't ask," I said.

       *       *       *       *       *

Our 12-month year was composed of 37-day months, except February which
we shorted six days to make it come out even.

According to this calendar the "May-flies" came in July, just a month
before our first anniversary. The little winged insects were a seasonal
life-form, one more item that escaped the exploratory party, and for
which we were unprepared.

They came out of the north, and they struck us before we could take
shelter in the ship or our plastic-screened huts. They were a little
smaller than flying ants, and even their long wings were jet-black.
Their bites were infinitesimal, but each one smarted like a prick with a
hot needle.

In the midst of the confusion of rescuing babies and herding everyone in
doors, I noticed that all the natives had disappeared into the forest.
Everyone had suffered a hundred bites or more, and we were sorry,
swollen sights. Sue insisted that I cover myself and make a run for the
clinic to see if Dr. Bailey had any remedies for the bites. Richard
Joseph was crying loudly from the irritation, so I agreed.

It was only 75 yards to the clinic, and I made it without collecting
many more stings. But the doctors had nothing to offer. They were
dabbing various salves, astringents and pastes on test patches of their
own skin, but nothing seemed to have any effect at all.

"All we hope," said Sorenson, "is that the flies aren't
microbe-carriers."

I started out the door to return then stepped back and peered through
the screen. The forest was erupting with natives. They staggered into
the clearing, headed for the center of it and sank down as if with great
weariness. On and on they came until the ground among our buildings was
literally paved with their prone bodies.

"Poor devils." Bailey murmured as the clouds of flies continued to sweep
through our village. "Nothing we can do, though. I wonder why they come
out in the open? You'd think they had better protection in the trees."

I had no answers, so I covered my head again and made a dash for my own
hut. Inside I brushed off the clinging flies and stamped on them. "The
medics don't have any help for us," I said. Then I saw him.

Sue was struggling to hold Joe on his feet. His arms were draped loosely
over her shoulders, and for a second I couldn't decided whether he was
ill or making a pass at Sue.

I pulled him off her by one shoulder. He swung around and toppled into
my arms. Remarkably few insect bites showed under the transparent haze
of golden hair, but he reeked of tala.

"You're drunk," I yelled at him. "A lot of help you are at a time like
this!"

"Tala," he said from loose lips. "Much tala."

"You've had much tala, all right!" I said disgusted.

Sue said, "We've got to let him stay in here, Sam. The flies will eat
him alive out there." She went to the window and knocked the flies from
the outside of the screen. Then she screamed. I thought she had just
discovered the massed natives, but she kept on screaming until I went to
her and looked out.

In the late afternoon sun, fuzzy little brown animals were waddling out
of the forest, closing in on the 900 or more natives lying senseless in
the clearing. _Koodi!_ Dozens of them.

I forgot my screaming wife, my crying infant, the drunken wife-stealer
slumped on the floor. I forgot the torture of my own stings. All I
remember is snatching my pistol from its holster that hung by the door
and plunging out and pulling the trigger until fire ceased to come out
of it. Then I was kicking and smashing with a tree limb, and every blow
smashed one of the vile little ghouls into the grass. I thought I saw
Benson firing and kicking, but I blacked out before I could be sure.

I regained consciousness with the flies still keening in my ears. Sue
was calling my name and slapping me sharply in the face. Joe was trying
to pull me to my feet, but the last thing I remember is the both of us
collapsing to the ground.

       *       *       *       *       *

I awoke days later with a burning fever and gloriously drunken sensation
of floating. Joe brought a fruit to me when he saw I was stirring. I
drank the thin, tangy juice in one breath and sank back into a deep
sleep again.

My next drink came from the long, slender fingers of a pretty little
female native. This time it was water, and I stayed awake. Joe came in,
saw I was awake and came back in a few minutes with Benson and Dr.
Bailey.

They both looked terrible, Benson especially. Bailey said, "Take it
easy. Sue's at the clinic. She and the baby are all right, but you
damned near didn't make it."

Benson said, "Can you talk?"

I cleared my throat and decided I could. He waved Joe and the female
out. Then he and Bailey sat down beside me. I asked, "Any casualties?"

"Two of our babies and thirty-six native babies. Some of the _koodi_
came in after dark."

It sounded strange, Benson's listing native casualties with our own.

The memory of the _koodi_ attack brought a wave of nausea over me. I
said, "Benson, I'm sorry, but I'm all done trying to murder Joe's race.
I want no further part of it."

Benson's face was thin and drawn, and he stared at the floor. "If we
haven't murdered it already," he said, "there will be no more attempts
while I am in charge." He covered his face with his hands. "Bailey. Tell
him, Bailey."

The doctor's voice was gravelly and weak. "If it hadn't been for the
natives we'd all have died. The venom from the flies paralyzed everyone
the second day after the swarm hit us. The flies were gone the next
morning, but every soul in the colony passed out. Joe and his friends
took care of us, poured tala down our throats and fed us."

"But they were soused," I said.

"Their only defense against the flies. The little black devils left the
natives pretty well alone, and it appears that the tala was responsible.
Could be that the stuff is what neutralized the toxin, too. They must
have poured a gallon of it down me, judging from the empty skins by my
bed. At any rate, they kept us alive until we could get up and feed
ourselves."

"Why did they come into the clearing when they drank the tala?" I asked.

Bailey said, "Joe told us that the day he saw Sue kill the _koodi_ that
was attacking you, he got the idea that he should do something about
them himself. Through his efforts the natives no longer take the little
devils as an inevitable evil. They kill them wherever they find them
now. And when they had to get drunk to save themselves from the flies,
Joe passed the word for them to head for the clearing. The _koodi_
usually avoid the sunlight, but it was late in the afternoon. They came
anyway."

"Phil," I said, "did I see you out there with me, killing the little
bastards?"

He nodded silently.

"You had changed your mind about the natives at that time?"

"I--I suppose so. Don't rub it in, Sam. It's hard enough to live with
the thought of how wrong I was. All I can do now is pray that whatever
failed in our first try failed again. Joe's people have made the human
race look pretty dismal. They have every right to their planet, and if
we are foolish enough to go native, well--at least we have a stronger
survival instinct."

At that point Susan came in carrying Richard. He had the hiccoughs. Sue
kissed me. "Richard just drew his ration of sterile tala from the
clinic. He still has a slight fever. But thanks to Joe and Harmony--"

"Harmony? Who's that?"

"The native girl who helped Joe nurse us. Her name is really
Hah-ah-arm-ig-hin-ih-hee, or something like that. She answers to
Harmony, though."

And she did. Hearing her name the little golden girl came through the
door towing Joe by one hand.

I said, "One of your favorites, Joe?"

He ran a caressing, four-fingered hand over her shoulder. "I like her,"
he admitted. "She wants to call me husband like Sue calls you."

Bailey smiled. "It seems there is a new fad among the natives. Something
like monogamy, I understand."

I said, "What do you think of the idea, Joe?"

He thought it over. "I have not made up my mind."

Sue pressed him, "Why not marry Harmony, Joe?"

In the blunt manner in which he so often made his curious revelations,
Joe blurted out, "Because I am in much demand among all the females. It
is--very pleasant."

Bailey's eyes widened. He ordered, "Bend over, Joe."

Joe obliged so we could all examine his back. There were two brown
stains on his shoulder blades as there should be, but Bailey was not
satisfied. He poked a finger into them and examined the skin under the
hair. "Mango pitch!" he announced. "Stained clean down to the skin. Did
you do that, Joe?"

"Yes."

"Why?"

"I knew you would force me to go into the ship with the others if I
didn't have the stain."

Benson looked up, shocked. "Then you--you knew what we were trying to
do?"

"Yes. You and Samrogers spoke of it outside the hut one day. You thought
I was asleep. Some of your words puzzled me, so I stayed away from the
ship. Then I found out what they meant."

"But you helped us get the others to go into the ship!"

"It was what you wanted," Joe said simply. "Later, when we went south,
the females saw that only Joe's favorites continued to have babies. So
Joe became very--popular."

I said, "You mean they figured it out?"

Joe smiled. "Did you think we do not know about--" he paused to dredge
among his amazing store of human idioms, "--the facts of life?"

Bailey shook his head. "What a man! What a race! Think what they would
be if they had a human's survival instinct!"

"And thumbs," I added.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Test Colony, by Winston Marks

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE TEST COLONY ***

***** This file should be named 32676.txt or 32676.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/2/6/7/32676/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
