The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Invader, by Alfred Coppel

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Invader

Author: Alfred Coppel

Release Date: June 4, 2010 [EBook #32684]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE INVADER ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                              THE INVADER

                            By Alfred Coppel

[Transcriber Note: This etext was produced from Imagination Stories of
Science and Fantasy February 1953. Extensive research did not uncover
any evidence that the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]


[Sidenote: Invading Earth was going to be a cinch, the Triomed scout
decided. But to make certain he must study its inhabitants--as one of
them!]


The Triomed advanced stealthily across the floor of the dark cell toward
the sleeping figure huddled in the corner. After the long, lonely
voyage, the nearness to a host filled the Triomed with eager
anticipation.

The tiny spaceship that had carried him into this lush planetary system
far from the galaxy's heart lay well hidden behind him. So far as he
could tell, his descent had not been detected, and that was as it should
be--for he was a Triomed and a scientist. One of the finest in the
service of his dying race. Dying that is, until now, he thought. No
longer would the race of Triomeds weaken and die for lack of suitable
hosts. This third planet of the yellow sun was a paradise thick with
warm-blooded biped mammals....

       *       *       *       *       *

The sleeping creature stirred uneasily, as though sensing the approach
of danger. The Triomed froze into immobility. It was unlikely that he
could be seen, he knew, though the sense of sight was only a synthesized
abstraction to him. It was not one of his own proper senses, but he had
been able to detect at long distance that almost every living creature
on this planet received impressions through certain specialized organs
mounted on and within their structure. There were plants, of course, as
there were on Triom, but they were unimportant.

There were viruses, too, and he had been afraid when he had discovered
this fact that he had arrived too late. But the first attempts at
establishing communication had relieved the Triomed of his fears. The
indigenous viruses were primitive; not at all like his own illustrious
ancestors of ancient Triom.

The sleeping biped relaxed and the Triomed inched forward again, a flat,
almost two dimensional smear of glistening matter on the floor in front
of the biped.

From high above the planet's night side, the Triomed had sensed the
city. He had absorbed its shape and size and meaning while his craft
settled through the heavy, oxygen-rich air. It was not enough that his
instruments told of suitable hosts. He was a scientist and believed in
absolute proof. Also, he had been in space long--without the
satisfaction of a host--and he yearned for the rapport, the domination
of a warm-blooded creature.

There had been a dark segment in the brilliant pattern of the city. An
island of solitude amid the myriad confluences. It was there that he had
landed his tiny probe ship and hidden it among the thickly wooded
glades. Almost immediately he had sensed the nearness of many creatures.
Insects, plants, warm-blooded quadrupeds and bipeds. There had been
machines and buildings and winding roadways among the trees. Darkness
had covered his progress until at last he found himself near the
sleeping creature, ready to infiltrate and take command.

       *       *       *       *       *

The glistening shape elongated, became a thread-like tendril of almost
gossamer thickness. It touched the flesh of the sleeper and thrilled
with pleasure. Cautiously, the Triomed moved up the hairy leg, an
invisible strand of alien life close to the warm skin. Presently, the
strand found the opening it sought. It slithered imperceptibly into the
moist warmth of the sleeper's nostril, moved through the tear-duct into
the space behind the eyeball. Here it probed through muscle and membrane
along the base of the brain, seeking the pineal gland.

And found it, penetrated it, coiling like a microscopic serpent within
the gland. A surge of pleasure went through the Triomed. Here was
safety. The host was large, powerful and vibrant with life. Quickly, the
Triomed established dominance. It was shockingly easy. The creature's
mind was immature, primitive. Briefly it struggled and then died as the
alien poisoned the identity centers of the brain.

New sensations poured in through unfamiliar sense organs. Sounds of the
faraway city, small sounds from the many living creatures in the
darkness. Smells and sights and pressures from all about him presented
themselves--were evaluated and recorded in the atomic structure of the
Triomed.

He was now equipped, he reflected with satisfaction, to carry out
further exploration. In the guise of the indigenous biped he could roam
among the natives at will. He remained in a sitting position, however,
while he familiarized himself with his host.

He had two articulated appendages fixed to the trunk at a point near and
below the skull-case. These ended in complex extremities consisting of
five jointed fingers. The same pattern was repeated at the lower end of
the trunk, but the extremities were suited there for the carrying of the
creature's considerable weight. Within the trunk were the customary
viscera generally associated with warm-blooded beings: lungs,
intestines, stomach, liver, bladder, reproductive organs and assorted
ducted and ductless glands. It was apparent to the Triomed that his
present body was in excellent health. He was greatly pleased.

After some careful experiments, the Triomed rose. If there was a proper
method of egress from the cubicle in which he found himself, it was not
imprinted on the biped's brain. For a moment this gave the alien pause.
He could, of course, determine the proper method by a tedious process of
trial and error, but that would take time and he had no desire to waste
the hours of darkness. One wall, he noted, consisted of vertical risers
fixed in the substance of the floor and ceiling. Beyond, he could see
the darkling woods and the sky-glow of the city. The answer, then, was
simple force. He did not doubt there was strength enough in the host's
musculature to distort the risers.

His assumption was quite correct.

       *       *       *       *       *

Stepping through the bent risers, he picked his way along a narrow
walkway lined with cubicles similar to the one he had left. Within them,
dark shapes moved or lay sleeping. Some were alert, others were not. But
none gave an alarm. The Triomed reached the end of the walk, scaled a
fence easily and stood on a surface of wet grass that sloped away from
the low dark building toward the woods.

Behind him he heard a shout. A narrow beam of light pierced the night,
swinging to and fro with a searching motion. He had a fleeting glimpse
of a small biped running down the walk toward the cubicle he had
deserted.

The Triomed broke toward the wood with a long loping pace that covered
the ground with unbelievable swiftness. The probing light did not find
him. Once among the trees he paused and took his bearings. The woods
were not thick. He could see the lights of the city through the foliage.
They began at the very edge of the trees, where a wide open area could
be discerned. Wheeled vehicles moved past with breathtaking speed.

If there was pursuit, it was inefficient, for the Triomed moved through
the woods undisturbed until he stood at the edge of the avenue,
sheltered by the shadow of a large tree. Most of the traffic was
vehicular, he noted. There were few pedestrians. From the noise and odor
he classified the vehicles as being powered by internal combustion
engines burning hydro-carbons. Primitive. That was good, he reflected.
When the fleets of Triom descended on this planet, there would be no
science worthy of the name to oppose them.

He waited until there was an interval in the traffic, and then stepped
out confidently, crossing the avenue. As he reached the opposite side he
heard a screech of brakes and a garbled, choking sound. He did not turn
to discover the source of the disturbance until he had reached the
shelter of a building on the far side of the walk bordering the street.

A vehicle had stopped at an oblique angle to the lane in which it was
travelling, and its single occupant, a very pale-faced biped was
goggling stupidly in the direction of the hidden Triomed.

For the first time, the alien being felt a twinge of apprehension.
Certainly he had done nothing out of the ordinary in crossing the open
space on foot? But perhaps there were tribal taboos and traditions among
the natives that could not be ignored without attracting attention.

The Triomed promised himself that he would exercise more caution in such
matters. Too much depended on this reconnaissance to allow it to be
disturbed by carelessness.

He worked his way through the shadows between the many buildings until
the wide highway was far behind him. He was very aware of the teeming
life all about him--in the buildings, in the vehicles on the streets.
Still, some odd impulse that stemmed from the numbed brain of his host
rather than his own, kept him fairly hidden. This, he decided with
something akin to annoyance, was not as it should be. If his survey were
to be of any value, he must roam at will and without fear of detection,
secure in his disguise.

       *       *       *       *       *

Presently he came upon a street where streams of bipeds jostled one
another, each seemingly intent upon its own particular incomprehensible
errands. For a long while he watched from the shelter of an alley
doorway, classifying and integrating the information his host's sharp
eyes brought him. It was miraculous. Hosts of every size and description
were in abundance--an unlimited supply of them. Enough for the whole
population of Triom. It was beyond belief, but he could not doubt. And
this was but a single concentration. A single city. From the
stratosphere he had seen hundreds of similar cities. Paradise! He
envisioned the fleets of Triom descending, the Triomeds emerging and
infiltrating. The thoughts brought pride and anticipation. It had been
so easy....

He decided not to linger. He felt now that he had his proofs and that he
should return at once to his ship. Triom must be told immediately. The
communicator in the ship could carry the message as soon as the craft
reached a suitable distance from planetary mass. He would return, send
the ship aloft, dispatch his message and then return to his host to
await the others of his race.

His decision made, he stepped confidently out into the throng of bipeds,
seeking the shortest route back to his hidden craft.

The result was instantaneous and amazing.

The crowd drew back with a howling, shrieking noise, leaving him
standing in the center of a circle of dead white faces.

Behind the first row of bipeds, he could see others running in every
direction, and screaming at the top of their voices. The racket,
combined with the noises of the city, was most unpleasant. The Triomed
began to be afraid.

[Illustration]

He broke into a rapid walk, and the crowd parted before him with much
louder screeching. Here and there a biped, apparently braver than the
rest, made threatening motions with bundles or knotted fists. A package
struck him on the shoulder.

The Triomed began to run. He noted for the first time that he towered
head and shoulders over most of the bipeds nearby, and his host's brain
interpreted the smells of hate and fear all about him.

The crowd scattered wildly at his approach, but he was being followed.
Panic began to clutch at the alien. What had he done wrong? Somewhere a
wailing sound began--vehicles with glaring red lights swept past him
with vicious, explosive noises. He felt a stinging pain in one leg, and
glanced down to see it streaked with red.

Ahead of him a line of bipeds all clothed in identical blue sacs of
fabric had formed, spilling from the vehicles as they halted. The
Triomed stopped, sensing mortal danger. Behind him, the mob rumbled.
Ahead the blue bipeds stood holding artifacts that the Triomed did not
for an instant doubt were weapons.

No street opened on either side of him. He was trapped between the
weapons, the mob, and two tall buildings. He hesitated only for a
moment. With a desperate leap, he reached the second level of windows of
the building nearest him and clung there, gasping.

A white-faced creature appeared and began poking at him with a steel rod
that burned like fire when it touched his host's flesh. The creature
screamed shrilly all the while.

With a sob, the Triomed swung himself onto the window ledge and began
climbing upward, toward the roof of the building. It was slow work and
the pain in his leg and burned shoulder slowed him down. He dare not
free himself of his host now, for he was much too far from his ship to
be able to return in his natural form.

       *       *       *       *       *

There were searchlights in the street below, probing at him as he clung
to the sheer facade of the building. Panic drove him upward. A
continuous, wailing roar rose from the canyon below, a fear-laden
hideous cacophony. The Triomed felt himself weak with terror, part of
which was his host's and part of which stemmed from within himself. The
terror and fear of not knowing what had gone wrong and why he stood now
in such peril.

At last he reached the roof. He heaved himself over the parapet and lay
for a moment, flanks heaving painfully. Then he stiffened with a new
fear. He was not alone. The roof was occupied. A score or more of armed
bipeds blocked him into a triangular corner of the roof. He got to his
feet and stumbled backward. Their weapons were aimed at him. He
retreated until the parapet stopped him, warning of the sheer drop to
the street far below.

A figure separated itself from the armed mass. A flash of recognition
came--partially his own, partially his host's. It was the small biped he
had seen in the searchlight beam running toward the cubicle he had
deserted so long ago it seemed.

The small creature began speaking, making soft, soothing noises,
advancing all the while, a tiny glass vial in his hands.

Without knowing why, the Triomed felt his lips pull away from his teeth
in a snarl. He heard a deep, rumbling growling sound in his own throat.
The biped stopped, and the Triomed could smell his sudden fear.

He felt a surge of incomprehensible rage come over him--he crouched
menacingly.

The creature took a step closer. Another. The Triomed tensed.

The creature was within reach, extending the vial. The alien could see
that it was tipped with a sliver of steel. He sprang--

The weapons crashed. The alien felt the thudding impact of projectiles
penetrating the brain case. In a panic he began to extrude from the
pineal gland. If death overcame the host while he had rapport, he, too,
would die. And if he died, Triom would die.

He felt his huge body totter. There was another blast from the weapons
and he sensed the projectile coming--with what seemed to be agonizing
slowness to his quickened senses. It was spinning in the darkness. It
struck the eye, smashed it, moved inward, along the base of the
brain....

The Triomed felt one deep, searing agony that was his alone as the
bullet crushed him. The hot metal acrid touch was the last thing he knew
before death came....

       *       *       *       *       *

The policemen stood about in a circle, staring down in mixed awe and
relief at the huge body on the roof.

"I've seen him a dozen times in the park," one said. "He always seemed
so--so peaceable." He shook his head. "What in hell do you suppose came
over him?"

The keeper looked up from where he knelt over the deep, still chest,
bloody and riddled with bullets. "It happens like this sometimes," he
said. "You can never tell about gorillas."





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Invader, by Alfred Coppel

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE INVADER ***

***** This file should be named 32684.txt or 32684.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/2/6/8/32684/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
