The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Next Time We Die, by Robert Moore Williams

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Next Time We Die

Author: Robert Moore Williams

Release Date: June 4, 2010 [EBook #32683]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE NEXT TIME WE DIE ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                           The Next Time We Die

                         By ROBERT MOORE WILLIAMS

[Transcriber Note: This etext was produced from Amazing Stories February
1957. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
copyright on this publication was renewed.]


[Sidenote: _We journey to far places, driven on by ideals. We fight for
lost causes, sacrificing our lives because the things we fight for seem
worthwhile. But are we right? Are they worth being killed over? Perhaps.
Then again, maybe we'll know better--The Next Time We Die _]


Now in the nooning, with the sun high overhead and the shadows huddling
dispiritedly at their sides, the threat that existed in this wild desert
was completely invisible.

The girl, Nora Martin, said, "What I don't understand is why we were so
stupid as to come here in the first place. We could have stayed on Earth
and had homes and families." Becoming conscious of what she had said,
she hastily corrected herself. "I mean, each of us could have had a home
and a family."

Pike McLean shifted the muzzle of the Rangeley just a trifle, adjusting
it so that the cross hairs in the periscope sight covered the exact spot
where he expected, and hoped, the next native would appear. He tried to
dig the sand out of his eyes. Since he had sand on his hands, this only
got more of the gritty particles into his eyes. He wished fervidly for a
deep satisfying breath of the thick muggy air of Earth before he died.

"This air, there's not anything to it," he muttered.

       *       *       *       *       *

The girl glanced sharply at him. She had eyes that were as blue as the
skies of Earth on a sunny day. The dirt on her nose made her look human.
At this moment, the eyes had anger in them. Back of the anger were
unshed tears.

[Illustration]

"Did you hear what I said?" she repeated.

McLean shifted his long body so that it lay a little lower in the
depression in the sand. "I guess you came here because you're an
archeologist and you're getting paid to examine ruins. I came here
because I'm a roustabout who is supposed to be able to do anything,
which is what I'm getting paid for." He paused and removed an offending
grain of sand from his right eyelid. "Dying is not much," he continued.
"Why are you so frazzled about it? It doesn't even hurt, when you really
get to it, that is."

"You talk as if you have died before!"

"Why, I have," he answered, surprise in his voice. "Hundreds of times.
Since we first crawled out on the mud flats and grew feet and left our
gills behind us, that's a long time. We've been dying ever since, that's
for sure. And probably for a much longer time."

"I thought you were talking about reincarnation," the astonished
archeologist said.

"So I was," the roustabout answered. "They're only different approaches
and aspects of the same problem. We reincarnate in order to take another
crack at the puzzle of evolution. Some day we'll solve it! Then we will
fall heir to the farther stars instead of just this little old duck pond
of a solar system."

"You sound very sure of yourself. What proof--"

"It's in the book," McLean answered. "We're _homo sapiens_. And that
means something. The mud flats didn't stop us. We crawled off of them
and on to the high ground and into the forests and overran a planet. The
atom bomb didn't hold us up too long, even when we got to using it on
each other. Where in all that space--" His hand swept upward in an arc
that included all the vast expanse of stars dimly seen here on this
world even at high noon. "--is anything that can stop us, when we can
keep coming back to take another crack at the problem? Any problem, I
don't care what it is, can be solved if we can keep working at it long
enough!" Enthusiasm sounded in his voice, then faded out. He drew his
hand down. Two of the fingers were missing.

McLean stared at the ooze of blood and plasma and set his lips against
the pain. "That damned needle ray can sure knock a hunk out of a man,"
he said.

"Oh, Pike, why did you have to be so careless!" Sliding the pack from
her back, she opened it. Taking great care not to get her head above the
edge of the hole, she opened the first-aid kit and applied antiseptics
and bandages to the stumps of the two fingers. Alternately she scolded
and then soothed him.

"You do that real well," he said, approvingly. "You should have been a
mama, instead of an archeologist, and raised a whole slather of kids, so
you could bandage all their cuts and pat away all their bruises."

A longing as deep as the seas of Earth showed in her blue eyes.
"That--that was what I wanted. But I got side-tracked into a
profession." The longing was washed away in a film of sudden tears.

       *       *       *       *       *

McLean closed his lips even tighter. He applied one eye to the sight of
the Rangeley, now adjusted to function as a periscope. Level and
apparently free of all danger, the grim red sands swept away to the low
mountains in the distance. The air was so clear and so thin that he
could even see the ruins of the city that had been their destination
when they had left the ship. The city was a vast mass of tumbled masonry
sprawled on treeless, forgotten hills. On the sand nothing moved. Yet
death was there in front of him, and his eye had certainly passed over
it.

"The nice little foxes are all in their nice little holes," he said.

The girl made a wan effort to smile. "How are your fingers? I mean, do
they hurt much?"

"They feel like I don't have them." Grinning at his own joke, McLean
swung the sight of the Rangeley around to their desert buggy. The
over-size tires loomed up like huge rubber doughnuts sprouting
mysteriously out of the desert sand. The door of the car was invitingly
open.

"It's only a quarter of a mile," he said. "We could sprint that far. But
how could we run at all without legs?"

"We have legs," the girl said eagerly. "Let's try to make the car."

"We wouldn't have 'em, if we jumped out of this hole and started
running. The little foxes have sharp teeth."

"Oh." Her voice dropped as the color faded from her eyes. "Then what are
we going to do?"

"Stay here and hope they send out another desert car from the ship
looking for us. If we don't return in a reasonable time, they may become
curious about us."

"And if they don't come?"

"We'll try to out-fox the foxes."

"If we had a radio--"

"We do, but it's in our buggy. If we were there, we wouldn't need a
radio. The dur-steel body of the car would stop the beam from that
needle gun. How the hell does it happen that wild tribesmen, with no
science and no industry, living here in a desert, have a weapon like
that needle ray gun?"

"When they built their city there, they weren't desert tribesmen," the
girl explained. "They were going somewhere, then, and they had science
and at least light industry, and skilled workers. When they came back to
the desert, they left everything behind them except their weapons. A
primitive will always choose a weapon over anything else. He will value
it as he values his life, because that is what it is."

"Why did they come back to a desert?"

"That's one thing we expected to discover in their ruined city, Pike."
The girl's voice took on the patient tone of the expert instructing the
amateur. "War with a neighboring tribe, in which they were defeated,
might have been the reason. Change in climate might have been a factor.
Perhaps there were other reasons too, famine, pestilence. They started
up, then went back. This has happened so often that it seems to me that
the seeds of decay always sprout at the same time as the seeds of
greatness."

"I wish I were an archeologist and a philosopher, and understood all
those things," McLean said, longingly.

"You are a man, which is more important."

"Do you mean _male_?"

"No. Man. _M-a-n_." She spelled the word for him. "Man. The highest
level reached by the life force on Earth, to date. Or in the Solar
System, as we know it."

"Oh, you mean the top of the heap," McLean said. "Sure, we know that.
But the little foxes hiding in their nice little holes don't know it.
They don't think that being a man is so much." A thin sparkle of light
flickered through the air above his head as he spoke. He had the
impression that a crackling sound went with the death beam, like the
rustle of static in space. "See! That's what they think of us! Targets!"

       *       *       *       *       *

The girl dodged downward. McLean advised her not to be a sissie and
turned his attention to the sight of the Rangeley. Nothing was in sight.
This did not surprise him. He had not expected to see anything except
sand. "I betcha I'm looking right at two or three of those devils and
not seeing them," he grumbled.

"They are adept at protective coloration," the girl said. "Let me look."

She applied her eye to the scope of the Rangeley, moving it on its
mounting so that it swept across the sand. "There's one!" she said,
sudden excitement in her voice.

"Where?" McLean demanded, pushing her aside and put his eye to the
scope.

"Right where I have the sight centered. Can't you see that little bulge?
Right there." She started to stand up and point.

McLean jerked her backward and shoved her face into the sand. "Don't get
so excited that you start to stand up," he growled. Light sparkled
through the air above them.

"I forgot," the girl said, meekly. "Let me get my head up. You've got my
nose and mouth full of sand."

"Out here, you only forget once," the roustabout said, releasing her. "I
still don't see anything," he said, peering through the scope. He moved
aside as she pushed at his shoulder.

Again she studied the terrain. Making a minute adjustment of the sight,
she pulled the trigger. The Rangeley burped softly--it was a gas
operated gun--then three quick explosions took place out on the desert
where the explosive pellets hit. A wild yell followed. McLean got his
eye to the sight in time to see a tribesman spin crazily within fifty
feet of them. The fellow turned one last cartwheel, then collapsed into
a bundle of dead rags.

"You got one!" McLean yelled triumphantly.

"Did--did I? I'm sorry--I mean--" Her voice trailed choked with fear.

       *       *       *       *       *

He looked quickly at her. The girl's eyes were filled with tears. "I
didn't really mean to do it," she blubbered.

"Cut out that damned caterwauling!" he ordered. "This is war. The fact
that just you and me, and some wild Martian Indians, are involved in
this war doesn't make it any less deadly. If we don't get them, they'll
get us." He held up his bandaged hand. "Do you think the tribesman who
did that was after my fingers? He wasn't! What he wanted was my head!"

"All right, all right, I understand this intellectually, it's just that
my emotions got involved."

"Get them uninvolved," he said. "How could you see that Martian when I
couldn't?"

"Better ability to differentiate colors, probably," the girl answered.
"Women can usually see colors better than men. That was the way I picked
him out."

"Do some more differentiating between colors," he invited, waving her
back to the sight of the Rangeley. "Maybe, by Harry, we'll get out of
here alive after all!" Hope surged in his voice. "If we do--"

"If we do, then what?" the girl asked.

He shook his head. "If we do get out, I couldn't tell you anyhow.
There's no point in talking. But in case we don't get out, I want you to
know that you're a mighty nice kid."

"Well--thanks." Her eyes were deep blue again, like the skies of Earth.
She moved toward him.

"Hey, what did you do that for?"

"Just an impulse. I always kiss men who tell me I'm a nice kid."

"Nice kid, nice kid, nice kid," McLean said.

"You're too eager." The blush on her cheeks was visible through the
sand. Hastily she applied her eye to the sight of the Rangeley. McLean
sighed. He had never had a girl. It seemed to him that fate was playing
him a cruel joke to try to give him one under these conditions, in a
hole in the sand with wild Martian tribesmen surrounding him. He
mentally estimated the distance to the desert buggy, considered their
chances of making this trip and arriving alive. He was shaking his head
at his own estimate when the Rangeley burped again.

"I missed!" the girl said. "Oh! Here he comes!"

McLean shoved her away from the sight. The Martian was moving toward
them, fast. Instead of a gun, he had a spear.

"You didn't miss," the roustabout said. "You hit him but you only
wounded him. This is his death charge!"

       *       *       *       *       *

He pressed the trigger of the Rangeley. The gun burped twice. In the
distance the exploding slugs threw up small geysers in the sand. The
native kept coming. In the sight, he looked to be ten feet tall.
Vaulting the Rangeley, he seemed to grow even more in stature. He
screamed at the top of his lungs as he thrust downward with the spear.

McLean shoved the girl away from him, rolled in the other direction. He
caught a glimpse of a metal spear point burying itself in the sand in
the exact spot where he had been lying. The roustabout wrapped both arms
around the legs of the Martian and yanked hard. The fellow came down, on
top of McLean. The human shoved him aside.

The Martian was a twisting, squirming, raging, biting, clawing, kicking
wild tangle of knobby knees and knobbier elbows. Whichever of these
knobby joints hit, it hurt. The fellow had a knife in his belt, which he
was struggling to get free. McLean, seeing the knife, was trying equally
hard to keep him from getting it.

The human caught the hilt of the knife with his left hand. With his
right fist, he struck at the native's stomach. Grunting, the Martian
opened his mouth and tried to bite McLean. The roustabout, no stranger
to this kind of fighting, butted him in the open mouth with the top of
his head, then struck again, savagely, at the stomach. He felt his fist
sink home in the leathery tissue there.

The native grunted and went limp. McLean jerked the knife from its
scabbard. He did not have to use it. A series of fine tremors passing
through his body, the Martian was dying. The explosive slug from the
Rangeley had finally done its work. With relief McLean let the body
drop.

       *       *       *       *       *

McLean wiped sweat and sand from his face. "That was the death charge,
all right. But you didn't miss. See--" He pointed to the wound in the
Martian's chest.

The Rangeley stopped burping as the girl took her eyes from the sight
and looked around. Glancing at the Martian, she hastily averted her
face. An instant later, she was back at the sight. The Rangeley began
burping again.

McLean had the impression that all the time he had been fighting with
the Martian, the Rangeley had been burping.

She had kept the gun going!

There was something he wanted to say to this archaeologist. He waited
until he had enough breath to say it.

"You're all right," he said at last. "I mean you use your head and keep
the others holed up while I fight this one."

She flashed a smile at him. "They're not holed up, they're running," she
answered.

McLean lifted his head above the level of the hole. A corpse was
sprawled almost at the muzzle of the Rangeley. A second lay fifty feet
away. A third was perhaps a hundred yards distant.

While he had been fighting the berserk Martian, the others had seized
the opportunity to charge.

"Good girl! You saved our necks." He watched the running tribesmen. She
was keeping the sand at their heels thoroughly stirred up with slugs
from the Rangeley.

"Wonderful!" McLean breathed. "Lift your sights just a little--"

The Rangeley went into silence. Looking down, he saw that her shoulders
were shaking with sobs.

"I know how you feel," he said, gently. "But you had to do it, to save
our necks. Come on! Let's get back to our car while they're still
running and we have the chance!" He swung into action.

       *       *       *       *       *

Collapsing the sight into place, he swung the Rangeley and its tripod
mounting over his shoulder. Catching the girl by one hand, he began to
run.

To both, the car looked like heaven. It was that, and more. Here in this
desert each had found in the other something that he had searched for
all his life and had not found. There was heaven in this thought. McLean
could hear the girl panting as she ran beside him, but she was also
laughing. He began to laugh too, from pure happiness. He squeezed her
hand and she squeezed back.

His laughter went into quick silence as he saw the tube of the needle
ray gun projecting past the rear tire of the desert car. The bright,
baleful eye of a Martian crouching there was visible behind the weapon.

"It's a trap!" he gasped. "They ran on purpose, knowing we would beat it
to our car as soon as they were gone."

Skidding to a halt, he tried to bring the Rangeley off his shoulder. The
needle ray gun winked at him. He coughed and went down in the sand.

The gun winked again, spitting its bright eye of light at the girl. She
went down like a falling doll.

McLean pulled himself up on one knee and one hand. There was a hole in
his chest as big as his fist, but there was no pain. The high energy
radiation from the needle gun seared the nerve endings so that no
sensations were transmitted.

The roustabout shook his fist at the native crouched under the car.

"You got us this time," he yelled. "But we'll be back again. You can't
lick us. We'll get you if it takes another million years." The drive
that had brought _homo sapiens_ up from the mud flats was in his voice.

His head began to swim. He took another deep breath. Beside him, the
girl lay completely silent. Only her eyes showed that she knew what had
happened.

McLean looked at her. There was still something that he wanted to say.
His mind was fogging and he had difficulty in finding the words.

"The next time through, I want to meet you earlier," he said at last. "I
want us to have the chance we missed this trip, of a home and a bunch
of--" He coughed. "And a bunch of kids," he ended.

The girl said nothing. She was beyond the ability to speak. But she
understood him. The glow that came into her eyes made them as beautiful,
and as full of promise, as the skies of Earth.

McLean quietly laid down.

The returning tribesmen danced their wild victory dance around the two
humans. Level and bare, the endless sands of Mars stretched far away.





End of Project Gutenberg's The Next Time We Die, by Robert Moore Williams

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE NEXT TIME WE DIE ***

***** This file should be named 32683.txt or 32683.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/2/6/8/32683/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
