The Project Gutenberg EBook of A Woman's Place, by Mark Irvin Clifton

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: A Woman's Place

Author: Mark Irvin Clifton

Illustrator: EMSH

Release Date: June 16, 2010 [EBook #32833]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A WOMAN'S PLACE ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                          A Woman's Place

                          By MARK CLIFTON

                        Illustrated by EMSH

[Transcriber Note: This etext was produced from Galaxy Science Fiction
May 1955. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
copyright on this publication was renewed.]


[Sidenote: Home is where you hang up your spaceship--that is, if you
have any Miss Kitty along!]


It was the speaking of Miss Kitty's name which half roused her from
sleep. She eased her angular body into a more comfortable position in
the sack. Still more asleep than awake, her mind reflected tartly that
in this lifeboat, hurtling away from their wrecked spaceship back to
Earth, the sleeping accommodation was quite appropriately named. On
another mental level, she tried to hear more of what was being said
about her. Naturally, hearing one's name spoken, one would.

"We're going to have to tell Miss Kitty as soon as she wakes up." It was
Sam Eade talking to Lt. Harper--the two men who had escaped with her.

"Yes, Sam," the lieutenant answered. "What we've suspected all along is
pretty definite now."

Still drowsing, she wondered, without any real interest, what they felt
they must tell her. But the other level of her mind was more real. She
wondered how she looked to these two young men while she slept. Did she
sleep with her mouth open? Did her tiara slip while she snored?

       *       *       *       *       *

Vividly, as in full dreaming, she slipped back into the remembered scene
which had given birth to the phrase. At some social gathering she had
been about to enter a room. She'd overheard her name spoken then, too.

"Miss Kitty is probably a cute enough name when you're young," the catty
woman was saying. "But at her age!"

"Well, I suppose you might say she's kept it for professional reasons,"
the other woman had answered with a false tolerance. "A school teacher,
wanting to be cozy with her kiddies, just a big sister." The tolerance
was too thin, it broke away. "Kind of pathetic, I think. She's so plain,
so very typical of an old maid school teacher. She's just the kind to
keep a name like Miss Kitty."

"What gets me," the first one scoffed, "is her pride in having such a
brilliant mind--if she really does have one. All those academic degrees.
She wears them on every occasion, like a tiara!"

She had drawn back from the door. But in her instant and habitual
introspection, she realized she was less offended than perversely
pleased because, obviously, they were jealous of her intellectual
accomplishments, her ability to meet men on their own ground,
intellectually as good a man as any man.

The half dream drowsiness was sharply washed away by the belated impact
of Sam Eade's question to Lt. Harper. Reality flashed on, and she was
suddenly wide awake in the lifeboat heading back to Earth.

[Illustration]

"What is it you must tell me?" She spoke loudly and crisply to the men's
broad backs where they sat in front of the instrument panel. The
implication of the question, itself, that they had been holding
something back....

Lt. Harper turned slowly around in his seat and looked at her with that
detested expression of amused tolerance which his kind of adult male
affected toward females. He was the dark, ruggedly handsome type, the
kind who took it for granted that women should fawn over him. The kind
who would speak the fatuous cliche that a woman's place was in the home,
not gallivanting off to teach colonists' children on the fourth planet
of Procyon. Still, perhaps she was unjust, she hardly knew the man.

"Oh, you awake, Miss Kitty?" he asked easily. His tone, as always, was
diffident, respectful toward her. Odd, she resented that respect from
him, when she would have resented lack of it even more.

"Certainly," she snapped. "What is it you must tell me?"

"When you're dressed, freshened up a bit," he answered, not evasively,
but as if it could wait.

       *       *       *       *       *

She started to insist, but he had already turned back to the nose window
to study the starry sky and the huge misty green ball of Earth in front
of them. Sam Eade, the radioman, was intently twisting the dials on his
set with a puckered frown between his blond eyebrows. He was an entirely
different type, tall, blond, but just as fatuously masculine, as
arrogantly handsome. Probably neither one of them had an ounce of
brains--handsome people so seldom needed to develop mental ability.

Sam, too, turned his face farther away from her. Both backs told her
plainly that she could dress, take care of her needs, with as much
privacy as the lifeboat could allow anybody.

Not that it would take her long. She'd worn coveralls since the
catastrophe, saving the dress she'd had on for landing on Earth. They'd
had to leave most of her luggage behind. The lieutenant had insisted on
taking up most of the spare space in the lifeboat with that dismantled
space warper from the wreck of their ship.

She combed her short graying hair back of her ears, and used a little
water sparingly to brush her teeth. Perhaps it had been a quixotic
thing, her giving up a secure teaching post on Earth to go out to
Procyon IV. Except that she'd dreamed about a new colony where the
rising generation, under her influence, would value intellect--with the
girls no different from the boys. Perhaps it had been even sillier to
take a cabin on a freighter, the only passenger with a crew of four men.
But men did not intimidate her, and on a regular passenger ship she'd
have been bored stiff by having to associate with the women.

Two of the men....

It wasn't quite clear to her, even yet, what had happened. They'd used
the normal drive to get clear of regular solar shipping lanes. The
warning bell had rung that they were about to warp into hyperspace, a
mechanism which canceled out distance and made the trip in apparent time
no more than an overnight jaunt to Mars. There was a grinding
shudder--then a twisted ship which looked as if some giant had taken a
wet rag and torqued it to squeeze out the water. Lt. Harper and Sam had
got her out of her cabin, and finally into the lifeboat which was only
partly crippled.

The other two men of the crew....

She zipped up the front of her coveralls with a crisp gesture, as if to
snap off the vision. She would show no weakness in front of these two
men. She had no weakness to show!

"All right, gentlemen," she said incisively to their backs. "Now. What
is it I must be told?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Lt. Harper pointed to the ball of Earth so close ahead. It was huge,
almost filling the sky in front of them. The misty atmosphere blurred
outlines slightly, but she could make out the Eastern halves of North
and South America clearly. The Western portions were still in dim
darkness.

"See anything wrong, Miss Kitty?" the lieutenant asked quietly.

She looked more closely, sensing a possible trap in his question, a
revealment of her lack of knowledge.

"I'm not an authority on celestial geography," she said cautiously,
academically. "But obviously the maps I've seen were not accurate in
showing the true continental proportions." She pointed to a small chart
hanging on the side wall. "This map shows Florida, for example, a much
longer peninsula than it actually is. A number of things like that. I
don't see anything else wrong, but, of course, it's not my field of
knowledge."

Lt. Harper looked at her approvingly, the kind of look she gave a bright
pupil who'd been especially discerning.

"Only it's not the map that's wrong, Miss Kitty," he said. "It is _my_
field of knowledge, and I've seen those continental outlines hundreds of
times. They always corresponded to the map ... before."

She looked at him without comprehension.

"Not only that," Sam Eade entered the conversation. "As soon as we were
clear of the wreck, Lt. Harper took a fix on stars and constellations.
He's an astrogator. He knows his business. And they were wrong, too.
Just a little wrong, here and there, but enough. And even more than
that. On a tight beam, I should have been able to make a connection with
Earth headquarters on this set. And I haven't yet got communication, and
we know there's nothing wrong with this set."

"Sam knows his business, too, Miss Kitty," Lt. Harper said. "If he can't
get communication, it's because there isn't any."

She looked wide-eyed from one to the other. For once, she was more
concerned with a problem than with concealing her ignorance about it.

"It means," the lieutenant said, as if he were answering a question she
hadn't yet asked, "that the Earth we are returning to is not the Earth
we left."

"I don't understand," she gasped.

"There's a theory," Lt. Harper answered slowly. "Heretofore it has been
considered only a mathematical abstraction, and having no counterpart in
reality. The theory of multiple dimensions." She looked at him closely,
and in her habitual ambivalence of thought reflected that he sounded
much more intelligent than she had suspected.

"I've read about that," she answered.

He looked relieved, and threw a quick look at Sam. Apparently he had
underestimated her intelligence, too--in spite of all her degrees.

       *       *       *       *       *

"We never thought it could be real," he emphasized. "But the theory was
that multiple universes lay side by side, perhaps each an instant's time
away from the other. The only thing I can see is that some flaw in the
space warper threw us out of our dimension into another one closely
adjacent--not far enough for things to be totally different, just
different enough that the duplication isn't identical. It's Earth, but
it's not our Earth. It's a New Earth, one we don't know anything about."

"In another few hours, we'll be entering the atmosphere," Sam put in,
"and we don't know what we'll find. We thought you ought to know."

She flared in exasperation at the simple assumption of male arrogance.

"Of course I should know!" she snapped back. "I am not one of your
little bits of blonde, empty-headed fluff to be protected by strong
males! I should have been told immediately!"

Lt. Harper looked at Sam with a broad grin. It was amusement, but it was
more--a confirmation that they could depend on her to take it in her
stride--an approval. Apparently, they had discussed more things about
her than she'd overheard, while she slept. He didn't turn off the grin
when he looked directly at her.

"What could you have done about it, if we had told you, Miss Kitty?" he
asked mildly.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was not the same Earth. The charts and maps had not been wrong. Her
tentative theory that perhaps there were vision flaws in the plastic
nose window which had not stood up.

The continents, the lakes, the rivers--the topography really was
distorted. Now there was the Mississippi River, one spot swinging rather
too widely to the East. The Great Lakes were one huge inland sea. The
Gulf of Mexico swung high up into what had once been Alabama and
Georgia.

There was no New Orleans, shipping center of the world, headquarters of
Space.

There were no cities anywhere up and down the Mississippi. Where St.
Louis should have been, there was virgin forest. As they dropped down
into the upper reaches of atmosphere, experiencing the familiar and
sometimes nauseating reference shift from ahead to below, there had been
no New York to the East, no San Francisco to the West. There had been no
Boulder Dam, no Tennessee Valley project, no continuous hydroelectric
installations running the entire length of the Mississippi, where the
strength of the Father of the Waters had finally been harnessed for Man.
There were no thin lines of highways, no paint-brush strokes of smoke
against the canvas of the Gulf of Mexico to denote steamers, for atomic
power was still not available to all.

On this New Earth, Man could not yet have reached a state of complex
technology.

And as they dropped lower still, through their telescope sights, they
saw no canoes on the river or the feeder streams. They saw no huts along
the river shore, no thin streamers of wood smoke from huts hidden under
the trees along the bayous. New Earth was purple and blue, then shading
into green as they dropped lower. They sighted a deer drinking at the
edge of a pool.

But there was no trace of Man.

"If there are no scars, no defacements upon this forest primeval," Miss
Kitty said didactically, "then Man has not evolved on New Earth." Since
it was spoken in the tone of an axiom, and there was no evidence to
refute it, neither of the two men felt like arguing the matter.

       *       *       *       *       *

They were low enough now that they were flying horizontally rather than
dropping vertically. They were still searching for traces of some kind
of artifacts. They were also searching, Lt. Harper advised them at last,
for a suitable place to land. They wanted a higher ground than the delta
country so they might be free of insect pests, assuming there were some
since deer could be seen throwing their heads back along their sides as
if to chase away flies. They wanted higher ground with a stream of water
going over falls to supplement their limited power in the lifeship. On
the chance there were fish, it would be nice to be handy to a lake. A
forest for game. A level ground for a permanent camp.

Since they were here, and it might be some time before they could figure
out a way to return to Old Earth, they may as well make the best of it.

They found the kind of place they wanted, a little to the west of the
Mississippi. They grounded the lifeship at the edge of a natural
clearing beside a lake where a stream of sparkling water dropped from a
rock ledge.

They settled the ship on the springy turf, then sat and looked at one
another as if they were suddenly all strangers. Wordlessly, Lt. Harper
got up and opened the door of the lifeship. He threw down the hinged
metal steps. He stood back. Miss Kitty went through the door first and
down the steps. The two men followed.

They stood on the ground of New Earth, and looked at one another the way
they had in the ship. In the minds of each there was the thought that
some kind of a ceremonial speech should be made, but no one volunteered
it.

"I suppose we should have a campfire," Miss Kitty said doubtfully.

They did not realize it at the time, but it was the most effective
speech which could have been devised. It was a symbol. Man had
discovered and taken possession of New Earth. His instinctive thought
was to place his brand upon it, an artificial fire.

All of them missed the significance of the fact that it was Miss Kitty
who had made the first move in the domestication of this New Earth.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the weeks which followed, Miss Kitty began to be dimly aware of the
significance. At first they had lived a sort of Robinson Crusoe kind of
life, leaning pretty heavily upon the stores of the liferaft.

It had been she who had converted it over into more of the Swiss Family
Robinson pattern of making use of the resources about them.

The resources were abundant, bountiful. Yet the two men seemed little
interested, and appeared content to live off the stores within the
liferaft. They devoted almost all their time, except that little for
bringing up firewood and trapping game, to fiddling with that gadget
they called a warp motor. They were trying to hook it up to the radio
sets, they said.

Miss Kitty detested women who nagged at men, but she felt compelled to
point out that this was the fall season upon New Earth, and winter would
soon be upon them. It should not be a severe winter at this latitude,
but they must be prepared for it with something more substantial than
her uncomfortable sleeping place in the liferaft; nor would the two of
them continue to enjoy sleeping out under the trees, if a blanket of
snow fell some night.

"I was hoping we could be back home before winter sets in, Miss Kitty,"
Lt. Harper apologized mildly.

She had not nagged them. She had simply shut her lips and walked away.

The next day they began cutting logs.

It was odd, the basic pleasure she felt in seeing the sides of the cabin
start to take form. Certainly she was not domestic by nature. And this
could, in no sense, be considered a home. Still, she felt it might have
gone up faster, if the men had used their muscles--their brute
strength--rather than spend so much futile time trying to devise power
tools.

They were also inclined to talk too much about warping radio wave bands
through cross sections of sinowaves, and to drop their work on the cabin
in favor of spending long hours trying new hookups.

But Miss Kitty never nagged about it. She had even tried to follow some
of the theory, to share in their efforts to put such theory into
practice, to be just a third fellow. Instead she found her thoughts
wandering to how an oven could be constructed so she could bake and
roast meats instead of broiling and frying them over an open fire.

Game was plentiful, fish seemed to be begging for the hook. Every day,
without going too far away from camp, she found new foods; watercress,
mustard greens, wild turnips, wild onions, occasionally a turkey nest
with eggs still edible, hollow trees where wild bees had stored honey,
persimmons still astringent, but promising incredibly sweet and
delicious flavor when frost struck them, chinquapin, a kind of chestnut,
black walnuts. There was no end to what the country provided. Yet the
men, instead of laying in winter stores, spent their time with the warp
motor.

       *       *       *       *       *

Without meaning to, Miss Kitty interrupted an explanation of Lt.
Harper's on how they were calibrating the torquing degrees. She told him
that he and Sam simply must help her harvest a hillside patch of wild
maise she had found, before the rains came and ruined all the grain with
mold, or the migrating birds ate it all.

The cabin they were erecting would contain only two rooms--a large
general room for cooking, eating, visiting, such as an old-fashioned
farm kitchen had once been. A little room, opening off it, would be her
sleeping room. She raised her eyebrows questioningly, and Sam explained
they would build a small, separate bunkhouse for himself and Lt. Harper.

She had a curious sense of displeasure at the arrangement. She knew she
should be pleased at their understanding of the need for privacy. There
was no point in becoming primitive savages. She should be grateful that
they shared her determination to preserve the civilized codes. She told
herself, rather severely, that the preservation of civilized mores was
extremely important. And she brought herself up short with a shocking
question, equal to a slap in the face.

_Why?_

She realized then she had intuitively known from the first that they
would never get back to Old Earth. Her instincts had been functioning,
insuring their lives, where intellect had failed them completely. She
tried to laugh scornfully at herself, in feminist tradition. Imagine!
Katheryn Kittredge, Career Woman, devoted to the intellectual
advancement of Man, thinking that mere cooking and cleaning and mending
was the supremely important thing.

But she failed in her efforts to deride herself. The intellectual
discussions among the small groups of intelligent girls back on Old
Earth were far away and meaningless. She discovered she was a little
proud and strangely contented that she could prepare edible food.
Certainly the two men were not talented; and someone had to accept the
responsibility for a halfway decent domestic standard and comfort.

As, for example, with the walls of the cabin halfway up, it was
necessary to point out that while they may be going to put the little
cookstove--welded together out of metal scrap--in the cabin, there was
no provision for a fireplace. How would they keep warm through the long
winter months this year, and in the years to come?

Lt. Harper had started to say something. Then he shrugged and a hopeless
look came over his face.

"Perhaps you are right, Miss Kitty," he said humbly. "It may be spring,
at that, before we can finish trying the more obvious combinations.
We're trying to...." He broke off, turned away, and began to mark off
the spot where they would saw down through the logs to fit in a
fireplace.

       *       *       *       *       *

Later that day, she overheard him tell Sam that, theoretically at least,
there could be millions of versions of the Earth, each removed an
infinitesimal point from the next. There was the chance the flaw in the
torque motor, which still eluded him, might not automatically take them
back to the right cross-section, even if he found it. They might have to
make an incredible number of trials, and then again they might hit it on
the very next combination.

"And you might not!" she cut into the conversation, with perhaps more
acid in her voice than she intended. "It might not be your next, nor
tomorrow, nor next spring--nor ever!"

Odd that she had felt an obscure satisfaction at the stricken looks on
their faces when she had said it. Yet they had it coming to them. It was
time someone shocked them into a sense of reality. It took a woman to be
a realist. She had already faced the possibility and was reconciled to
it. They were still living in an impossible dream.

Still she was sorry. She was sorry in the way she had always regretted
having to make a bad boy in kindergarten go stand with his face to the
wall. She tried to make up for it that evening.

[Illustration]

"I understand," she said as they sat near the campfire outside the
half-finished cabin. "You alter the torque, then try the various radio
wave bands in the new position."

They both looked at her, a little surprised.

"It must be a slow and tedious procedure," she continued.

"Very," Sam said with a groan.

A shifting air current, carrying the sound of the waterfall, gave her an
idea.

"Too bad you can't borrow the practice of Tibetan monks," she mused.
"They tie their prayers to a wheel, set it in a running stream. Every
turn of the wheel is a prayer sent up to their gods. That way they can
get their praying done for them while they go about the more urgent
matters of providing a living for themselves and their families."

She hadn't meant it to be so pointed, implying that all they were doing
was sending up futile prayers to unheeding gods, implying they should be
giving more attention to setting in winter stores. But even so....

"Miss Kitty," Sam said in a kind of awe. "You are a wonderful woman!"

In spite of her sudden flush of pleasure, she was irritated. As pointed
as she had made it, he had missed it.

[Illustration]

He turned and began talking excitedly to Lt. Harper. Yes, of course,
they could rig up an automatic method instead of doing it by hand. It
could be done faster and more smoothly with electric motors, but the
idea was the same. If Lt. Harper could rig a trip to kick the warp over
another notch each time, they could run it night and day. Just let some
kind of alarm bell start ringing, if they hit anything at the other end!

The two of them jumped to their feet then, grabbed her arms, squeezed
them, and rushed away to the little shed they'd constructed beside the
lifeship to hold some of their scattered equipment.

She felt vaguely regretful that she had mentioned it.

       *       *       *       *       *

Still she gained a great deal. The men finished the cabin in a hurry
after that, and they put up their own bunkhouse in less than a week.
Both jobs were obviously not done by experts, and she had fussed at
them, although not unkindly, because she had had to chink such wide
cracks with a mixture of clay and dried grass.

She moved into the larger cabin, discovered a dozen roof leaks during
the first hard rain they'd had; got them patched, began molding clay
into dishes and containers, started pressuring the boys to build her a
ceramics kiln, began to think about how their clothes would eventually
wear out and how she would have to find some way to weave cloth to
replace them. Day by day she was less irritable, as the boys settled
into a routine.

"I do believe," she said to herself one day, "I would be disappointed if
they found a way back!" She straightened up and almost spilled the
container of wild rice she had been garnering from the swampy spot at
the upper reaches of the lake. "Why! The very idea of saying such a
thing, Katheryn Kittredge!" But her heart was not in the self chiding.

But what reason, in heaven's name, would they have for staying here?
Three people, marooned, growing old, dying one by one. There was no
chance for Man's survival here. From the evidence about them, they had
come to the conclusion that on this New Earth, in the tree of evolution,
the bud to grow into a limb of primates had never formed.

She turned and looked at the tall, straight pines ahead of her. She saw
the deciduous hardwoods, now gold and red, to one side of her. Behind
her the lake was teeming with fish. The spicy smell of fall was all
around her, and a stray breeze brought a scent of grapes she had
overlooked when she was gathering all she could find to make a wine to
pleasantly surprise the boys.

She thought of the flock of wild chickens which had learned to hang
around the cabin for scraps of food, the grunting lazy pigs, grown quite
tame, begging her to find their acorns for them, the nanny goat with two
half-grown kids Lt. Harper had brought back from a solitary walk he had
taken.

New Earth was truly a paradise--and all to be wasted if there were not
Man to appreciate it truly.

A thought knocked at her mind, but she resolutely shut it out, refused
it even silent verbalization.

Yet, while she stooped over again and busied her hands with stripping
the rice from the stalks without cutting them on the sharp dry leaves,
she found herself thinking about Mendelian law. Line breeding from
father to daughter, or brother to sister--in domestic animals, of
course--was all right in fixing desirable traits, providing certain
recessives in both the dam and the sire did not thus become dominant.

"There, Katheryn Kittredge," she mumbled with satisfaction. "Assuming
the responsibilities of domesticity has not made you forget what you
learned."

But the danger of fixing recessives into dominants through inbreeding
was even less with half-brothers and sisters. Now daughters by
one--er--sire could be bred to another sire to get only a quarter
relationship to a similar cross from the other father--er--sire. She
must work it out with a stylus in smooth clay. The boys had preempted
every scrap of paper for their pointless calculations. But she could
remember it, and it would be valuable in breeding up a desirable
barnyard stock.

Yet it was odd that she assumed two males and only one female!

       *       *       *       *       *

Then and there, standing ankle deep in the bog of wild rice, muddy to
her knees in her torn coveralls, slapping at persistent mosquitoes, she
came to terms with herself. In the back of her mind she had known it all
the time. All this was without meaning unless there was Man--and a
continuity of Man. Even so little as this gathering of wild rice, before
the migrating ducks got it, was without meaning, if it were merely to
stave off death from a purposeless existence. If there were no other
fate for them than eventually to die, without posterity, then they might
as well die tomorrow, today, now.

The men were still living in a dream of getting back. No doubt their
lusting appetites were driving them to get back to their brazen,
heavy-breasted, languorous-eyed hussies who pandered to all comers
without shame! Miss Kitty was astonished at her sudden vehemence, the
red wave of fury which swept over her.

But of course she was right. That was their urgent drive. "A male human
is nothing more than a sex machine!" Wasn't that what her roommate at
college had once said? Or was it her maiden aunt who had dominated her
widowed mother and herself through all the years she was growing up?
What did it matter who said it? She knew it was true. No wonder they
were so anxious to get back to Old Earth! Her lip lifted in cynical
scorn.

"You don't dare leave a young girl alone with a boy for five minutes,"
her aunt had once complained bitterly. "All they ever think about
is...." her voice had dropped to a whisper and she had given that
significant look to Katheryn's mother. But Katheryn had known what she
meant, of course.

And it was true of all men.

Women, back on Old Earth, had looked at her with pity and a little
contempt, because she had never, she had never.... But you didn't have
to have first hand experience to know. She had authoritative knowledge
gleaned from reading between the lines of the very best text books on
abnormal psychology. She hadn't had to read between the lines of sundry
surveys and reports. And if there had been no organized study at all,
the movies, the TV, the published better fiction--all of it centered
around that one theme--that one, alone, romanticize it or obscure it
though they might.

It was all men ever thought about. And many women pandered to it--those
sultry, shameless, undulating....

But Sam and Lt. Harper? It had been almost two months now since they had
left Earth and those vile blondes. How had they restrained themselves
during all this time!

Her fuming anger was suddenly overwhelmed by a warm rush of gratitude, a
sympathy which brought a gush of tears into her eyes to stream down her
cheeks. How blind she had been. Of course! They were still bound by
their gentleman's Word of Honor, given to her on that first night in the
lifeship.

What splendid men! All right, so they had their faults; a little
impractical, dreamers all, but with such nobility of character, truly
they were fit to be the fathers of a proud and noble race. And, in time,
with herself to shape and guide them....

She straightened her aching back from bending over the rice reeds,
thrust out her scrawny chest, and breathed deeply. She lifted her chin
resolutely.

"Katheryn Kittredge," she said firmly. "A woman's place is more than
merely cooking and cleaning and mending!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Supper, that evening, was a dinner, a special dinner. She set before the
two men a whole roast young tom turkey, with a touch of frosted
persimmons mixed with wild honey to enliven the light meat. There was a
dressing of boiled maise and wild rice, seasoned with wild onion and
thyme. There were little red tomatoes, tough but tasty. There were baked
yams. There was a custard of goat milk and turkey eggs sweetened with
honey.

Instead of the usual sassafras tea to which their digestion had finally
adjusted, there was grape wine in their cups. It wasn't a very good
wine, still green and sharp, but the occasion called for it.

Both of them looked at her with wonder, when they came in at her call
and saw the table. But they didn't ask any questions. They just started
eating and, for once, they forgot to talk about warp theory.

She, herself, ate little. She was content to look at them. The
lieutenant, tall and strong, big-boned, dark-complexioned, square-faced,
white even teeth. Sam, smalled-boned, fair-complexioned, hair bleached
straw from the outdoor sun. He had been inclined to be a little stout
when she first saw him, but now he had that muscular wiriness which
comes with hard physical work--and clean living. His daughters would be
delicate, lovely, yet strong. The lieutenant's sons....

She watched, in a kind of rapture, the ripple of muscles beneath their
shirts, the way the pillar of the neck arose from strong shoulders to
support a well-shaped head, the way the muscles of jaws rippled under
their lean cheeks as they chewed. The way their intelligent eyes flashed
appreciation at each savory mouthful.

"It occurs to me, Sam," Lt. Harper said as he washed down some turkey
with a healthy quaff of wine. "We could give a little more attention to
scraping up food for Miss Kitty to cook. Now you take this brown rice,
for example, we could rig up a polishing mill so she'd have white
rice...."

"Nonsense," Miss Kitty said firmly. "All the proper food value lies in
the brown covering. I will not have the children's eating habits spoiled
from the beginning...."

Appalled, she realized what she had said. Both men stopped chewing and
stared at her.

"What children, Miss Kitty?" Lt. Harper asked, and he was looking at her
intently.

She dropped her eyes to her plate. She felt the red flush arising around
her neck, up into her face. She couldn't face him. Yet, it had to be
done. It must be made quite clear to him, both of them, that....

"_Our_ children," she said distinctly, and felt their eyes boring into
the top of her head. "And I wish you both would stop calling me Miss
Kitty, as if--as if you were kindergarten children and I was the old
maid school teacher! All three of us are adults, men and a woman. In
spite of what you may think, I am not a great deal older than either of
you. There will be children! If it works out the way I plan, I believe I
do have time for at least six sons and daughters before I reach ...
before my barren years."

She heard Sam's fork clatter down on the table top as he dropped it. She
heard Lt. Harper's feet scrape, as if he had been about to leap to his
feet. Without seeing it, she almost felt them look at one another.

Well, she had made it plain enough.

But they didn't say anything.

Suddenly she could stand it no longer. Slowly, in dignity, she arose to
her feet and without looking at them she walked, head down, to her door.
Then she realized she had perhaps been too crisp, too businesslike about
it all. A vision of the kind of women they must have known, the kind
which would arouse their passion, the kind which would make it all
unmistakable....

She had a flashing memory of a girl back in college, one smitten with a
football hero, trying to captivate the hero, draw him to her. On
impulse, Miss Kitty imitated that girl now, and a little tableau she
remembered.

At her doorway she turned, and looked at them over her shoulder. She
lifted her shoulder so that it touched her chin. She drooped her eyes
half shut.

"My name is Katheryn," she said, and she tried to make her voice husky
instead of tremulous and frightened. "Call me Kathy, call me Kate, call
me Kay."

Both men were staring at her with wide eyes and open mouths as she
closed her door. She made sure there was no sound of a latch turning to
discourage them.

       *       *       *       *       *

She undressed herself slowly, and, for the first time other than for
bathing, completely. She felt grateful for the time they were giving
her. No doubt they were talking it over, man to man, in the way of
civilized, educated.... She crawled in between the blankets, fresh and
smelling of sunshine from being washed in the clear water of the lake.
She was a little regretful she had no perfume; that was something they
didn't put into lifeboats.

She waited.

She heard the low rumble of male voices in the other room. They were
undoubtedly discussing it. She felt grateful relief that their voices
had not risen. They were not quarreling over her--not yet. She did hope
they would continue to be sensible.

She heard one of the stools scrape on the rough split log floor. She
caught her breath in a gasp, found her hands were clutching the covers
and pulling them tightly up to her chin. She willed her hands to relax.
She willed the tenseness out of her rigid body.

She heard the other stool scrape. Surely they were not both....

She heard their feet walking across the floor, the heavy steps of the
lieutenant, the lighter, springier steps of Sam. She gritted her teeth
and clenched her eyes tight shut.

And then she heard the outer door close softly.

Which one? Which had remained behind?

She waited.

Then she heard footsteps outside. She tried to identify, by sound, which
man was making the noise, but the shuffling of leaves was confusing, as
if more than one person were walking outside. And where was the other
man? Why had he made no sound in the outer room? Was he quietly drinking
up the wine--first? Then, distinctly, she recognized two pairs of feet
outside, going farther away, in the direction of the men's bunkhouse.

She could not bear the suspense. She sprang out of bed clutching one of
the blankets about her. Slowly, soundlessly, she opened her door a
crack. She could see no one in the flickering firelight of the room.
They had turned out the lights. Or--he had. She opened the door wide.

It had been they, not he. Both men had gone.

       *       *       *       *       *

Inadvertently something between a sob and a hiccough rattled her throat.
She choked back another. She would not give way to ... rage? ...
frustration? ... relief? ... _fear?_

Fear!

She had seen the movies, she had read the stories, she had overheard
boys. "I'll fix you when we get outside! You meet me in the alley and
I'll show you!"

These two men. Were they going off into the darkness to settle a
conflict which they had not been able to resolve through sensible
agreement? There, under the trees in the moonlight, would they, denying
all the progress of the sacred centuries, would they revert to the
primitive, the savage; and like two rutting male animals rend and tear
and battle with one another for the only female?

Oh, no! No, they must not! There was no doubt that the lieutenant with
his great, massive strength.... But the human race of New Earth must
have the fine sensitivity, the lithe grace of Sam's kind, also!

She tugged the blanket around her shoulders and ran toward the door. She
must reach them, step in between them, even at the cost of receiving
some of the blows upon herself, make them realize....

She felt herself shivering as she opened the door, shivering as if with
an ague. She felt her face burning, as if with a fever. Her teeth were
chattering in anguish. She tried to still the noise of her teeth, to
listen for those horrible sounds of silent men in a death conflict
somewhere out there in the moonlight.

Then she saw a chink of light through a crack in the wall of the
bunkhouse, where the clay had dried and fallen away from the logs.

In there? What were they doing in there?

Instead of their fists and crushing arms, were they stalking one another
with knives? She remembered scenes from Western movies, the overturned
tables, the crash of things thrown. Had some sense of chivalry still
remained in the lieutenant, and he, knowing Sam wouldn't stand a chance
in hand to hand conflict, devised some contest which would be more fair?

There need be no contest. If only they would be sensible, work out an
equitable schedule....

Barefooted, she ran across the ground toward the bunkhouse. She had
visions of herself throwing open the door, shocking them to stillness in
a tableau of violence. She was close now. She should be able to hear the
crashing of their table and chairs.

She could hear nothing at all. Was she too late? Even now, was one of
them standing above the other, holding a dripping knife? What horrors
might she run into, even precipitate, if she threw open the door?
Caution, Katheryn!

Instead, she crept up to the crack in the wall. Her teeth were
chattering so hard, she had difficulty in holding her head still enough
to peer through the slit of light. With her free hand, her shoulders
were shaking so hard she had difficulty in clutching the blanket about
her with the other, she grabbed her jaw and held on, to still her
shaking. Her eyes focused on the scene inside the room.

       *       *       *       *       *

She had a three-quarter vision of each man and the table between them.
They were dealing a greasy pack of cards! Were they going to gamble for
her? Relief and shame intermingled in her reaction. She would have
preferred they settle it with more elemental.... It would have made it
less.... Yet, this way neither would be killed. Sons and daughters from
both....

"How are we going to tell her now?" Sam asked, as he picked up his
cards. His voice came distinctly through the wall crack.

"We should have told her about our wives and families right at the
start," Harper answered morosely. "I don't know why we didn't. Except
that, well, none of us have talked about things back home. She didn't,
and so we didn't either."

"But I never dreamed Miss Kitty would start getting ideas," Sam said in
a heartsick voice. "I just never dreamed she...."

"We're going to have to tell her," Harper said resolutely. "We'll just
have to tell her that, well, there's still hope and as long as there's
hope...."

Blindly, in an anguish of shame such as she had never known, Miss Kitty
crept away from the bunkhouse, and stumbled back to the cabin. Now she
was shivering so violently she could hardly walk. The exposure to the
night air, the nervous tension, overwrought emotions....

She could not remember getting back into the cabin, crawling into bed.
She knew only that a little later she was in bed, still shaking
violently with a chill, burning with fever.

She was awakened in the morning with the sound of the axe chopping on
wood. She dragged herself out of bed, forlorn, sick, filled with shame.
Her head spun so wildly that she sank to her knees and lay it on the
bed. Then her pride and her will forced her to her feet, and she drove
herself to dress, to go into the big room, dig out glowing coals from
beneath ashes, put them in the little cook stove, pile fine slivers of
resin-rich kindling on top of them, blow on them.

Between painful breaths, she heard herself sobbing. Her teeth started
chattering again, and there was a ringing in her ears. She heard the
blows of the axe falling on the wood, and each blow transferred itself
to the base of her skull. The ringing in her ears grew louder and
louder.

She heard one of the men shout. It sounded like Sam. Had he hurt himself
with the axe, gashed his leg or something? She'd always been afraid of
that axe! She'd told them and told them to be careful!

She pulled herself up from her knees there at the stove where she had
been blowing on the coals. She must get out there, help him! That
terrible buzzing in her head, that ringing in her ears. No matter, she
must get out there to help him.

[Illustration]

She threw open the door and saw Sam running toward the lifeship. Had he
lost his mind? The bandages were here. She had them here! She saw Lt.
Harper come to the door of the bunkhouse. He was still pulling on his
pants. He started running toward the lifeship, too, cinching his belt as
he ran.

Then she realized that at least part of the ringing in her ears came
from the lifeship. At first it had no meaning for her, then she
remembered them talking about fixing up some kind of alarm, so that if
they got a signal through....

She started running toward the lifeship. She stumbled, fell, got up,
felt as light as a feather, as heavy as mercury. She crawled up the
steps of the lifeship, she clutched at the door. She heard Sam speaking
very slowly, carefully.

"Do you read me? _Is this Earth?_"

She saw his face. She knew the answer.

And that was the last she knew.

       *       *       *       *       *

Consciousness came back in little dribbles like a montage--half reality
and half nightmare of the insomniac. Lt. Harper's voice shouting at her
with a roar like a waterfall, "My God, Miss Kitty, are you sick?"
Blackness. More shouting, Sam calling the lieutenant, something about a
red flare in the sky. A lucid moment, when Sam was explaining to her
that Earth had been given the warp coordinates, and had sent a red flare
to see if they could get through. Then another gap. A heavy trampling of
feet, a great many feet. Some kind of memory of a woman in white,
sticking a thermometer in her mouth. The prick of a needle in her arm.
The sense of being carried. A memory of knowing she was in a ship. A
flash that was more felt than seen.

Nightmares! All nightmares! She would wake up in a moment. She would get
up, dress, go out and start a fire to heat water on the cookstove. She
had planned to have coffee, a special treat from their almost exhausted
store. She would have coffee. The men would come in sheepish, evading
her glance.

Very well, she would simply tell them that she had misunderstood, save
them the embarrassment of telling her. She would not be the woman
scorned.

She moved her hands to throw back her blankets, and froze. Her fingers
had not touched blankets, they had touched cool, slick sheets! Her eyes
popped open.

It had not been a nightmare, a wish fulfillment of escape. She was in a
hospital room. A nurse was standing beside her bed, looking down at her.
A comfortably motherly-looking sort of woman was speaking to her.

"Well, now, Miss Kittredge, that's much better!" the woman said. "So you
will go gather wild rice in the swamp and get your bloodstream full of
bugs!" But it was a professional kind of chiding, the same way she had
talked to her kindergarten children when they'd got themselves into
trouble.

"Still," the nurse chatted, "it's made our pathologists mighty happy.
They've been having themselves a ball analyzing the bugs you three
managed to pick up. You got something close to malaria. The two men,
healthy oxen, didn't get anything at all. We had to let 'em out of
quarantine in three days."

       *       *       *       *       *

Miss Kitty just looked at her in a sort of unthinking lassitude. She was
still trying to make the reality seem real. The nurse helped a little.
She turned to her cart and produced a white enamel, flat container. She
slid it under the top sheet.

"Upsy-daisy now, Miss Kittredge," she said firmly. "It's time you
started cooperating a little."

Yes, that brought her back to reality. But she still didn't say
anything.

"Although we might as well not have let 'em out of quarantine," the
nurse grumbled. "They've just been living out there in the waiting room
for a solid week, buttonholing everybody from doctors down to orderlies
asking about you."

She gave a soft wolf whistle.

"Whew, imagine having not just one guy but two of 'em, absolutely crazy
about you. Just begging to see you, hold your hand a little. Two
beautiful men like that! You ready to see them soon?"

Miss Kitty felt a rush of shame again. In the cabin she would have been
forced to face them, but not now.

"No," she said firmly. "I _never_ want to see them again."

"Well, now, let me tell you something, Miss Kittredge," the nurse said,
and this time there was a note of seriousness. "One of the symptoms of
this sickness you picked up is that it makes you talk. Gal, you have
talked a blue streak for the last week. We know everything, everything
that happened, everything you thought about. The doctor understood how
you might feel about things. So he told the lieutenant and Mr. Eade that
you had got bitten about the time you were up in the rice swamp, and
that you hadn't been responsible for anything you'd said for the last
three days back there on New Earth."

Miss Kitty felt a flood of relief.

"Did they believe the doctor?" she asked hesitantly.

"Sure they believed him," the nurse answered. "Sure they did. But you
wanna know something? I've talked to those two men. And I've just got
myself an idea that it wouldn't have made a particle of difference in
the way they feel about you even if they didn't believe it. You're tops
with those two guys, lady. Absolutely tip-top tops. The way you pitched
in there, carried your share of things...."

She slipped the pan out from under the sheets, and put it into a
compartment of the cart.

"You wanna know something else? I don't think you were out of your head
at all when you propositioned those two guys. I think you were showing
some good female sense, maybe for the first time in your life. And I
think they know you were.

"You think it over, Miss Kittredge. If I know you--and I ought to after
listening to you rave day after day--you've got what it takes. You want
my advice? You go right on being a normal female. Don't you be silly
enough to get back into that warped, twisted, frustrated kind of a
man-hater you always thought you were.

"I gotta go now. You think it over. But not too long. Those two guys are
going to be mighty, mighty hurt if they find out you're conscious and
won't see them."

She went out the door, pushing her cart in front of her.

       *       *       *       *       *

Miss Kitty relaxed her neck, willed the tenseness out of her body, and
just lay for a while thinking of nothing. A gust, a rattle of raindrops,
called her attention to the window. They had put her on the ground
floor. She was able to see through the window to the street outside. The
rain was pelting down, like that first rain they'd had there on New
Earth. How chagrined the boys had looked when the roof started leaking
in a dozen places!

She felt a warm sense of relief, of gratitude, that she could remember
them without shame. The nurse had been right, of course. Probably the
doctors had planted that particular nurse in her room, anticipating her
return to consciousness, anticipating the necessity for a little mental
therapy.

_Good female sense._ With such a semantic difference from good male
sense! The mind of a man and a woman was not the same. She knew that
now. And she realized that deeply, hidden from her own admittance, she
had always known it. And the nurse's good earthy
expression--"propositioning those two guys"--approval that it had been
natural and right. And another expression, "the way you pitched in
there, carried your share of things."

Carried your share of things! That meant more than just cooking,
mending, cleaning. More than just seeing that the race continued, too;
although it somehow tied in with all these things.

She lay in her bed, watching the rain through the window, getting
comfort from the soft, drumming sound. Along the street she could see
people sloshing through the film of water underfoot. She watched the
scene of turned-up collars, pulled-down hatbrims, bobbing umbrellas, as
if it were something apart from her, and yet a part of her. She began to
get a sense of rare vision, an understanding which she knew was more
complete than any intellectual abstraction she had ever managed. She
began to get a woman's sense of purpose, completely distinct from that
of a man.

       *       *       *       *       *

She recalled once reading of an incident where an Oklahoma oil
millionaire had built a huge mansion; then, because his squaw did not
know how to make a home within it, they pitched their tepee in the front
grounds, to live there, unable to feel at home in anything else.

Yes, too often the mansions of science came in for a similar treatment.
The vast rooms of ideas, the great halls of expansion, the limitless
ceilings of challenge, the wide expanses of speculation; all these
things which would exalt Man into a truly great existence were denied,
put to no use beyond mere gadgetry. And the mass of human beings still
huddled in their cramped and grimy little tepees of ancient syndromes,
only there feeling at home.

It was the fault of the women. They had not kept up with the men. Those
who attempted it tried to be men, to prove themselves as good a man as
any man, the way she had done.

They had missed the real point entirely, every single bit of it.

The male was still functioning in the way males always had. There was no
essential difference between the cave man who climbed a new mountain and
explored a new valley and brought back a speared deer to throw down at
the entrance of his home cave; no difference between him and the modern
explorer of science who, under similar hardships, brought back a bright
and rich new knowledge.

But the ancient cave woman had not failed. She had known what to do with
the deer to strengthen and secure the future of the race.

And what about New Earth?

Lt. Harper and Sam had talked about the possibility of millions of
Earths, each infinitesimally removed from the other, and if they could
bridge the gap to one, they might bridge it to an uncountable number.
Perhaps there were millions of others, but for her there was only one
New Earth.

Would the processions of colonists going there spoil it? Would the women
going there see in it a great mansion? Or, instead, would they simply go
there to escape here--escape from exhaustion, failure, anguish,
bitterness--and, as always, take these things along with them? Would
they still live in grimy little syndromes of endless antagonism,
bickering in their foolish frustrations, because they had no wisdom
about what to do with this newly speared deer?

_Oh, not on New Earth!_

Suddenly Miss Kitty knew what she must do. If that one particular
mansion needed someone to make it into a home, why not herself? And who
had a better right?

Somewhere, there, perhaps that very one striding along under the eaves
of that building across the street, with his hatbrim pulled down,
leaning against the rain, somewhere, close, there must be a man who
could share her resolution and her dream. A man of the same breed as the
lieutenant and Sam, a man who carried his head high, his shoulders back,
who had keen, intelligent eyes, and laughter.

Yes, now she wanted to see the two men after all, and meet their lucky
wives, and see their children, the kind of children she might have had.

Might _yet_ have!

At a flash of memory, she smiled a little ruefully, and yet with an
inner peace.

"I am not so old," she repeated in a whisper. "I still have time for at
least a half dozen sons and daughters before--before my barren years."





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of A Woman's Place, by Mark Irvin Clifton

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A WOMAN'S PLACE ***

***** This file should be named 32833.txt or 32833.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/2/8/3/32833/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
