The Project Gutenberg EBook of Piper in the Woods, by Philip K. Dick

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Piper in the Woods

Author: Philip K. Dick

Release Date: June 16, 2010 [EBook #32832]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PIPER IN THE WOODS ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









[Illustration]


                PIPER IN THE WOODS

                       _By
                 Philip K. Dick_


        Earth maintained an important garrison on
 Asteroid Y-3. Now suddenly it was imperiled with
 a biological impossibility--men becoming plants!


"Well, Corporal Westerburg," Doctor Henry Harris said gently, "just why
do you think you're a plant?"

As he spoke, Harris glanced down again at the card on his desk. It was
from the Base Commander himself, made out in Cox's heavy scrawl: _Doc,
this is the lad I told you about. Talk to him and try to find out how he
got this delusion. He's from the new Garrison, the new check-station on
Asteroid Y-3, and we don't want anything to go wrong there. Especially a
silly damn thing like this!_

Harris pushed the card aside and stared back up at the youth across the
desk from him. The young man seemed ill at ease and appeared to be
avoiding answering the question Harris had put to him. Harris frowned.
Westerburg was a good-looking chap, actually handsome in his Patrol
uniform, a shock of blond hair over one eye. He was tall, almost six
feet, a fine healthy lad, just two years out of Training, according to
the card. Born in Detroit. Had measles when he was nine. Interested in
jet engines, tennis, and girls. Twenty-six years old.

"Well, Corporal Westerburg," Doctor Harris said again. "Why do you think
you're a plant?"

The Corporal looked up shyly. He cleared his throat. "Sir, I _am_ a
plant, I don't just think so. I've been a plant for several days, now."

"I see." The Doctor nodded. "You mean that you weren't always a plant?"

"No, sir. I just became a plant recently."

"And what were you before you became a plant?"

"Well, sir, I was just like the rest of you."

There was silence. Doctor Harris took up his pen and scratched a few
lines, but nothing of importance came. A plant? And such a
healthy-looking lad! Harris removed his steel-rimmed glasses and
polished them with his handkerchief. He put them on again and leaned
back in his chair. "Care for a cigarette, Corporal?"

"No, sir."

The Doctor lit one himself, resting his arm on the edge of the chair.
"Corporal, you must realize that there are very few men who become
plants, especially on such short notice. I have to admit you are the
first person who has ever told me such a thing."

"Yes, sir, I realize it's quite rare."

"You can understand why I'm interested, then. When you say you're a
plant, you mean you're not capable of mobility? Or do you mean you're a
vegetable, as opposed to an animal? Or just what?"

The Corporal looked away. "I can't tell you any more," he murmured. "I'm
sorry, sir."

"Well, would you mind telling me _how_ you became a plant?"

Corporal Westerburg hesitated. He stared down at the floor, then out the
window at the spaceport, then at a fly on the desk. At last he stood up,
getting slowly to his feet. "I can't even tell you that, sir," he said.

"You can't? Why not?"

"Because--because I promised not to."

       *       *       *       *       *

The room was silent. Doctor Harris rose, too, and they both stood facing
each other. Harris frowned, rubbing his jaw. "Corporal, just _who_ did
you promise?"

"I can't even tell you that, sir. I'm sorry."

The Doctor considered this. At last he went to the door and opened it.
"All right, Corporal. You may go now. And thanks for your time."

"I'm sorry I'm not more helpful." The Corporal went slowly out and
Harris closed the door after him. Then he went across his office to the
vidphone. He rang Commander Cox's letter. A moment later the beefy
good-natured face of the Base Commander appeared.

"Cox, this is Harris. I talked to him, all right. All I could get is the
statement that he's a plant. What else is there? What kind of behavior
pattern?"

"Well," Cox said, "the first thing they noticed was that he wouldn't do
any work. The Garrison Chief reported that this Westerburg would wander
off outside the Garrison and just sit, all day long. Just sit."

"In the sun?"

"Yes. Just sit in the sun. Then at nightfall he would come back in. When
they asked why he wasn't working in the jet repair building he told them
he had to be out in the sun. Then he said--" Cox hesitated.

"Yes? Said what?"

"He said that work was unnatural. That it was a waste of time. That the
only worthwhile thing was to sit and contemplate--outside."

"What then?"

"Then they asked him how he got that idea, and then he revealed to them
that he had become a plant."

"I'm going to have to talk to him again, I can see," Harris said. "And
he's applied for a permanent discharge from the Patrol? What reason did
he give?"

"The same, that he's a plant now, and has no more interest in being a
Patrolman. All he wants to do is sit in the sun. It's the damnedest
thing I ever heard."

"All right. I think I'll visit him in his quarters." Harris looked at
his watch. "I'll go over after dinner."

"Good luck," Cox said gloomily. "But who ever heard of a man turning
into a plant? We told him it wasn't possible, but he just smiled at us."

"I'll let you know how I make out," Harris said.

       *       *       *       *       *

Harris walked slowly down the hall. It was after six; the evening meal
was over. A dim concept was coming into his mind, but it was much too
soon to be sure. He increased his pace, turning right at the end of the
hall. Two nurses passed, hurrying by. Westerburg was quartered with a
buddy, a man who had been injured in a jet blast and who was now almost
recovered. Harris came to the dorm wing and stopped, checking the
numbers on the doors.

"Can I help you, sir?" the robot attendant said, gliding up.

"I'm looking for Corporal Westerburg's room."

"Three doors to the right."

Harris went on. Asteroid Y-3 had only recently been garrisoned and
staffed. It had become the primary check-point to halt and examine ships
entering the system from outer space. The Garrison made sure that no
dangerous bacteria, fungus, or what-not arrived to infect the system. A
nice asteroid it was, warm, well-watered, with trees and lakes and lots
of sunlight. And the most modern Garrison in the nine planets. He shook
his head, coming to the third door. He stopped, raising his hand and
knocking.

"Who's there?" sounded through the door.

"I want to see Corporal Westerburg."

The door opened. A bovine youth with horn-rimmed glasses looked out, a
book in his hand. "Who are you?"

"Doctor Harris."

"I'm sorry, sir. Corporal Westerburg is asleep."

"Would he mind if I woke him up? I want very much to talk to him."
Harris peered inside. He could see a neat room, with a desk, a rug and
lamp, and two bunks. On one of the bunks was Westerburg, lying face up,
his arms folded across his chest, his eyes tightly closed.

"Sir," the bovine youth said, "I'm afraid I can't wake him up for you,
much as I'd like to."

"You can't? Why not?"

"Sir, Corporal Westerburg won't wake up, not after the sun sets. He just
won't. He can't be wakened."

"Cataleptic? Really?"

"But in the morning, as soon as the sun comes up, he leaps out of bed
and goes outside. Stays the whole day."

"I see," the Doctor said. "Well, thanks anyhow." He went back out into
the hall and the door shut after him. "There's more to this than I
realized," he murmured. He went on back the way he had come.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was a warm sunny day. The sky was almost free of clouds and a gentle
wind moved through the cedars along the bank of the stream. There was a
path leading from the hospital building down the slope to the stream. At
the stream a small bridge led over to the other side, and a few patients
were standing on the bridge, wrapped in their bathrobes, looking
aimlessly down at the water.

It took Harris several minutes to find Westerburg. The youth was not
with the other patients, near or around the bridge. He had gone farther
down, past the cedar trees and out onto a strip of bright meadow, where
poppies and grass grew everywhere. He was sitting on the stream bank, on
a flat grey stone, leaning back and staring up, his mouth open a little.
He did not notice the Doctor until Harris was almost beside him.

"Hello," Harris said softly.

Westerburg opened his eyes, looking up. He smiled and got slowly to his
feet, a graceful, flowing motion that was rather surprising for a man of
his size. "Hello, Doctor. What brings you out here?"

"Nothing. Thought I'd get some sun."

"Here, you can share my rock." Westerburg moved over and Harris sat down
gingerly, being careful not to catch his trousers on the sharp edges of
the rock. He lit a cigarette and gazed silently down at the water.
Beside him, Westerburg had resumed his strange position, leaning back,
resting on his hands, staring up with his eyes shut tight.

"Nice day," the Doctor said.

"Yes."

"Do you come here every day?"

"Yes."

"You like it better out here than inside."

"I can't stay inside," Westerburg said.

"You can't? How do you mean, 'can't'?"

"You would die without _air_, wouldn't you?" the Corporal said.

"And you'd die without sunlight?"

Westerburg nodded.

"Corporal, may I ask you something? Do you plan to do this the rest of
your life, sit out in the sun on a flat rock? Nothing else?"

Westerburg nodded.

"How about your job? You went to school for years to become a Patrolman.
You wanted to enter the Patrol very badly. You were given a fine rating
and a first-class position. How do you feel, giving all that up? You
know, it won't be easy to get back in again. Do you realize that?"

"I realize it."

"And you're really going to give it all up?"

"That's right."

       *       *       *       *       *

Harris was silent for a while. At last he put his cigarette out and
turned toward the youth. "All right, let's say you give up your job and
sit in the sun. Well, what happens, then? Someone else has to do the job
instead of you. Isn't that true? The job has to be done, _your_ job has
to be done. And if you don't do it someone else has to."

"I suppose so."

"Westerburg, suppose everyone felt the way you do? Suppose everyone
wanted to sit in the sun all day? What would happen? No one would check
ships coming from outer space. Bacteria and toxic crystals would enter
the system and cause mass death and suffering. Isn't that right?"

"If everyone felt the way I do they wouldn't be going into outer space."

"But they have to. They have to trade, they have to get minerals and
products and new plants."

"Why?"

"To keep society going."

"Why?"

"Well--" Harris gestured. "People couldn't live without society."

Westerburg said nothing to that. Harris watched him, but the youth did
not answer.

"Isn't that right?" Harris said.

"Perhaps. It's a peculiar business, Doctor. You know, I struggled for
years to get through Training. I had to work and pay my own way. Washed
dishes, worked in kitchens. Studied at night, learned, crammed, worked
on and on. And you know what I think, now?"

"What?"

"I wish I'd become a plant earlier."

Doctor Harris stood up. "Westerburg, when you come inside, will you
stop off at my office? I want to give you a few tests, if you don't
mind."

"The shock box?" Westerburg smiled. "I knew that would be coming around.
Sure, I don't mind."

Nettled, Harris left the rock, walking back up the bank a short
distance. "About three, Corporal?"

The Corporal nodded.

Harris made his way up the hill, to the path, toward the hospital
building. The whole thing was beginning to become more clear to him. A
boy who had struggled all his life. Financial insecurity. Idealized
goal, getting a Patrol assignment. Finally reached it, found the load
too great. And on Asteroid Y-3 there was too much vegetation to look at
all day. Primitive identification and projection on the flora of the
asteroid. Concept of security involved in immobility and permanence.
Unchanging forest.

He entered the building. A robot orderly stopped him almost at once.
"Sir, Commander Cox wants you urgently, on the vidphone."

"Thanks." Harris strode to his office. He dialed Cox's letter and the
Commander's face came presently into focus. "Cox? This is Harris. I've
been out talking to the boy. I'm beginning to get this lined up, now. I
can see the pattern, too much load too long. Finally gets what he wants
and the idealization shatters under the--"

"Harris!" Cox barked. "Shut up and listen. I just got a report from Y-3.
They're sending an express rocket here. It's on the way."

"An express rocket?"

"Five more cases like Westerburg. All say they're plants! The Garrison
Chief is worried as hell. Says we _must_ find out what it is or the
Garrison will fall apart, right away. Do you get me, Harris? Find out
what it is!"

"Yes, sir," Harris murmured. "Yes, sir."

       *       *       *       *       *

By the end of the week there were twenty cases, and all, of course, were
from Asteroid Y-3.

Commander Cox and Harris stood together at the top of the hill, looking
gloomily down at the stream below. Sixteen men and four women sat in the
sun along the bank, none of them moving, none speaking. An hour had gone
by since Cox and Harris appeared, and in all that time the twenty people
below had not stirred.

"I don't get it," Cox said, shaking his head. "I just absolutely don't
get it. Harris, is this the beginning of the end? Is everything going to
start cracking around us? It gives me a hell of a strange feeling to see
those people down there, basking away in the sun, just sitting and
basking."

"Who's that man there with the red hair?"

"That's Ulrich Deutsch. He was Second in Command at the Garrison. Now
look at him! Sits and dozes with his mouth open and his eyes shut. A
week ago that man was climbing, going right up to the top. When the
Garrison Chief retires he was supposed to take over. Maybe another year,
at the most. All his life he's been climbing to get up there."

"And now he sits in the sun," Harris finished.

"That woman. The brunette, with the short hair. Career woman. Head of
the entire office staff of the Garrison. And the man beside her.
Janitor. And that cute little gal there, with the bosom. Secretary, just
out of school. All kinds. And I got a note this morning, three more
coming in sometime today."

Harris nodded. "The strange thing is--they really _want_ to sit down
there. They're completely rational; they could do something else, but
they just don't care to."

"Well?" Cox said. "What are you going to do? Have you found anything?
We're counting on you. Let's hear it."

"I couldn't get anything out of them directly," Harris said, "but I've
had some interesting results with the shock box. Let's go inside and
I'll show you."

"Fine," Cox turned and started toward the hospital. "Show me anything
you've got. This is serious. Now I know how Tiberius felt when
Christianity showed up in high places."

       *       *       *       *       *

Harris snapped off the light. The room was pitch black. "I'll run this
first reel for you. The subject is one of the best biologists stationed
at the Garrison. Robert Bradshaw. He came in yesterday. I got a good run
from the shock box because Bradshaw's mind is so highly differentiated.
There's a lot of repressed material of a non-rational nature, more than
usual."

He pressed a switch. The projector whirred, and on the far wall a
three-dimensional image appeared in color, so real that it might have
been the man himself. Robert Bradshaw was a man of fifty, heavy-set,
with iron grey hair and a square jaw. He sat in the chair calmly, his
hands resting on the arms, oblivious to the electrodes attached to his
neck and wrist. "There I go," Harris said. "Watch."

His film-image appeared, approaching Bradshaw. "Now, Mr. Bradshaw," his
image said, "this won't hurt you at all, and it'll help us a lot." The
image rotated the controls on the shock box. Bradshaw stiffened, and his
jaw set, but otherwise he gave no sign. The image of Harris regarded him
for a time and then stepped away from the controls.

"Can you hear me, Mr. Bradshaw?" the image asked.

"Yes."

"What is your name?"

"Robert C. Bradshaw."

"What is your position?"

"Chief Biologist at the check-station on Y-3."

"Are you there now?"

"No, I'm back on Terra. In a hospital."

"Why?"

"Because I admitted to the Garrison Chief that I had become a plant."

"Is that true? That you are a plant."

"Yes, in a non-biological sense. I retain the physiology of a human
being, of course."

"What do you mean, then, that you're a plant?"

"The reference is to attitudinal response, to Weltanschauung."

"Go on."

"It is possible for a warm-blooded animal, an upper primate, to adopt
the psychology of a plant, to some extent."

"Yes?"

"I refer to this."

"And the others? They refer to this also?"

"Yes."

"How did this occur, your adopting this attitude?"

Bradshaw's image hesitated, the lips twisting. "See?" Harris said to
Cox. "Strong conflict. He wouldn't have gone on, if he had been fully
conscious."

"I--"

"Yes?"

"I was taught to become a plant."

The image of Harris showed surprise and interest. "What do you mean, you
were _taught_ to become a plant?"

"They realized my problems and taught me to become a plant. Now I'm free
from them, the problems."

"Who? Who taught you?"

"The Pipers."

"Who? The Pipers? Who are the Pipers?"

There was no answer.

"Mr. Bradshaw, who are the Pipers?"

After a long, agonized pause, the heavy lips parted. "They live in the
woods...."

Harris snapped off the projector, and the lights came on. He and Cox
blinked. "That was all I could get," Harris said. "But I was lucky to
get that. He wasn't supposed to tell, not at all. That was the thing
they all promised not to do, tell who taught them to become plants. The
Pipers who live in the woods, on Asteroid Y-3."

"You got this story from all twenty?"

"No." Harris grimaced. "Most of them put up too much fight. I couldn't
even get _this_ much from them."

Cox reflected. "The Pipers. Well? What do you propose to do? Just wait
around until you can get the full story? Is that your program?"

"No," Harris said. "Not at all. I'm going to Y-3 and find out who the
Pipers are, myself."

       *       *       *       *       *

The small patrol ship made its landing with care and precision, its jets
choking into final silence. The hatch slid back and Doctor Henry Harris
found himself staring out at a field, a brown, sun-baked landing field.
At the end of the field was a tall signal tower. Around the field on all
sides were long grey buildings, the Garrison check-station itself. Not
far off a huge Venusian cruiser was parked, a vast green hulk, like an
enormous lime. The technicians from the station were swarming all over
it, checking and examining each inch of it for lethal life-forms and
poisons that might have attached themselves to the hull.

"All out, sir," the pilot said.

Harris nodded. He took hold of his two suitcases and stepped carefully
down. The ground was hot underfoot, and he blinked in the bright
sunlight. Jupiter was in the sky, and the vast planet reflected
considerable sunlight down onto the asteroid.

Harris started across the field, carrying his suitcases. A field
attendant was already busy opening the storage compartment of the patrol
ship, extracting his trunk. The attendant lowered the trunk into a
waiting dolly and came after him, manipulating the little truck with
bored skill.

As Harris came to the entrance of the signal tower the gate slid back
and a man came forward, an older man, large and robust, with white hair
and a steady walk.

"How are you, Doctor?" he said, holding his hand out. "I'm Lawrence
Watts, the Garrison Chief."

They shook hands. Watts smiled down at Harris. He was a huge old man,
still regal and straight in his dark blue uniform, with his gold
epaulets sparkling on his shoulders.

"Have a good trip?" Watts asked. "Come on inside and I'll have a drink
fixed for you. It gets hot around here, with the Big Mirror up there."

"Jupiter?" Harris followed him inside the building. The signal tower was
cool and dark, a welcome relief. "Why is the gravity so near Terra's? I
expected to go flying off like a kangaroo. Is it artificial?"

"No. There's a dense core of some kind to the asteroid, some kind of
metallic deposit. That's why we picked this asteroid out of all the
others. It made the construction problem much simpler, and it also
explains why the asteroid has natural air and water. Did you see the
hills?"

"The hills?"

"When we get up higher in the tower we'll be able to see over the
buildings. There's quite a natural park here, a regular little forest,
complete with everything you'd want. Come in here, Harris. This is my
office." The old man strode at quite a clip, around the corner and into
a large, well-furnished apartment. "Isn't this pleasant? I intend to
make my last year here as amiable as possible." He frowned. "Of course,
with Deutsch gone, I may be here forever. Oh, well." He shrugged. "Sit
down, Harris."

"Thanks." Harris took a chair, stretching his legs out. He watched Watts
as he closed the door to the hall. "By the way, any more cases come up?"

"Two more today," Watts was grim. "Makes almost thirty, in all. We have
three hundred men in this station. At the rate it's going--"

"Chief, you spoke about a forest on the asteroid. Do you allow the crew
to go into the forest at will? Or do you restrict them to the buildings
and grounds?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Watts rubbed his jaw. "Well, it's a difficult situation, Harris. I have
to let the men leave the grounds sometimes. They can _see_ the forest
from the buildings, and as long as you can see a nice place to stretch
out and relax that does it. Once every ten days they have a full period
of rest. Then they go out and fool around."

"And then it happens?"

"Yes, I suppose so. But as long as they can see the forest they'll want
to go. I can't help it."

"I know. I'm not censuring you. Well, what's your theory? What happens
to them out there? What do they do?"

"What happens? Once they get out there and take it easy for a while they
don't want to come back and work. It's boondoggling. Playing hookey.
They don't want to work, so off they go."

"How about this business of their delusions?"

Watts laughed good-naturedly. "Listen, Harris. You know as well as I do
that's a lot of poppycock. They're no more plants than you or I. They
just don't want to work, that's all. When I was a cadet we had a few
ways to make people work. I wish we could lay a few on their backs, like
we used to."

"You think this is simple goldbricking, then?"

"Don't you think it is?"

"No," Harris said. "They really believe they're plants. I put them
through the high-frequency shock treatment, the shock box. The whole
nervous system is paralyzed, all inhibitions stopped cold. They tell the
truth, then. And they said the same thing--and more."

Watts paced back and forth, his hands clasped behind his back. "Harris,
you're a doctor, and I suppose you know what you're talking about. But
look at the situation here. We have a garrison, a good modern garrison.
We're probably the most modern outfit in the system. Every new device
and gadget is here that science can produce. Harris, this garrison is
one vast machine. The men are parts, and each has his job, the
Maintenance Crew, the Biologists, the Office Crew, the Managerial Staff.

"Look what happens when one person steps away from his job. Everything
else begins to creak. We can't service the bugs if no one services the
machines. We can't order food to feed the crews if no one makes out
reports, takes inventories. We can't direct any kind of activity if the
Second in Command decides to go out and sit in the sun all day.

"Thirty people, one tenth of the Garrison. But we can't run without
them. The Garrison is built that way. If you take the supports out the
whole building falls. No one can leave. We're all tied here, and these
people know it. They know they have no right to do that, run off on
their own. No one has that right anymore. We're all too tightly
interwoven to suddenly start doing what we want. It's unfair to the
rest, the majority."

       *       *       *       *       *

Harris nodded. "Chief, can I ask you something?"

"What is it?"

"Are there any inhabitants on the asteroid? Any natives?"

"Natives?" Watts considered. "Yes, there's some kind of aborigines
living out there." He waved vaguely toward the window.

"What are they like? Have you seen them?"

"Yes, I've seen them. At least, I saw them when we first came here. They
hung around for a while, watching us, then after a time they
disappeared."

"Did they die off? Diseases of some kind?"

"No. They just--just disappeared. Into their forest. They're still
there, someplace."

"What kind of people are they?"

"Well, the story is that they're originally from Mars. They don't look
much like Martians, though. They're dark, a kind of coppery color. Thin.
Very agile, in their own way. They hunt and fish. No written language.
We don't pay much attention to them."

"I see." Harris paused. "Chief, have you ever heard of anything
called--The Pipers?"

"The Pipers?" Watts frowned. "No. Why?"

"The patients mentioned something called The Pipers. According to
Bradshaw, the Pipers taught him to become a plant. He learned it from
them, a kind of teaching."

"The Pipers. What are they?"

"I don't know," Harris admitted. "I thought maybe you might know. My
first assumption, of course, was that they're the natives. But now I'm
not so sure, not after hearing your description of them."

"The natives are primitive savages. They don't have anything to teach
anybody, especially a top-flight biologist."

Harris hesitated. "Chief, I'd like to go into the woods and look around.
Is that possible?"

"Certainly. I can arrange it for you. I'll give you one of the men to
show you around."

"I'd rather go alone. Is there any danger?"

"No, none that I know of. Except--"

"Except the Pipers," Harris finished. "I know. Well, there's only one
way to find them, and that's it. I'll have to take my chances."

       *       *       *       *       *

"If you walk in a straight line," Chief Watts said, "you'll find
yourself back at the Garrison in about six hours. It's a damn small
asteroid. There's a couple of streams and lakes, so don't fall in."

"How about snakes or poisonous insects?"

"Nothing like that reported. We did a lot of tramping around at first,
but it's grown back now, the way it was. We never encountered anything
dangerous."

"Thanks, Chief," Harris said. They shook hands. "I'll see you before
nightfall."

"Good luck." The Chief and his two armed escorts turned and went back
across the rise, down the other side toward the Garrison. Harris watched
them go until they disappeared inside the building. Then he turned and
started into the grove of trees.

The woods were very silent around him as he walked. Trees towered up on
all sides of him, huge dark-green trees like eucalyptus. The ground
underfoot was soft with endless leaves that had fallen and rotted into
soil. After a while the grove of high trees fell behind and he found
himself crossing a dry meadow, the grass and weeds burned brown in the
sun. Insects buzzed around him, rising up from the dry weed-stalks.
Something scuttled ahead, hurrying through the undergrowth. He caught
sight of a grey ball with many legs, scampering furiously, its antennae
weaving.

The meadow ended at the bottom of a hill. He was going up, now, going
higher and higher. Ahead of him an endless expanse of green rose, acres
of wild growth. He scrambled to the top finally, blowing and panting,
catching his breath.

He went on. Now he was going down again, plunging into a deep gully.
Tall ferns grew, as large as trees. He was entering a living Jurassic
forest, ferns that stretched out endlessly ahead of him. Down he went,
walking carefully. The air began to turn cold around him. The floor of
the gully was damp and silent; underfoot the ground was almost wet.

He came out on a level table. It was dark, with the ferns growing up on
all sides, dense growths of ferns, silent and unmoving. He came upon a
natural path, an old stream bed, rough and rocky, but easy to follow.
The air was thick and oppressive. Beyond the ferns he could see the side
of the next hill, a green field rising up.

Something grey was ahead. Rocks, piled-up boulders, scattered and
stacked here and there. The stream bed led directly to them. Apparently
this had been a pool of some kind, a stream emptying from it. He climbed
the first of the boulders awkwardly, feeling his way up. At the top he
paused, resting again.

As yet he had had no luck. So far he had not met any of the natives. It
would be through them that he would find the mysterious Pipers that were
stealing the men away, if such really existed. If he could find the
natives, talk to them, perhaps he could find out something. But as yet
he had been unsuccessful. He looked around. The woods were very silent.
A slight breeze moved through the ferns, rustling them, but that was
all. Where were the natives? Probably they had a settlement of some
sort, huts, a clearing. The asteroid was small; he should be able to
find them by nightfall.

       *       *       *       *       *

He started down the rocks. More rocks rose up ahead and he climbed them.
Suddenly he stopped, listening. Far off, he could hear a sound, the
sound of water. Was he approaching a pool of some kind? He went on
again, trying to locate the sound. He scrambled down rocks and up rocks,
and all around him there was silence, except for the splashing of
distant water. Maybe a waterfall, water in motion. A stream. If he found
the stream he might find the natives.

The rocks ended and the stream bed began again, but this time it was
wet, the bottom muddy and overgrown with moss. He was on the right
track; not too long ago this stream had flowed, probably during the
rainy season. He went up on the side of the stream, pushing through the
ferns and vines. A golden snake slid expertly out of his path. Something
glinted ahead, something sparkling through the ferns. Water. A pool. He
hurried, pushing the vines aside and stepping out, leaving them behind.

He was standing on the edge of a pool, a deep pool sunk in a hollow of
grey rocks, surrounded by ferns and vines. The water was clear and
bright, and in motion, flowing in a waterfall at the far end. It was
beautiful, and he stood watching, marveling at it, the undisturbed
quality of it. Untouched, it was. Just as it had always been, probably.
As long as the asteroid existed. Was he the first to see it? Perhaps. It
was so hidden, so concealed by the ferns. It gave him a strange feeling,
a feeling almost of ownership. He stepped down a little toward the
water.

And it was then he noticed her.

The girl was sitting on the far edge of the pool, staring down into the
water, resting her head on one drawn-up knee. She had been bathing; he
could see that at once. Her coppery body was still wet and glistening
with moisture, sparkling in the sun. She had not seen him. He stopped,
holding his breath, watching her.

She was lovely, very lovely, with long dark hair that wound around her
shoulders and arms. Her body was slim, very slender, with a supple grace
to it that made him stare, accustomed as he was to various forms of
anatomy. How silent she was! Silent and unmoving, staring down at the
water. Time passed, strange, unchanging time, as he watched the girl.
Time might even have ceased, with the girl sitting on the rock staring
into the water, and the rows of great ferns behind her, as rigid as if
they had been painted there.

All at once the girl looked up. Harris shifted, suddenly conscious of
himself as an intruder. He stepped back. "I'm sorry," he murmured. "I'm
from the Garrison. I didn't mean to come poking around."

She nodded without speaking.

"You don't mind?" Harris asked presently.

"No."

So she spoke Terran! He moved a little toward her, around the side of
the pool. "I hope you don't mind my bothering you. I won't be on the
asteroid very long. This is my first day here. I just arrived from
Terra."

She smiled faintly.

"I'm a doctor. Henry Harris." He looked down at her, at the slim coppery
body, gleaming in the sunlight, a faint sheen of moisture on her arms
and thighs. "You might be interested in why I'm here." He paused. "Maybe
you can even help me."

She looked up a little. "Oh?"

"Would you like to help me?"

She smiled. "Yes. Of course."

"That's good. Mind if I sit down?" He looked around and found himself a
flat rock. He sat down slowly, facing her. "Cigarette?"

"No."

"Well, I'll have one." He lit up, taking a deep breath. "You see, we
have a problem at the Garrison. Something has been happening to some of
the men, and it seems to be spreading. We have to find out what causes
it or we won't be able to run the Garrison."

       *       *       *       *       *

He waited for a moment. She nodded slightly. How silent she was! Silent
and unmoving. Like the ferns.

"Well, I've been able to find out a few things from them, and one very
interesting fact stands out. They keep saying that something
called--called The Pipers are responsible for their condition. They say
the Pipers taught them--" He stopped. A strange look had flitted across
her dark, small face. "Do you know the Pipers?"

She nodded.

Acute satisfaction flooded over Harris. "You do? I was sure the natives
would know." He stood up again. "I was sure they would, if the Pipers
really existed. Then they do exist, do they?"

"They exist."

Harris frowned. "And they're here, in the woods?"

"Yes."

"I see." He ground his cigarette out impatiently. "You don't suppose
there's any chance you could take me to them, do you?"

"Take you?"

"Yes. I have this problem and I have to solve it. You see, the Base
Commander on Terra has assigned this to me, this business about the
Pipers. It has to be solved. And I'm the one assigned to the job. So
it's important to me to find them. Do you see? Do you understand?"

She nodded.

"Well, will you take me to them?"

The girl was silent. For a long time she sat, staring down into the
water, resting her head against her knee. Harris began to become
impatient. He fidgeted back and forth, resting first on one leg and
then on the other.

"Well, will you?" he said again. "It's important to the whole Garrison.
What do you say?" He felt around in his pockets. "Maybe I could give you
something. What do I have...." He brought out his lighter. "I could give
you my lighter."

The girl stood up, rising slowly, gracefully, without motion or effort.
Harris' mouth fell open. How supple she was, gliding to her feet in a
single motion! He blinked. Without effort she had stood, seemingly
without _change_. All at once she was standing instead of sitting,
standing and looking calmly at him, her small face expressionless.

"Will you?" he said.

"Yes. Come along." She turned away, moving toward the row of ferns.

Harris followed quickly, stumbling across the rocks. "Fine," he said.
"Thanks a lot. I'm very interested to meet these Pipers. Where are you
taking me, to your village? How much time do we have before nightfall?"

The girl did not answer. She had entered the ferns already, and Harris
quickened his pace to keep from losing her. How silently she glided!

"Wait," he called. "Wait for me."

The girl paused, waiting for him, slim and lovely, looking silently
back.

He entered the ferns, hurrying after her.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Well, I'll be damned!" Commander Cox said. "It sure didn't take you
long." He leaped down the steps two at a time. "Let me give you a hand."

Harris grinned, lugging his heavy suitcases. He set them down and
breathed a sigh of relief. "It isn't worth it," he said. "I'm going to
give up taking so much."

"Come on inside. Soldier, give him a hand." A Patrolman hurried over and
took one of the suitcases. The three men went inside and down the
corridor to Harris' quarters. Harris unlocked the door and the Patrolman
deposited his suitcase inside.

"Thanks," Harris said. He set the other down beside it. "It's good to be
back, even for a little while."

"A little while?"

"I just came back to settle my affairs. I have to return to Y-3 tomorrow
morning."

"Then you didn't solve the problem?"

"I solved it, but I haven't _cured_ it. I'm going back and get to work
right away. There's a lot to be done."

"But you found out what it is?"

"Yes. It was just what the men said. The Pipers."

"The Pipers do exist?"

"Yes." Harris nodded. "They do exist." He removed his coat and put it
over the back of the chair. Then he went to the window and let it down.
Warm spring air rushed into the room. He settled himself on the bed,
leaning back.

"The Pipers exist, all right--in the minds of the Garrison crew! To the
crew, the Pipers are real. The crew created them. It's a mass hypnosis,
a group projection, and all the men there have it, to some degree."

"How did it start?"

"Those men on Y-3 were sent there because they were skilled,
highly-trained men with exceptional ability. All their lives they've
been schooled by complex modern society, fast tempo and high integration
between people. Constant pressure toward some goal, some job to be done.

"Those men are put down suddenly on an asteroid where there are natives
living the most primitive of existence, completely vegetable lives. No
concept of goal, no concept of purpose, and hence no ability to plan.
The natives live the way the animals live, from day to day, sleeping,
picking food from the trees. A kind of Garden-of-Eden existence, without
struggle or conflict."

"So? But--"

"Each of the Garrison crew sees the natives and _unconsciously_ thinks
of his own early life, when he was a child, when _he_ had no worries, no
responsibilities, before he joined modern society. A baby lying in the
sun.

"But he can't admit this to himself! He can't admit that he might _want_
to live like the natives, to lie and sleep all day. So he invents The
Pipers, the idea of a mysterious group living in the woods who trap him,
lead him into their kind of life. Then he can blame _them_, not himself.
They 'teach' him to become a part of the woods."

"What are you going to do? Have the woods burned?"

"No." Harris shook his head. "That's not the answer; the woods are
harmless. The answer is psychotherapy for the men. That's why I'm going
right back, so I can begin work. They've got to be made to see that the
Pipers are inside them, their own unconscious voices calling to them to
give up their responsibilities. They've got to be made to realize that
there are no Pipers, at least, not outside themselves. The woods are
harmless and the natives have nothing to teach anyone. They're primitive
savages, without even a written language. We're seeing a psychological
projection by a whole Garrison of men who want to lay down their work
and take it easy for a while."

The room was silent.

"I see," Cox said presently. "Well, it makes sense." He got to his feet.
"I hope you can do something with the men when you get back."

"I hope so, too," Harris agreed. "And I think I can. After all, it's
just a question of increasing their self-awareness. When they have that
the Pipers will vanish."

Cox nodded. "Well, you go ahead with your unpacking, Doc. I'll see you
at dinner. And maybe before you leave, tomorrow."

"Fine."

       *       *       *       *       *

Harris opened the door and the Commander went out into the hall. Harris
closed the door after him and then went back across the room. He looked
out the window for a moment, his hands in his pockets.

It was becoming evening, the air was turning cool. The sun was just
setting as he watched, disappearing behind the buildings of the city
surrounding the hospital. He watched it go down.

Then he went over to his two suitcases. He was tired, very tired from
his trip. A great weariness was beginning to descend over him. There
were so many things to do, so terribly many. How could he hope to do
them all? Back to the asteroid. And then what?

He yawned, his eyes closing. How sleepy he was! He looked over at the
bed. Then he sat down on the edge of it and took his shoes off. So much
to do, the next day.

He put his shoes in the corner of the room. Then he bent over,
unsnapping one of the suitcases. He opened the suitcase. From it he took
a bulging gunnysack. Carefully, he emptied the contents of the sack out
on the floor. Dirt, rich soft dirt. Dirt he had collected during his
last hours there, dirt he had carefully gathered up.

When the dirt was spread out on the floor he sat down in the middle of
it. He stretched himself out, leaning back. When he was fully
comfortable he folded his hands across his chest and closed his eyes. So
much work to do--But later on, of course. Tomorrow. How warm the dirt
was....

He was sound asleep in a moment.




Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from _Imagination: Stories of Science and
    Fantasy_ February 1953. Extensive research did not uncover any
    evidence that the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.
    Minor spelling and typographical errors have been corrected without
    note.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Piper in the Woods, by Philip K. Dick

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PIPER IN THE WOODS ***

***** This file should be named 32832.txt or 32832.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/2/8/3/32832/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
