The Project Gutenberg EBook of Problem on Balak, by Roger D. Aycock

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Problem on Balak

Author: Roger D. Aycock

Release Date: October 4, 2010 [EBook #33839]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PROBLEM ON BALAK ***




Produced by Robert Cicconetti, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                          PROBLEM ON BALAK

                            By ROGER DEE

                     Illustrated by DICK FRANCIS

[Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from the September 1953
issue of Galaxy Science Fiction. Extensive research did not uncover any
evidence that the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]


[Sidenote: _Sometimes you can solve your problem by running out on it!_]


What I'm getting at is that you don't ever have to worry about being
bored stiff in Solar Exploitations field work. It never gets dull--and
in some pretty strange places, at that.

Take the _S.E.2100's_ discovery of Balak, which is a little planet
circling 70 Ophiuchi some 20,000 light-years from Earth, for example.
You'd never expect to run across the greatest race of surgeons in the
Galaxy--structural, neural or what have you--on a little apple like
that, any more than you'd expect a four man complement like ours to be
handed the sort of life-and-death problem they put to us.

And, if by some miracle of prophecy you anticipated both, it's a cinch
you'd never expect that problem to be solved in the way ours was.

       *       *       *       *       *

Captain Corelli and Gibbons and I couldn't have gone more than a hundred
yards from the _S.E.2100_ before we met our first Balakian native. Or,
to be more accurate, before he met us.

Corelli and I were filling our little sterilized bottles with samples of
soil and vegetation and keeping a wary eye out for possible predators
when it happened. Gibbons, our ecologist and the scientific mainspring
of our crew, was watching a swarm of little twelve-legged bugs that were
busily pollinating a dwarf shrub at the top and collecting payment in
drops of white sap that oozed out at the bottom in return. His eyes were
shining behind their spectacles, and he was swearing to himself in a
pleased monotone.

"Signal the ship and tell the Quack--if you can pry that hypochondriac
idiot away from his gargles and germicide sprays--to bring out a
live-specimen container," he called to Captain Corelli. "We've stumbled
onto something really new here, a conscious symbiosis between entirely
dissimilar life-forms! If the rest of the flora and fauna cooperate like
this...."

At the moment, Gibbons' discovery didn't register, because it was just
then that the first Balakian showed himself.

The native looked at first glance something like a wrinkled pink
octopus, standing three feet high and nearly as broad, and he walked in
a skip-a-step swing like a man on crutches because his three short legs
were set in a horizontal row. He had four arms to each side, the lower
ones meant for grasping and holding and the upper ones for manipulation.
He didn't have a head, exactly, but there was a face of sorts up near
the top of the body that looked like nothing so much as a politely
grinning Oriental's.

He wasn't armed, but I took no chances--I dropped my specimen kit and
yanked out the heat-gun that is a part of every S.E. field operative's
gear. Captain Corelli, who was on the point of calling the Quack at the
ship, took his thumb off the mike button and grabbed for his own
weapon. Gibbons, like a true scientist, stood by with his mouth open,
too interested to be scared.

Then the Balakian spoke, and Corelli and I gaped wider than Gibbons. As
I said before, Balak is some 20,000 light-years from Earth, and to our
knowledge we were the first human beings ever to come within a hundred
parsecs of the place.

"Please don't shoot, gentlemen," he said to us in Terran. "My name is
Gaffa, and I assure you that I am quite friendly."

       *       *       *       *       *

I had to give Gibbons credit for being fast on his mental feet; he had
taken over before Corelli and I could get our mouths closed, and was
talking to the native as if this sort of thing happened every time we
made planetfall.

"You speak Terran fluently," Gibbons said. "Or is this some sort of
telepathic contact that creates the illusion of oral communication?"

The native grinned delightedly. "The contact is oral. We learned your
language from an independent planet-hunter named Haslop, who was
wrecked here some years ago."

In Solar Exploitations you learn to expect the unexpected, but to me
this was stretching coincidence clear out of joint. We had the latest
zero-interval-transference drive made, and I couldn't believe that any
independent planet-staker could have beaten us here with outmoded
equipment.

"A Terran?" I asked. "Where is he now?"

"Coming up," Gaffa said. "With my fellows."

A couple of dozen other Balakians, looking exactly like him, bore down
on us through the dwarf shrubbery, and with them were two lanky Terrans
dressed in loose shirt-and-drawers ensembles which obviously had been
made on Balak. Even at a distance the Terrans looked disturbingly alike,
and when they got closer I could see that they were identical twins.

"You don't count so good, chum," I said. "I see _two_ Terrans."

"Only one," Gaffa corrected, grinning wider. "The other is one of us."

I didn't believe it, of course. Corelli didn't get it, either; his eyes
had a glazed look, and he was shaking his head like a man with a gnat in
his ear.

One of the Terrans rushed up to us with tears in his eyes and his
Adam's apple bobbing, so overcome with emotion that I was afraid he
might kiss us.

"I'm Ira Haslop," he said in a choked voice. "I've been marooned here
for twenty-two eternal years, and I never thought I'd see a Terran face
again. And now--"

He stopped, but not for breath. The other skinny Terran had grabbed his
arm and swung him around.

"What the hell do you think you're doing, you masquerading nightmare?"
the second one yelled. "_I'm_ Ira Haslop, and you damn well know it! If
you think you're going to pass yourself off as me and go home to Earth
in my place...."

The first Haslop gaped at him for a moment; then he slapped the other's
hand off his arm and shook a bony fist in his face.

"So that's your game! That's why these grinning freaks made you look
like me and threw us together all these years--they've planned all along
to ring in a switch and send you home instead of me! Well, it won't
work!"

       *       *       *       *       *

The second Haslop swung on him then and the two of them went to the mat
like a pair of loose-drawered tigers, cursing and gouging. The grinning
natives separated them after a moment and examined them carefully for
damage, chattering away with great satisfaction in their own language.

Corelli and Gibbons and I stared at each other like three fools. It was
impossible to think that either of the two men could be anything but
what he claimed to be, a perfectly normal and thoroughly angry Terran;
but when each of them swore that one of them--the other one, of
course--was an alien, and the natives backed up the accusation, what
else could we believe?

Gaffa, who seemed to be a sort of headman, took over and explained the
situation--which seemed to be an incredibly long-range gag cooked up by
these octopod jokers, without the original Haslop's knowledge, against
the day when another Terran ship might land on Balak. Their real intent,
Gaffa said, was to present us with a problem that could be solved only
by a species with a real understanding of its own kind. If we could
solve it, his people stood ready to assist us in any way possible. If
not....

I didn't like the sound of it, so I reached for my heat-gun again. So
did Captain Corelli and Gibbons, but we were too slow.

A little stinging bug--another link in the cooperative Balakian
ecology--bit each of us on the back of the neck and we passed out cold.
When we woke up again, we were "guests" of Gaffa and his tribe in a sort
of settlement miles from the _S.E.2100_, and there wasn't so much as a
nail file among us in the way of weapons.

The natives hadn't bothered to shackle us or lock us up. We found
ourselves lying instead in the middle of a circular court surrounded by
mossy mounds that looked like flattened beehives, but which were
actually dwellings where the Balakians lived.

We learned later that the buildings were constructed by swarms of tiny
burrowing brutes like termites, who built them up grain by grain
according to specifications. I can't begin to explain the principle
behind the harmony existing between all living things on Balak; it just
was, and seemed to operate like a sort of hyper-sympathy or interlocking
telepathy between species. Every creature on the planet performed some
service for some other creature--even the plants, which grew edibles
without pain-nerves so it wouldn't hurt to be plucked, and which sent up
clouds of dust-dry spores once a week to make it rain.

And the three-legged, eight-armed natives were right at the top of this
screwy utopia, lords of it all.

Not that any of us were interested at first in it as an ecological
marvel, of course. From the moment we woke up we were too busy with
plans for escaping the trap we'd fallen into.

       *       *       *       *       *

"The Quack is our only hope," Captain Corelli said, and groaned at the
thought. "If that hypochondriac idiot has brains enough to sit tight, we
may have a chance. If they get him, too, we're lost."

The Quack was a damned poor reed to lean on.

His name was Alvin Frick, but no one ever used it. He was twenty-nine,
and would never have rated a space berth as anything but a hydroponics
attendant, which is one step above manual labor. He was short, plump and
scrubbed to the pink, and he was the only hypochondriac I ever knew in
this modern age of almost no sickness. He groused about the germs
swarming in his reduction tanks, and he was scared green, in spite of
his permanent immunization shots, that he'd contract some nameless alien
disease at every planetfall. He dosed himself continuously with
concoctions whipped up from an old medical book he had found somewhere,
and he spent most of his off-duty time spraying himself and his quarters
with disinfectant. His mania had only one good facet--if he had been the
careless sort, hydroponics being what it is, he'd have smelled like a
barnyard instead of a dispensary.

We had never made any attempt to get rid of him, since we might have
drawn an even worse tank-farmer, but we began to wish now that we had.
We had hardly begun to figure ways and means of escaping when a bunch of
grinning natives swung into our court and deposited the Quack, sleeping
soundly, in our midst.

He came to just before sundown, and when we told him what had happened,
he promptly passed out again--this time from fright.

"A fine lot of help _you_ are, you super-sterile slob," I said when he
woke up for the second time. I'd probably have said worse, but it was
just then that the real squeeze began.

Gaffa came back with the two scowling Haslops in tow and handed us the
problem his tribe had spent twenty-two years in working up.

"We have learned enough already from Haslop," Gaffa said, "to know
something of the pressures and complexities that follow the expansion of
your Terran Realm through the galaxy, and to assure us that in time we
must either become a part of that Realm or isolate ourselves completely.

"We are a peaceful species and feel that we should probably benefit as
much from your physical sciences as your people would from our
biological skills, but there is a question of compatibility that must be
settled first, before we may risk making ourselves known to Terra. So we
have devised a test to determine what our course shall be."

       *       *       *       *       *

We raised our brows at one another over that, not guessing at the time
just what the Balakians really had on the ball.

"For thousands of generations, we have devoted our energies to knowing
ourselves and our environment," Gaffa said, "because we know that no
species can be truly balanced unless it understands itself. The
symbiosis between all life-forms on our planet is the result of that
knowledge. We should like to assure ourselves that you are capable of
understanding your own kind as well before we offer our services to your
Terran Realm--and therein lies the test we have arranged for you."

Captain Corelli drew himself up stiffly. "I think," he said, "that the
three of us should be able to unravel your little riddle, if you'll
condescend to tell us what it is."

Gaffa sent a puzzled look at the Quack, and I could see that he was
wondering why Corelli hadn't included him in the boast. But Gaffa
didn't know how simple the Quack could be, nor how preoccupied with his
own physiology he was.

"One of these two," said Gaffa, pointing to the two Haslops, "is the
original Ira Haslop, who was stranded here twenty-two Terran years ago.
The other is a synthetic creation of ours--an android, if you like, who
is identical, cell by cell, with the original so far as exterior
likeness is concerned. We could not duplicate the interior without
dissection, which of course was out of the question, so we were forced
to make compromises that--"

Gibbons interrupted him incredulously. "You mean you've created a living
creature, brain and all?"

"Only the body," Gaffa said. "Creation of intelligence is still beyond
us. The brain of the duplicate Haslop is one of our own, transplanted
and conditioned to Haslop's knowledge, memories and ideology."

He paused for a moment, and the waiting circle of Balakians grinned with
him in anticipation.

"Your problem is this," Gaffa said. "If you know yourselves well enough
to merit our help, then you should be able to distinguish readily
between the real and false Haslops. If you fail, we shall have no
alternative but to keep you here on Balak for the rest of your lives,
since to release you would bring other Terrans down on us in force."

And that was it. All we had to do was to take these two identical
twins--who looked alike, thought alike and cursed alike--and determine
which was real and which was bogus.

"For a very pertinent reason which you may or may not discover," Gaffa
said, "the test must be limited to a few hours. You have until sunrise
tomorrow morning, gentlemen."

And with that he crutched away at his skip-a-step walk, taking his
grinning cohorts with him. The two Haslops remained behind, glowering
and grumbling at each other.

       *       *       *       *       *

The situation didn't look too bad at first.

"There are no two things," Captain Corelli declared, "that are exactly
and absolutely identical. And that applies, I should say, especially to
identities."

It had a heartening sound. I've never been long on logic, being a very
ordinary S.E. navigator whose automatic equipment is designed to do
practically everything for him, and Corelli seemed to know what he was
talking about.

Gibbons, being a scientist, saw it differently.

"That's not even good sophistry," he said. "The concept of identity
between two objects has no meaning whatever, Captain, unless we have a
prior identification of one or the other. Aristotle himself couldn't
have told an apple from a coconut if he'd never seen or heard of
either."

"Any fool would know that," one of the Haslops grunted. And the other
added in the same tone: "Hey, if you guys are going at it like that,
we'll be here forever!"

"All right," Corelli said, deflated. "We'll try another tack."

He thought for a minute or two. "How about screening them for background
detail? The real Haslop was a bounty-claimer, which means that he must
have made thousands of planetfalls before crashing here. The bogus one
couldn't remember the details of all those worlds as well as the
original, no matter how many times he'd been told, could he?"

"Won't work," one of the Haslops said disgustedly. "Hell, after
twenty-two years I can't remember those places myself, and I was
_there_."

The other Haslop gave him a dirty look. "You were _here_, fellow--_I_
was _there_."

And to the captain he said, "We're getting nowhere, friend. You're
underestimating these Balakians--they look and act like screwballs, but
they're sharp. In the twenty-two years I've lived with that carbon copy
of myself, he's learned everything I know."

"He's right," Gibbons put in. He blinked a couple of times and turned
pink. "Unless the real Haslop happened to be married, that is. I'm a
bachelor myself, but I'd say there are some memories that a married man
wouldn't discuss, even when marooned."

Captain Corelli stared at him admiringly. "I never gave you enough
credit, Gibbons," he said. "You're right! How about--"

"Don't help any," one of the Haslops said morosely. "I never was
married. And now I never will be if I've got to depend on you jerks to
get me out of this mess."

The sun went down just then and a soft, drowsy darkness fell. I thought
at first that we'd have to finish our investigation in the dark, but the
natives had made provisions for that. A swarm of fireflies as big as
robins sailed in from somewhere and circled around over the court,
lighting it as bright as day. The Balakian houses made a dim row of
flattened shadow-mounds at the outskirts of the circle. A ring of
natives sat tailor-fashion on the ground in front of them--a neat trick
considering that they had three legs each to fold up--and grinned at us.

They had waited twenty-two years for this show, and now that it had
come they were enjoying every minute of it.

       *       *       *       *       *

Our investigation was pretty rough going. The fireflies overhead all
circled in one direction, which made you dizzy every time you looked up,
and besides that the Quack had remembered that he was a prisoner in an
alien environment and was at the mercy of any outlandish disease that
might creep past his permanent immunization. He muttered and grumbled to
himself about the risk, and his grousing got on our nerves even worse
than usual.

I moved over to shut him up, and blinked when I saw him pop something
into his mouth. My first guess was that he had managed to sneak some
food concentrate out of the ship somehow, and the thought made me
realize how hungry I was.

"What've you got there, Quack?" I demanded. "Come on, give--what are you
hiding out?"

"Antibiotics and stuff," he answered, and pulled a little flat plastic
case out of a pocket.

It was his portable medicine chest, which he carried the way
superstitious people used to carry rabbits' feet, and it was largely
responsible for our calling him the Quack. It was full of patent capsule
remedies that he had gleaned out of his home medical book--a cut thumb,
a surprise headache, or a siege of gas on the stomach would never catch
the Quack unprepared!

"Jerk," I said, and went back to Gibbons and Corelli, who were arguing a
new approach to our problem.

"It's worth a try," Gibbons said. He turned on the two Haslops, who were
bristling like a pair of strange dogs. "This question is for the real
Haslop: Have you ever been put through a Rorschach, thematic
apperception or free association test?"

The real Haslop hadn't. Either of them.

"Then we'll try free association," Gibbons said, and explained what he
wanted of them.

"_Water_," Gibbons said, popping it out quick and sharp.

"Spigot," the Haslops said together. Which is exactly what any spaceman
would say, since the only water important to him comes out of a ship's
tank. "Lake" and "river" and "spring," to him, are only words in books.

Gibbons chewed his lip and tried again, but the result was the same
every time. When he said "payday" they both came back "binge," and when
he said "man" they answered "woman!" with the same gleam in their eyes.

"I could have told you it wouldn't work," one Haslop said when Gibbons
threw up his hands and quit. "I've lived so long with that phony that
he even knows what I'm going to say next."

"I was going to say the same thing," the other one growled. "After
twenty-two years of drinking and arguing with him, we've begun--God help
me!--to think alike."

I tried my own hand just once.

"Gaffa says that they are exactly identical so far as outside appearance
goes," I said. "But he may be wrong, or lying. Maybe we'd better check
for ourselves."

       *       *       *       *       *

The Haslops raised a howl, of course, but it did them no good. Gibbons
and Corelli and I ganged them one at a time--the Quack refused to help
for fear of being contaminated--and examined them carefully. It was a
lively job, since both of them swore they were ticklish, and under
different circumstances it could have been embarrassing.

But it settled one point. Gaffa hadn't lied. They were absolutely
identical, as far as we could determine.

We had given it up and were resting from our labors when Gaffa came
grinning out of the darkness and brought us a big crystal pitcher of
something that would have passed for a first-class Planet Punch except
that it was nearer two-thirds alcohol than the fifty-fifty mix you get
at most interplanetary ginmills.

The two Haslops had a slug of it as a matter of course, being accustomed
to it, and the rest of us followed suit. Only the Quack refused, turning
green at the thought of all the alien bacteria that might be swimming
around in the pitcher.

A couple of drinks made us feel better.

"I've been thinking," Captain Corelli said, "about what Gaffa said when
he limited the time of the test, that we might or might not discover the
reason for ourselves. Now what the hell did the grinning heathen mean by
that? Is there a reason, or was he only dragging a red herring across
the bogus Haslop's track?"

Gibbons looked thoughtful. I sat back while he pondered and watched the
Quack, who was swallowing another antibiotic capsule.

"Wait a minute," Gibbons exclaimed. "Captain, you've hit on something
there!"

He stared at the Haslops. They stared back, unimpressed.

"Gaffa said you two were exactly alike outside," Gibbons said. "And
we've proved it. Does that mean you're not alike _inside_?"

"Sure," one of them said. "But what of it? You're sure as hell not going
to cut one of us open to see!"

"You're confusing the issue," Gibbons snapped. "What I'm getting at is
this--if you two aren't made alike inside, then you can't possibly exist
on the same sort of diet. One of you eats the same sort of food as
ourselves. The other can't. But which is which?"

One of the Haslops pointed a quivering finger at the other. "It's him!"
he said. "I've watched him drink his dinner for twenty-two years--he's
the fake!"

"Liar!" the other one yelled, springing up. Corelli stepped between them
and the second Haslop subsided, grumbling. "It's true enough, only
_he's_ the one that drinks his meals. This stuff in the pitcher is the
food he lives on--alcohol for energy, with minerals and other stuff
dissolved in it. I drink it with him for kicks, but that phony can't eat
anything else."

       *       *       *       *       *

Corelli snapped his fingers.

"So that's why they limited our time, and why they brought this
stuff--to keep their fake Haslop refueled! All we've got to do to
separate our men now is feed them something solid. The one that eats it
is the real Haslop."

"Sure, all we need now is some solid food," I said. "You don't happen to
have a couple of sandwiches on you, do you?"

Everybody got quiet for a couple of minutes, and in the silence the
Quack surprised us all by deciding to speak up.

"Since I'm stuck here for life," he said, "a few germs more or less
won't matter much. Pass me the pitcher, will you?"

He took a man-sized slug of the fiery stuff without even wiping off the
pitcher's rim.

After that we gave it up, as who wouldn't have? Captain Corelli said the
hell with it and took such a slug out of the pitcher that the two
Haslops yelled murder and grabbed it quick themselves, and from then on
we just sat around and drank and talked and waited for the sunrise that
would condemn us to Balak for the rest of our lives.

Thinking about our problem had reminded me of an old puzzle I'd heard
somewhere about three men being placed in a room where they can see each
other but not themselves; they're shown three white hats and two black
ones, and then they're blindfolded and a hat is put on each of their
heads. When the blindfolds are taken off, the third man knows by looking
at the other two and by what they say just what color hat he's wearing
himself, but I always forget how it is that he knows.

We got so interested in the hat problem that the east was turning pink
before we realized it.

None of us actually saw the sun rise, though, except the Quack and the
bogus Haslop.

I was right in the middle of a sentence when all of a sudden my stomach
rolled over and growled like a dying tiger, and I never had such an
all-gone feeling in my life. I looked at the others, wondering if the
stuff in the pitcher had poisoned us all, and saw Gibbons and Corelli
staring at each other with the same startled look in their eyes. One of
the Haslops was hit, too--he had the same pinched expression around the
mouth, and perspiration stood out on his forehead in drops as big as
grapes.

And then the four of us were on our feet and dashing for open country,
leaving the Quack and the remaining Haslop staring after us. The Haslop
who stayed looked puzzled, I thought, but the Quack only seemed
interested and very much entertained.

I couldn't be sure of that, though. There wasn't time to look twice.

       *       *       *       *       *

When we came back to the court later, shaken and pale and bracing
ourselves for another dash at any minute, we found Gaffa and his
grinning chums congratulating the Quack. The bogus Haslop had dropped
his impersonation act and seemed very happy.

"I've learned to like Haslop so well after twenty-two years," he said,
"that I'm quite prejudiced in favor of his species, and I'm delighted
that we are to join your Realm. Balak and Terra will get along famously,
I know, since you people are so ingenious and appreciative of humor."

We ignored the Balakians and swooped down on the Quack.

"You put something in that pitcher after you drank out of it, you insult
to humanity," I said. "What was it?"

The Quack backed off with a wary look in his eye.

"A recipe from the curiosa section of my medical book," he said. "I
whipped up some capsules for my pocket kit, just in case of emergency,
and I couldn't help thinking of them when--"

"Never mind the buildup," Captain Corelli said. "_What was it?_"

"A formula invented by ancient Terran bartenders, and not recommended
except in extreme cases," the Quack said. "With a very odd name. It's
called a twin Mickey."

We'd probably have murdered him then and there if the Quack's concoction
had let us.

Later on we had to admit that the Quack had actually done us a service,
since his identifying the real Haslop saved us from being marooned for
life on Balak. And the Balakians were such an immediate sensation in the
Terran Realm that the Quack's part in their admittance made him famous
overnight. Somebody high up in Government circles got him out of Solar
Exploitations field work and gave him a sinecure in an antibiotics
laboratory, where he wound up as happy as a pig in a peanut field.

Which points up the statement I made in the beginning, that one thing
you never have to worry about in Solar Exploitations work is being
bored.

You see what I mean?







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Problem on Balak, by Roger D. Aycock

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PROBLEM ON BALAK ***

***** This file should be named 33839.txt or 33839.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/3/8/3/33839/

Produced by Robert Cicconetti, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
