The Project Gutenberg EBook of By Earthlight, by Bryce Walton

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: By Earthlight

Author: Bryce Walton

Release Date: October 6, 2010 [EBook #33842]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BY EARTHLIGHT ***




Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







                         Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced Science Fiction Stories 1953. Extensive
    research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S. copyright on this
    publication was renewed.


     _We all have to die sometime, but it's more the manner of
      our going, and the reason why we must die when we do that's
      the rub._


                           _By Earthlight_


                          _by_ BRYCE WALTON

       *       *       *       *       *




[Illustration]

The rocket skin was like a dun-colored wall in the dim light under the
hill. Three anonymous men who were beyond suspicion, who had worked on
the rocket, were taking Barlow up in the elevator, up along the
rocket's curving walls.

Earlier, scores of men had climbed up many ladders to various
platforms where doors opened into the rocket's compartments for the
insertion and repair of the many highly-specialized instruments.

_It was still--so damn still here!_

Some guards were way down below somewhere in the shadows, but they
didn't notice anything. The three men were regular workers and there
were last minute things to be done. It all looked quite logical.

Over in the blockhouse, some of America's most important political and
military figures were sitting over instruments and charts, waiting,
discussing.

One of the three men was talking, explaining things to Barlow about
the rocket, about the pressure-suit he was to wear. Barlow listened
and got it all straight. Barlow was helped into the suit. It weighed
700 pounds, and after they had encased him in it--all but the huge
helmet-plate--he lay there absolutely helpless, on a dolly, waiting
to be rolled into the rocket's compartment.

The anonymous faces he'd never seen before, and would never see again,
looked down at him. He blinked several times and moistened his lips.
The suit was like a lead coffin. He didn't feel dead, but supposedly
dead and unable to tell any one. A ridiculous way to feel!

What was the matter with him? He'd expected to die, all the time, from
the start. Everybody died! Few could experience what he was
experiencing. Death was worth this. One last kick, the biggest kick of
all for Hal Barlow. You lived for kicks, so what was the matter?

He couldn't move his limbs; he could barely lift his head. Encased in
700 pounds of suit. Helpless. A pencil-flash flickered on and off. A
couple of eyes shone. A whisper. "The kit is fastened to your belt.
The instructions are in an air-tight capsule inside the kit. If you're
caught, and the paper's removed, it will disintegrate; now we'll slide
you inside."

The helmet slid over his face. It was absolutely dark. The suit,
all-enclosing mobile shelter, atmosphere-pressure, temperature-control,
mobility and electric power to manipulate tools. Its own power plant. It
reprocessed continuously the precious air breathed by the occupant,
putting it back into circulating supply after enriching it. The rocket was
cold and alien and it would support no life; the suit alone protected him.
The rocket was just metal and gadgets; only the suit stood between him and
an agonizing death from acceleration, deceleration, extremes of heat and
cold.

The dolly was rolling him in through the small opening. His encased
body being slid, stuffed, jammed into something like a wad of ammo
into a barrel. His body was entirely constricted. He couldn't hear
anything. It was black. He could shift his massive helmet slightly. It
clanged against metal, and the sound inside the helmet was like rusty
thunder.

His blood boiled softly. He felt like a child shut up in the dark. He
thought of the radio in the suit, and desperately manipulated the
controls by the small control-panel in the metal hand of the suit.

The voices seemed to quiet whatever had been boiling up in him. He had
started to scream; he remembered that now. Somehow, with an intense
effort, he had suppressed the scream, clamped his teeth on it. Now the
voices helped. He realized how much time had passed in the quick
pressured dark. Voices preparing to send the first rocket to the moon.
Quiet voices with all the suspense and tension held down by long
military habit.

He had started being afraid. More than that. He had been going to
scream. He--Hal Barlow! Where was the excitement, the great thrill,
the big kick he had anticipated, to compensate for a voluntary dying?

He felt only anxiety. Afraid the terror would return. He had never
admitted fear before. He thought back a little, trying to recall
something that would explain the fear.

"_X minus one!_"

He felt as if an immense cyst of suppuration had burst inside of him.
Sweat teared his eyes.

_If they had psyched me, I'd know. I wouldn't be afraid. What would
they have found? Why am I afraid now when I've never been afraid in my
life?_

Or had he? He couldn't remember. He tried to think of something
immediate....

       *       *       *       *       *

Two hours before, Barlow had paused on the second floor of the men's
barracks on the White Sands, New Mexico, Proving Grounds and looked
put. He shivered a little. It was a lonely spot, maybe the loneliest
in the world. Especially at night. Even here, Barlow managed to be
with someone most of the time--but the same dullards got boring. Even
women (like Lorraine), who said they loved him, were futile
companions; a guy whose future was death couldn't get emotionally
involved.

He went into his three-room dump and switched on the radio at once. He
needed the sound of voices and the music. He started to undress in the
dark. But the cold and frigid moonlight came in and shone on the bed;
it revealed the body lying there. The face looking up at Barlow was
his own! His breath thinned. His hands were wet.

It did him a lot more justice than any mirror, or the reflection in a
woman's eyes. The half-boyish, half-man face with the thin wiry lips,
the blond curling hair and the sun-burned, cynical face. The blue eyes
that seemed never quite able to smile. The face on the bed never
would; it was dead.

Barlow turned. Part of the shadow in the corner moved. A voice.
"D-716."

The 16 meant that this was that number among the hundred possible
goals of duty and sacrifice. The D of course meant Death, and Barlow
had known since having been given the number years ago what his end
would be.

There were many other ways, some worse than dying. Loss of identity
by plastic surgery. Barlow's appearance had been thoroughly altered
three times. Some had volunteered for the torture and concentration
camps of the East. Barlow had done that, too; anything for kicks.

He'd never bothered to indoctrinate himself with the philosophy of the
Brotherhood with its seven rituals of self-denial and discipline, its
long program of learning the love of humanity, the unity of each with
all people and with the Universe.

He had his own philosophy. You were born, and then you died; the rest
was just a living job.

You lived as an individual, and not as a cog--if you had the guts for
it. You lived for the excitement and the thrill of danger and the
maintenance of individuality--if you could. Otherwise you might as
well die when you were born--because then the stretch between wasn't
worth the price.

That was Barlow's way. Only the _manner_ of dying was important.
Everybody had to die. All that the Brotherhood really worked for was
the goal of enabling everybody to live as long as possible, and
finally to die with dignity and moral integrity. Barlow didn't need
their philosophy; basically, that was all he, too, really
wanted--maybe.

The man was indistinct in the shadows. An anonymous figure without a
name. "The man on the bed has made the supreme sacrifice for the
cause."

"So he's dead," Barlow said casually. "So what?"

"It took a lot of work to make such an exact resemblance. One of our
members brought him in through the guards in a supply truck. It's easy
to bring in a dead man who'll never go back out--except as someone who
was already in. You of course."

"No one will know what is to happen to the real me then?"

"No one. It will be assumed that you committed suicide."

Barlow grinned thinly.

"There's been no change in your attitude? Your willingness to--"

"Die? None. Willing Barlow, always ready to drop dead at a moment's
notice."

"You're the only one of the Brotherhood who's never submitted to the
rituals and the psyching; we hope that isn't bad. Your service has
been excellent. But I wish you had submitted to a psyching before this
assignment, because there's one basic weakness, an Achilles Heel, in
everyone, and on an assignment so vital as this, it would be worth
knowing, in advance...."

"Get someone else if you're worried."

"You're the only member we have, who's inside the grounds here, who
can stand the acceleration and deceleration."

"Ah," Barlow exclaimed. "This sounds big."

"It couldn't be bigger," the anonymous man said. "Than a one-way trip
to the moon!"

       *       *       *       *       *

The man explained some things to Barlow. Barlow didn't say anything.
Maybe there was a slight tremor in his lips, but he didn't think so.

_The first man into space. The first man to the Moon!_

"... a world atomic war may break within six months. In spite of
propaganda being fed to the people, trying to paint this atomic war as
just another war, we know it will probably be the last war, the end of
civilization. So our philosophical revolution, the revolution of men's
minds, will begin in approximately six months from tonight. But if
this last war breaks, our centuries-old plan will fail; it will never
even materialize.

"The revolution is quite delicate. Simultaneously, all over the world,
at a specific time, and under rigidly-controlled and favorable
circumstances, the movement we have been building so long will spring
up. Nothing can stop it then, once the spiritual fires begin to burn!
But it can't begin until the exact scheduled moment. Your job will be
to attempt to prolong this present 'peace' until our plan can go into
effect. That's why you're making this trip to the moon."

Barlow laughed. "That doesn't mean a damn thing to me. To me, the only
important thing is that I'm the first man into space. That's enough
for anyone to know."

"Is it?"

"I'm just Hal Barlow, a guy who's had several other names, and who's
really only a number! I joined the Brotherhood for kicks, not
lectures! I'll do this job, in my own way, because I want to do it.
For Hal Barlow!"

The man in the shadows nodded slowly. "Can't you feel what it means?
Our spiritual revolution? You've read some of the works we've printed
on it. This feeling of oneness with humanity. That's the real value.
Can't you--"

Barlow said. "Isn't the offer of my life enough?"

The shadow said. "Maybe--for us, for people. But what about you? Maybe
there are some things even you can't face alone. And think of those
people out there; they need and cling to each other, even to each
others' madness. Living in futile hope while going on down the crazy
toboggan-ride to their own destruction. The living loudly and in
public, because to be silent allows reality to enter in on feet of
terror; and because 'to be alone' means madness. The simulated gaiety
of the bars every night, with the shadows outside that never seem to
go away, even under the glare of neon. They've never had a chance to
plan, to live with any hope for the future. Burdened down by anxiety,
they've built up a defense of falseness, and underneath, the terrible
fear of the atomic bomb is a constant inner sickness!"

Barlow grinned. "A nice speech, but I already know those things. What
I'm really interested in is what I'm supposed to do."

So the man explained to Barlow some things about why he was going on a
one-way trip to the moon in a rocket intended for no man to be in, in
a rocket intended for no living thing.

After the man had gone, Barlow quickly snapped on the radio again, and
he felt better with the music and human voices. For a moment there, he
had seemed to feel a tinge of fear. What the devil? Psyche-screening?
So he was capable of fear; who wasn't? He didn't need psyching. What
indignity to the individual--to have the fingerprints of psychiatrists
all over your brain!

_I'm Hal Barlow! The first man into space. The first man to the Moon!_

He had gotten to the rocket-launching site early and had sat in the
moonlight smoking a cigarette. He felt odd inside and he didn't know
why. The moon had a cold effect on him. He was worried, about himself.

The whole area had been painted and disguised with all the arts of
camouflage; everything appearing from the air looked like sand and
sage and rock and hill. The rocket itself was built inside the hill,
which served as a giant launching-barrel to guide the rocket with the
exact accuracy demanded in its take-off.

The moon had loomed large and still and cold.

"_... ten, nine, eight...._"

So he was back inside the suit, inside the rocket, jammed into a
barrel like a wad of ammo. Now he was beginning to see what might
cause his terror. His Achilles Heel. But it was too late. What would
they have found if they'd psyched him?

A wild kid--old, but still driven by the urges of a kid who hadn't
grown up. A lot of surface things, the inside of him covered over.
Obsessed with exterior things, he had never given himself a chance to
see inside himself. Afraid. Always been with people, beer, women,
bars, juke-boxes, noises, excitement. Never alone--

No parents that he could remember. He'd run away from the middle-west
orphanage and heard about the Brotherhood from a friendly priest, and
the priest had taken him into the organization. Strictly for kicks
though, Barlow had warned. The priest had smiled with wisdom--"You
don't know your own true motives, my boy."

"_... seven, six, five, four...._"

       *       *       *       *       *

Just Hal Barlow. That was all right, but the real Hal Barlow was
unknown. He'd never realized, with all his screaming about
individualism, how much he'd depended on people. He had loved no one.
He had seemed to love them when he was with them, but could never form
any solid associations. Now all the people he had never really known
became as shadows thrown upon the wall of his brain. He felt the sweat
soaking his skin. Alone. Destined for it like a twin, whose double has
died at birth. Always--in league with those on the other side of the
looking-glass.

"_... three... two...._"

He screamed; _no, I can't do it, I can't face it--_

_Someone--listen--_

The dull muted explosion miles away, and the terrific compression and
the wash of numbing, deafening sound beating back around him.
Everything inside him seeming to whirl up and come down in a crash.
The seeming to slide around in the dihedrals of time and space,
slipping in and out of being like a ball-bearing in a maze....

First man to the moon. In a rocket meant for no man. Not a rocket. A
coffin--on a one-way trip--

_And I--maybe the one, the very one they should never have sent._

       *       *       *       *       *

With each degree of returning consciousness, more and more capacity
for fighting the fear. He cursed the fear and wrestled with it like a
man with an invisible opponent down an endless flight of stairs.

He felt too alone, isolated; then he thought of the readings. They
could be flashed into a small screen in the face-plate by manipulating
the fingers of his right hand. He tried to concentrate on the readings
as an aid in fighting the fear.

... in the stratosphere, eighty kilometers, rocket's temperature minus
a hundred and fifty degrees. Hundred and twenty-five kilometers, lower
part of ionosphere, up plus one hundred and fifty--and then on up
where it was somewhere around a thousand degrees, and who cared? He
was beyond that--away way out--somewhere--

It went on a long time and then ... nothing but darkness ... the
lonely song of the gyroscopes. His own voice ... distant, alien ...
raving ... a kind of delirium ... then sometime, an awareness of the
cutting down of power, the brief warning of intuition, the concussion.
And as consciousness came back again, the knowing that he had hit too
hard in spite of the lighter moon gravity.

His head throbbing crazily and around him the absolute darkness and
silence and the warm ache in his head, the dizziness and the warm
stickiness flowing down his face.

He lay there, afraid of retching. He moved his finger to release more
oxygen. He could smell himself, the sharp bite of fear and the odor of
blood.

He felt panic. He experimented. He could move easily here where the
seven-hundred pound suit weighed only 140 pounds. He switched on the
suit's light beam. The anonymous man had said. "_Get out of the rocket
at once, silently!_"

He squeezed out of the barrel, into the larger compartment. He got the
compartment door open. Half blind by shock, he was out in the Lunar
night. "_When you get outside, stop right there. Read the
instructions!_"

He had a panicky desire to fall to his knees, cling to the rocket. He
stood there stiffly. "It isn't fair," he whispered over and over. "I
can't do it!"

_Read the instructions._

       *       *       *       *       *

Alone, a man--one man--on the moon. No movement, no sound, no air, no
life. Only sharp black and white contrast of lifeless shadow to
accentuate the awful and final loneliness. Occasional meteors striking
into the pumice dust--silently, voicing the stillness of his own
terror.

He read the instructions. He hooked the capsule out of the kit, opened
it. The suit's single light beaming like a Cyclopean eye.

The giant walls of Albategnius the center of the moon's visible disk
towered bleakly up around ... everywhere ... lifelessness, just broken
rock ... no water to erode. No voices, no faces, no life anywhere.
Just Barlow. Barlow and a rocket.

And the stars and somewhere, the earth in the sky, sharp as molten
steel in the eyes. The rocket watched him and listened. This was a
target rocket. 240,000 miles away in the New Mexico blockhouse, they
were watching through the rocket's eyes, feeling through the rocket's
mechanical nervous system. The rocket carried instruments to test out
flight calculations, controls, conditions on the moon. It carried
self-operating information about the range of temperatures, radiation,
gravitational influences and other conditions to be encountered on the
journey and here on the moon's surface. It wouldn't return; only the
results of its sensory apparatus were returning now and would keep on
returning until the rocket's power ran out.

The rocket was equipped with every kind of instrument--trackers,
telemeters, and it was sending back sound and sight like a human eye
and ear. Radar stations, television stations, G.E. wagons down there
receiving information from the rocket....

The instructions told Barlow exactly where to stand so the
television-eyes could pick up his image. He found himself leaning in
using the kit, getting the radio apparatus out of his suit connected
properly.

He was starting, making gestures, while the terrible fear of
loneliness and isolation, his Achilles Heel, made the alien
surroundings reel and slip and tremble as though at any moment he was
going to crumble, fail, surrender.

The bleeding from his nose and ears had stopped. No pain; that wasn't
the trouble. It was being alone, the idea of dying alone....

The bulbous suit carried him over the terrain. Clouds of pumice-dust
drifted. He felt like an infant walking, his feet threatening to fold
under him. The rocket seemed to be drawing him back toward it. It
seemed warm and friendly as he walked the required distance away from
it. On Earth they were seeing him now--a man on the moon where there
should be no men. He would explain it to them; that was his job. To
give them an explanation that would frighten them, freeze the
inevitable war-drift for six months more. So the Brotherhood could
act--the Brotherhood only needed time.

But what about Barlow? Sure, everybody had to die, but no one should
have to die the way Barlow is being asked to. He couldn't do it!

But he stood there, and the rocket transmitted his image and his words
back to the blockhouse at White Sands, New Mexico. He said what the
instructions told him to.

"We've been observing you; we saw the rocket coming in. You think
you're the first to send a rocket here, but you're not. We've been
here quite a while. Long enough to have set up a small colony. We've
built a city near a uranium mine. There are large processing works,
rocket installations and living quarters. There are atomic warhead
rockets too...."

He stopped. His legs were weak, so much pressure for such light
gravity....

... rockets on the moon's dark side, out of your reach. But we can
reach you. The world is just a target rotating beneath us. We have
unlimited deposits of uranium and other radioactive metals; you are
completely helpless. Any further attempts to come to the moon will
meet with destruction. We will enforce peace if we can. Any indication
down there of any power planning to start a war, and we'll send our
own atomic warhead rockets down.

"We are primarily scientists and technicians. The annihilation of
civilization would have been inevitable anyway, so we've nothing to
lose by this last attempt to maintain peace by the only means left--by
force. We'll bomb any power that attempts to launch atom bombs, or
begins any form of military aggression. And remember--no more rockets
to the moon!

"And who are we? WE are not America, Russia, France, Britain,
Yugoslavia, China, Japan, Italy, Germany, Norway, Sweden, Denmark,
Spain, Portugal, Canada, Texas, or any South American country. We are
no country at all. We are of ALL countries. We are here to protect all
countries from every other country, and we will try to do this by
force if necessary. Remember--no more rockets to the moon. We will
atom-bomb any nation attempting any form of military aggression."

       *       *       *       *       *

The Brotherhood was very old, the outgrowth of an ancient Eastern
philosophical cult of non-resistance and peace. With six months more,
the Brotherhood could win the peace, maybe forever. If the speech just
made frightened the Americans enough, they wouldn't try anything. The
only other powers that might start a war within six months were
Russia, China, Yugoslavia. And they were too uncertain as to whether
or not America had already reached the moon. Who controlled the Moon
controlled Earth. They had been afraid for some time that perhaps
America had already gotten to the moon. Mutual fear of retaliation had
postponed the last war this long.

The Brotherhood knew social-psychology. They figured this would work.

Barlow felt himself backing away from the rocket. They were watching
him, the rocket's eyes and ears. Taking his voice and image back to
earth, back to voices and laughter and music and sound and warmth and
women ... with a sob, he twisted away from the rocket, turned, fell
to his thighs in thick pumice-dust, kept on struggling through lazy
streaming dust ribbons and he didn't look back. He was watched; he
mustn't look back at the rocket again.

Meteors exploded soundlessly on the beds of lava and seas of dust,
shooting up thick motionless sprays that seemed almost solid. Above
him, like splintered steel, stretched the thousands of feet of crater
wall. He reached the sharp wall of rock, managed to get around it and
out of sight of the rocket. He fell. He lay there, his suit blending
with the cold and airless landscape.

He screamed. He clawed his way up, started back again, back toward the
rocket. Hell with the Brotherhood. He was for Hal Barlow. Just for Hal
Barlow. He'd tell the truth. It wouldn't be long then. They'd send
other rockets up then. This was for Hal Barlow. The isolation pressed
in, pressed him faster, throwing him crazily over the dust toward the
rocket. Then they'd know the truth, send up other rockets, ... not
this way, with no more sounds, voices, any moving thing. No way for a
man to die....

It wasn't death; it was the way of dying. No one should die this
way--so alone. Especially Barlow, who feared loneliness more than
anything else.

He fell. One foot slid into a crack filled with pumice dust fine as
powder. He hooked the big steel hooks on the ends of his arms at the
rock, and clung there, his helmet barely pushing up through the dust.
He struggled for a while, desperately with his mind filling with
visions of the rocket. He wanted to live now, make up for all the
living he'd missed for so long.

He looked around, still struggling. Light gravity, little weight, but
he was so weak now, and still the rocket wasn't in sight. He crawled
on his stomach, dragging the bulbous suit over the rock. He could get
around the rock. He had to. Out of sight, but so near, was the warm
human rocket.

He ran into the rock and collapsed with a long wet sigh. He gasped.
Pain throbbed damply over his chest. He moved ... just enough to turn
over on his back. He slid up a little so that he was sitting there
staring at the frigid, barren, naked emptiness of utter silence and
desolation. What had the man said? "_No man is alone who has learned
the secret of oneness with the world...?_"

He thought about the Brotherhood, seriously now, for the first time.
Many men before him had died for it. An entirely new approach to
society and the individual. Working from the inside out, there would
be more than a mere deflection of evil. There would be suppression at
the source, in the individual will.

An end of national idolatry that threatened the existence of
civilization. Man was superhuman in power and glory, subhuman in
morality. After the spiritual revolution, never again the monstrous
evils arising when remote abstractions like "nation" and "state" are
regarded as realities more concrete and significant than human beings.

And no man is an island unto himself....

Unity....

He looked up. He saw the Earth then.

It shone down upon him through the Lunar night, twenty times brighter
than moonlight. He felt warmth. There were faces in the shadows,
hopeful women's faces and the eager innocent faces of children who had
not yet learned hopelessness and hate. They might never learn it now.

He grinned. It was funny, you had to get so far away to look back and
see all the people on earth as one, one face, one heart--one world--it
looked like one world from here.

It wasn't cold as Barlow lay there and looked up at the bright shining
disk. He closed his eyes. The Earthlight seemed to warm him, as the
sunlight had once warmed him, long ago in childhood, on a lazy summer
afternoon.

       *       *       *       *       *







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of By Earthlight, by Bryce Walton

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BY EARTHLIGHT ***

***** This file should be named 33842.txt or 33842.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/3/8/4/33842/

Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
