The Project Gutenberg EBook of Ask a Foolish Question, by Robert Sheckley

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Ask a Foolish Question

Author: Robert Sheckley

Release Date: October 11, 2010 [EBook #33854]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ASK A FOOLISH QUESTION ***




Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







                         Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced Science Fiction Stories 1953. Extensive
    research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S. copyright on this
    publication was renewed.


          _It's well established now that the way you put a question
           often determines not only the answer you'll get, but the
           type of answer possible. So ... a mechanical answerer,
           geared to produce the ultimate revelations in reference to
           anything you want to know, might have unsuspected
           limitations._


                       _Ask A Foolish Question_


                         _by_ ROBERT SHECKLEY

       *       *       *       *       *




[Illustration]

Answerer was built to last as long as was necessary--which was quite
long, as some races judge time, and not long at all, according to
others. But to Answerer, it was just long enough.

As to size, Answerer was large to some and small to others. He could
be viewed as complex, although some believed that he was really very
simple.

Answerer knew that he was as he should be. Above and beyond all else,
he was The Answerer. He Knew.

Of the race that built him, the less said the better. They also Knew,
and never said whether they found the knowledge pleasant.

They built Answerer as a service to less-sophisticated races, and
departed in a unique manner. Where they went only Answerer knows.

Because Answerer knows everything.

Upon his planet, circling his sun, Answerer sat. Duration continued,
long, as some judge duration, short as others judge it. But as it
should be, to Answerer.

Within him were the Answers. He knew the nature of things, and why
things are as they are, and what they are, and what it all means.

Answerer could answer anything, provided it was a legitimate question.
And he wanted to! He was eager to!

How else should an Answerer be?

What else should an Answerer do?

So he waited for creatures to come and ask.

       *       *       *       *       *

"How do you feel, sir?" Morran asked, floating gently over to the old
man.

"Better," Lingman said, trying to smile. No-weight was a vast relief.
Even though Morran had expended an enormous amount of fuel, getting
into space under minimum acceleration, Lingman's feeble heart hadn't
liked it. Lingman's heart had balked and sulked, pounded angrily
against the brittle rib-case, hesitated and sped up. It seemed for a
time as though Lingman's heart was going to stop, out of sheer pique.

But no-weight was a vast relief, and the feeble heart was going again.

Morran had no such problems. His strong body was built for strain and
stress. He wouldn't experience them on this trip, not if he expected
old Lingman to live.

"I'm going to live," Lingman muttered, in answer to the unspoken
question. "Long enough to find out." Morran touched the controls, and
the ship slipped into sub-space like an eel into oil.

"We'll find out," Morran murmured. He helped the old man unstrap
himself. "We're going to find the Answerer!"

Lingman nodded at his young partner. They had been reassuring
themselves for years. Originally it had been Lingman's project. Then
Morran, graduating from Cal Tech, had joined him. Together they had
traced the rumors across the solar system. The legends of an ancient
humanoid race who had known the answer to all things, and who had
built Answerer and departed.

"Think of it," Morran said. "The answer to everything!" A physicist,
Morran had many questions to ask Answerer. The expanding universe; the
binding force of atomic nuclei; novae and supernovae; planetary
formation; red shift, relativity and a thousand others.

"Yes," Lingman said. He pulled himself to the vision plate and looked
out on the bleak prairie of the illusory sub-space. He was a biologist
and an old man. He had two questions.

What is life?

What is death?

       *       *       *       *       *

After a particularly-long period of hunting purple, Lek and his
friends gathered to talk. Purple always ran thin in the neighborhood
of multiple-cluster stars--why, no one knew--so talk was definitely in
order.

"Do you know," Lek said, "I think I'll hunt up this Answerer." Lek
spoke the Ollgrat language now, the language of imminent decision.

"Why?" Ilm asked him, in the Hvest tongue of light banter. "Why do you
want to know things? Isn't the job of gathering purple enough for
you?"

"No," Lek said, still speaking the language of imminent decision. "It
is not." The great job of Lek and his kind was the gathering of
purple. They found purple imbedded in many parts of the fabric of
space, minute quantities of it. Slowly, they were building a huge
mound of it. What the mound was for, no one knew.

"I suppose you'll ask him what purple is?" Ilm asked, pushing a star
out of his way and lying down.

"I will," Lek said. "We have continued in ignorance too long. We must
know the true nature of purple, and its meaning in the scheme of
things. We must know why it governs our lives." For this speech Lek
switched to Ilgret, the language of incipient-knowledge.

Ilm and the others didn't try to argue, even in the tongue of
arguments. They knew that the knowledge was important. Ever since the
dawn of time, Lek, Ilm and the others had gathered purple. Now it was
time to know the ultimate answers to the universe--what purple was,
and what the mound was for.

And of course, there was the Answerer to tell them. Everyone had heard
of the Answerer, built by a race not unlike themselves, now long
departed.

"Will you ask him anything else?" Ilm asked Lek.

"I don't know," Lek said. "Perhaps I'll ask about the stars. There's
really nothing else important." Since Lek and his brothers had lived
since the dawn of time, they didn't consider death. And since their
numbers were always the same, they didn't consider the question of
life.

But purple? And the mound?

"I go!" Lek shouted, in the vernacular of decision-to-fact.

"Good fortune!" his brothers shouted back, in the jargon of
greatest-friendship.

Lek strode off, leaping from star to star.

       *       *       *       *       *

Alone on his little planet, Answerer sat, waiting for the Questioners.
Occasionally he mumbled the answers to himself. This was his
privilege. He Knew.

But he waited, and the time was neither too long nor too short, for
any of the creatures of space to come and ask.

       *       *       *       *       *

There were eighteen of them, gathered in one place.

"I invoke the rule of eighteen," cried one. And another appeared, who
had never before been, born by the rule of eighteen.

"We must go to the Answerer," one cried. "Our lives are governed by
the rule of eighteen. Where there are eighteen, there will be
nineteen. Why is this so?"

No one could answer.

"Where am I?" asked the newborn nineteenth. One took him aside for
instruction.

That left seventeen. A stable number.

"And we must find out," cried another, "Why all places are different,
although there is no distance."

That was the problem. One is here. Then one is there. Just like that,
no movement, no reason. And yet, without moving, one is in another
place.

"The stars are cold," one cried.

"Why?"

"We must go to the Answerer."

For they had heard the legends, knew the tales. "Once there was a
race, a good deal like us, and they Knew--and they told Answerer. Then
they departed to where there is no place, but much distance."

"How do we get there?" the newborn nineteenth cried, filled now with
knowledge.

"We go." And eighteen of them vanished. One was left. Moodily he
stared at the tremendous spread of an icy star, then he too vanished.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Those old legends are true," Morran gasped. "There it is."

They had come out of sub-space at the place the legends told of, and
before them was a star unlike any other star. Morran invented a
classification for it, but it didn't matter. There was no other like
it.

Swinging around the star was a planet, and this too was unlike any
other planet. Morran invented reasons, but they didn't matter. This
planet was the only one.

"Strap yourself in, sir," Morran said. "I'll land as gently as I can."

       *       *       *       *       *

Lek came to Answerer, striding swiftly from star to star. He lifted
Answerer in his hand and looked at him.

"So you are Answerer," he said.

"Yes," Answerer said.

"Then tell me," Lek said, settling himself comfortably in a gap
between the stars, "Tell me what I am."

"A partiality," Answerer said. "An indication."

"Come now," Lek muttered, his pride hurt. "You can do better than
that. Now then. The purpose of my kind is to gather purple, and to
build a mound of it. Can you tell me the real meaning of this?"

"Your question is without meaning," Answerer said. He knew what purple
actually was, and what the mound was for. But the explanation was
concealed in a greater explanation. Without this, Lek's question was
inexplicable, and Lek had failed to ask the real question.

Lek asked other questions, and Answerer was unable to answer them. Lek
viewed things through his specialized eyes, extracted a part of the
truth and refused to see more. How to tell a blind man the sensation
of green?

Answerer didn't try. He wasn't supposed to.

Finally, Lek emitted a scornful laugh. One of his little
stepping-stones flared at the sound, then faded back to its usual
intensity.

Lek departed, striding swiftly across the stars.

       *       *       *       *       *

Answerer knew. But he had to be asked the proper questions first. He
pondered this limitation, gazing at the stars which were neither large
nor small, but exactly the right size.

The proper questions. The race which built Answerer should have taken
that into account, Answerer thought. They should have made some
allowance for semantic nonsense, allowed him to attempt an
unravelling.

Answerer contented himself with muttering the answers to himself.

       *       *       *       *       *

Eighteen creatures came to Answerer, neither walking nor flying, but
simply appearing. Shivering in the cold glare of the stars, they gazed
up at the massiveness of Answerer.

"If there is no distance," one asked, "Then how can things be in other
places?"

Answerer knew what distance was, and what places were. But he couldn't
answer the question. There was distance, but not as these creatures
saw it. And there were places, but in a different fashion from that
which the creatures expected.

"Rephrase the question," Answerer said hopefully.

"Why are we short here," one asked, "And long over there? Why are we
fat over there, and short here? Why are the stars cold?"

Answerer knew all things. He knew why stars were cold, but he couldn't
explain it in terms of stars or coldness.

"Why," another asked, "Is there a rule of eighteen? Why, when eighteen
gather, is another produced?"

But of course the answer was part of another, greater question, which
hadn't been asked.

Another was produced by the rule of eighteen, and the nineteen
creatures vanished.

       *       *       *       *       *

Answerer mumbled the right questions to himself, and answered them.

       *       *       *       *       *

"We made it," Morran said. "Well, well." He patted Lingman on the
shoulder--lightly, because Lingman might fall apart.

The old biologist was tired. His face was sunken, yellow, lined.
Already the mark of the skull was showing in his prominent yellow
teeth, his small, flat nose, his exposed cheekbones. The matrix was
showing through.

"Let's get on," Lingman said. He didn't want to waste any time. He
didn't have any time to waste.

Helmeted, they walked along the little path.

"Not so fast," Lingman murmured.

"Right," Morran said. They walked together, along the dark path of the
planet that was different from all other planets, soaring alone around
a sun different from all other suns.

"Up here," Morran said. The legends were explicit. A path, leading to
stone steps. Stone steps to a courtyard. And then--the Answerer!

To them, Answerer looked like a white screen set in a wall. To their
eyes, Answerer was very simple.

Lingman clasped his shaking hands together. This was the culmination
of a lifetime's work, financing, arguing, ferreting bits of legend,
ending here, now.

"Remember," he said to Morran, "We will be shocked. The truth will be
like nothing we have imagined."

"I'm ready," Morran said, his eyes rapturous.

"Very well. Answerer," Lingman said, in his thin little voice, "What
is life?"

A voice spoke in their heads. "The question has no meaning. By 'life,'
the Questioner is referring to a partial phenomenon, inexplicable
except in terms of its whole."

"Of what is life a part?" Lingman asked.

"This question, in its present form, admits of no answer. Questioner
is still considering 'life,' from his personal, limited bias."

"Answer it in your own terms, then," Morran said.

"The Answerer can only answer questions." Answerer thought again of
the sad limitation imposed by his builders.

Silence.

"Is the universe expanding?" Morran asked confidently.

"'Expansion' is a term inapplicable to the situation. Universe, as the
Questioner views it, is an illusory concept."

"Can you tell us _anything_?" Morran asked.

"I can answer any valid question concerning the nature of things."

       *       *       *       *       *

The two men looked at each other.

"I think I know what he means," Lingman said sadly. "Our basic
assumptions are wrong. All of them."

"They can't be," Morran said. "Physics, biology--"

"Partial truths," Lingman said, with a great weariness in his voice.
"At least we've determined that much. We've found out that our
inferences concerning observed phenomena are wrong."

"But the rule of the simplest hypothesis--"

"It's only a theory," Lingman said.

"But life--he certainly could answer what life is?"

"Look at it this way," Lingman said. "Suppose you were to ask, 'Why
was I born under the constellation Scorpio, in conjunction with
Saturn?' I would be unable to answer your question _in terms of the
zodiac_, because the zodiac has nothing to do with it."

"I see," Morran said slowly. "He can't answer questions in terms of
our assumptions."

"That seems to be the case. And he can't alter our assumptions. He is
limited to valid questions--which imply, it would seem, a knowledge we
just don't have."

"We can't even ask a valid question?" Morran asked. "I don't believe
that. We must know some basics." He turned to Answerer. "What is
death?"

"I cannot explain an anthropomorphism."

"Death an anthropomorphism!" Morran said, and Lingman turned quickly.
"Now we're getting somewhere!"

"Are anthropomorphisms unreal?" he asked.

"Anthropomorphisms may be classified, tentatively, as, A, false
truths, or B, partial truths in terms of a partial situation."

"Which is applicable here?"

"Both."

That was the closest they got. Morran was unable to draw any more from
Answerer. For hours the two men tried, but truth was slipping farther
and farther away.

"It's maddening," Morran said, after a while. "This thing has the
answer to the whole universe, and he can't tell us unless we ask the
right question. But how are we supposed to know the right question?"

Lingman sat down on the ground, leaning against a stone wall. He
closed his eyes.

"Savages, that's what we are," Morran said, pacing up and down in
front of Answerer. "Imagine a bushman walking up to a physicist and
asking him why he can't shoot his arrow into the sun. The scientist
can explain it only in his own terms. What would happen?"

"The scientist wouldn't even attempt it," Lingman said, in a dim
voice; "he would know the limitations of the questioner."

"It's fine," Morran said angrily. "How do you explain the earth's
rotation to a bushman? Or better, how do you explain relativity to
him--maintaining scientific rigor in your explanation at all times, of
course."

Lingman, eyes closed, didn't answer.

"We're bushmen. But the gap is much greater here. Worm and super-man,
perhaps. The worm desires to know the nature of dirt, and why there's
so much of it. Oh, well."

"Shall we go, sir?" Morran asked. Lingman's eyes remained closed. His
taloned fingers were clenched, his cheeks sunk further in. The skull
was emerging.

"Sir! Sir!"

And Answerer knew that that was not the answer.

       *       *       *       *       *

Alone on his planet, which is neither large nor small, but exactly the
right size, Answerer waits. He cannot help the people who come to him,
for even Answerer has restrictions.

He can answer only valid questions.

Universe? Life? Death? Purple? Eighteen?

Partial truths, half-truths, little bits of the great question.

But Answerer, alone, mumbles the questions to himself, the true
questions, which no one can understand.

How could they understand the true answers?

The questions will never be asked, and Answerer remembers something
his builders knew and forgot.

In order to ask a question you must already know most of the answer.

[Illustration]

       *       *       *       *       *







End of Project Gutenberg's Ask a Foolish Question, by Robert Sheckley

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ASK A FOOLISH QUESTION ***

***** This file should be named 33854.txt or 33854.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/3/8/5/33854/

Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
