The Project Gutenberg EBook of Old Friends Are the Best, by Jack Sharkey

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Old Friends Are the Best

Author: Jack Sharkey

Release Date: October 18, 2010 [EBook #33871]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK OLD FRIENDS ARE THE BEST ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                       OLD FRIENDS ARE THE BEST

                           By JACK SHARKEY


[Transcriber note: This etext was produced from Amazing Stories March
1960. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
copyright on this publication was renewed.]


[Sidenote: Are you one of those people who save the best things for the
last ... who eat all the chocolate sundae away from under the maraschino
cherry? If so, you are very like the Peter W. Merrill Moonplant.]


It had no awareness of time, and so did not know nor concern itself with
the millennia that passed since it first drew up the dissolved silicates
from the shifting grey remnants of soil and arranged them inside the
walls of the thousand green pods that were its body cells, and settled
down to wait. Somewhere within its fragile cortex, a tiny pulse of life
beat. It was a feeble pulse, to be sure, and one that a man, unless he
could observe it for a thousand years without blinking, would not be
aware of. As the normal human heart beats seventy-two times a minute, so
did this tiny swelling of tube contract once each hundred years; fifty
tireless years of contraction, then fifty soothing years of relaxation,
bringing the walls of the slender tube together, then letting them ease
apart.

But it was sufficient for its life.

The pallid yellow sap was moved about inside the plant, once each
hundred years, and the plasm of the silicon-protected cellular structure
absorbed just the needed amount, bleeding off the waste products between
the very molecules of the silicon buttresses, and patiently waiting the
century out till the second helping came oozing around.

And so it lay dormant, through heat that could send a man into
convulsions of agony in seconds, through cold that fractional degree
lower than can be achieved in a scientific laboratory. It did not know
where it was, nor what it was, nor how precarious--by cosmic
standards--was its chance of survival, with sap enough stored in the
stiff, coarse roots for only a few more million years.

It simply was, and knew that it was, and was satisfied.

Such a tiny organism can have only the most rudimentary of memories, but
it remembered. Once--Once long before, there had been ... more.

       *       *       *       *       *

Life had been the same, but somehow fuller. When it tried to recall
exactly in what this fullness lay, the memory just was not there; only a
vague recollection of comfort, motion, satiation.

When the men landed upon the moon in the twentieth century, they did not
find it at first. Locating it would have been comparable to stumbling
upon a solitary blade of grass, imbedded in ice at the South Pole. Men
came to the moon, though, and began to settle there. The first homes
they knew were mere metal shacks, filled with life-giving gases of their
planetary atmosphere, and devoid of all comforts save those necessary
for maintenance of life.

But men have a way of rising above the status quo, and so, within half a
pulsebeat of the plant, the surface of the moon became dotted with these
iglooic shacks, then pressurized tunnels radiated out in a unifying
network, and soon the Domes began to grow; immense translucent
light-weight structures of enormous strength bubbled up on the moon, and
soon cities were being built beneath them, strange towering fairyland
cities on this satellite where people and architecture alike boasted six
times the power possessed on Earth. The cities soared upward in
glinting, stalagmitic pinnacles whose tapering ends seemed to threaten
the fabric of the Domes themselves, but were in reality still far below
the blue-white curving surface.

Machines lay buried now in the grey pumice that was the surface of the
moon; machines that drained gases from the oxides and nitrates within
the planetoid and filled the Domes for the people with the life-giving
gases. And still the moon grew more Domes, and more.

And then, three motions of the tiny plant after the primal landing of
men on the moon, three half-cycles later, a pulse-and-a-half--It was
found.

The man who found it was an engineer, a man of high intelligence. For,
building on the moon was a perilous undertaking. A man had to know
stresses and strains, had to be able to read gauges that warned of
vacuum pockets beneath the crust of the moon that--if broken into--could
suck the life-giving gases from the metal caissons within which the men
laid the foundations of new Domes. Had it been on Earth, and the workman
unionized and possibly unlettered, it would have had the fate of a
dandelion that stands in the path of a growing subway tube.

Unfortunately, the man--as mentioned--had intelligence.

Carefully, the fossil--so he presumed--was cut away from the rock in
which it was rooted, and laid gently in a bed of soft cotton, and that
bed in a plastic casing, and the casing in a metal box. The box was
loaded aboard a spaceship and sent to a man back on Earth.

This man was an eminent botanist, and--eminent or not--he nearly jumped
with joy when he'd opened the box, unsealed the container, plucked away
the cotton, and saw the plant lying there. It was dead, insofar as he
knew, and apparently useless except perhaps as a club, but the botanist
was delighted to receive it. Through his head passed notions of cutting
it in two, then polishing the twin cut surfaces, and studying the cell
structure, so that he might compare its construction with similar--if
there were any--plants of Earth, and then write a learned thesis about
it which would be read only by other eminent botanists, who would all
then curse their luck for not having been friends with any engineers on
the moon. The whole procedure--taking the cosmic view--was almost
pointless, but it would make the botanist happy, at least.

       *       *       *       *       *

However, after setting up his instruments, and placing the plant in a
sort of padded vise to steady it against the invasion of its privacy, he
chanced to see a bit of root, broken off by sheer unaccustomed weight on
the planet, lying upon the lab table, and he placed that beneath the
glass lens of his microscope and studied it instead.

"I'll be damned!" he said. "The plasm is _liquid_!"

A few dozen of the shattered cells had indeed let their contents spill
out onto the slide of his 'scope.

"I wonder," he mused, "if it is viable?"

Wouldn't _that_ make for an interesting paper, he went on, building his
dreams upon dreams. A moonplant! Growing in my garden! He decided, as
is the way with botanists, to name his--it was now "his"; having
abandoned liberty when it abandoned the moon--to name his plant after
himself.

And that's how it came to be called the "Peter W. Merrill Moonplant." He
put it in his garden, arranged a small protective wire cylinder around
it, and sprinkled it with water. Then he went into the house to start
typing up his notes for that forthcoming paper.

       *       *       *       *       *

As he lay there in the soft loam, feeling the cool trickling of the
water passing over his stiff tendrils, the newly christened Pete felt a
stirring within himself. The sunlight that now struck him was filtered
by an atmosphere, and gentle in its action upon him. Pete prodded his
memory, and suddenly decided that silicates, after all, are not the most
comfortable of linings for one's tender green cells. He seemed to recall
a state of lush, sybaritic softness, in pre-silicate times. Decidedly,
the silicates must go, thought Pete.

And go they did, molecule by molecule, down into the earth through his
roots, which were now acting as tiny spigots, getting rid of the
scratchy stuff that had bolstered the cell walls against change for
millennia past, leaving Pete softer, greener, livelier, and a constant
delight to the heart of Peter W. Merrill the First, whenever he came out
to tend his plant, between pages of his thesis.

Pete, after spewing the last hateful molecule away, reversed his tiny
fibre engines, and began to draw in. He drew in all sorts of things, as
the days passed. A lot of minerals, and just enough water to float them
in. Mostly, Pete's growing hunger sought out iron. Pete didn't know why
he wanted iron, any more than a smoker knows why he wants another
cigarette, but Pete's interest in iron was as intense as any smoker's in
tobacco.

Above the ground, he grew very few inches larger, merely broadening his
dark, green spiral leaves a bit to catch the tiny amount of warmth he
required for growth. But beneath the soil, as with any tuberous plant,
his roots were spread in a rough circular spoke-like pattern that
reached about ten miles in every direction.

Pete Senior, had he tried to dig his plant up, would have been very much
surprised to find he could not do it. But he didn't try, so his life
went on as usual, with no surprises, which is the way he preferred it,
so he was happy enough.

It wasn't until his paper had been duly published, and botanical cronies
had shaken the dust from their whiskers and toddled around to see this
enviable possession, that something of the root structure was
discovered.

"Seems to spread underground," one remarked.

"Kind of a lunatic crab-grass," another jibed.

"Sure you're not pulling our leg, Merrill?" said a third. "Seems a bit
stunted."

"Gravity," said Pete Senior. "Not used to it yet."

Then they all had coffee and cake, shook hands with Pete Senior, and
went to their homes and laboratories.

By this time, of course, at the farthest reaches of Pete's root network,
duplicate Petes were popping up above ground, quietly and
unostentatiously (Pete stood barely five inches high), and much like
their parent. They, too, began sending out spoke-like root networks.
Some of them, stronger than others, sent roots for a radius of a hundred
miles, others for a few leagues and no more.

Eventually, Pete Senior reached an age where his body cells died more
rapidly than they were replaced, that is, he achieved old age, and he
passed from his life, leaving a wife, three children, and an unpaid
fertilizer bill.

Pete himself, by now was pulsing considerably faster. In fact,
incredibly faster, after his once-a-century contraction of short years
before. His pulse rate was now in the neighborhood of ten per second,
which is a pretty good increase. It soon reached hundreds per second.

And his offspring weren't far behind him either.

Since the whole planet was now as interwoven with Pete-type networks as
the inside of a baseball with string, this constant vibration--which
slowly began to beat in a united concentration--began to make itself
felt.

People started to complain about it.

       *       *       *       *       *

So scientists with seismographs, and even dousers with willow twigs,
began to seek out the source of this unnerving, almost supersonic,
thrilling of the planet crust. Eventually, they located the tiny green
plants with the spirally leaves at the center--the loudest point--of
each network. Someone recognized the plant, and they confirmed this
someone's suspicions by a check of the Public Library's back issues of
_Botanist's Quarterly_. It was the moonplant, all right.

The Peter W. Merrill Moonplant. Yes sir. That's what it was.

The public, though, was not satisfied with the finding of a _name_ for
the disturbance, and insisted that it be brought to a _halt_ somehow.
Naturally, the International Society of Botanists, Biologists and
Biochemists raised one hell of a fuss about this, but on a democratic
planet they were summarily outvoted, and all spirally little green Peter
W. Merrill Moonplants were--well, not _uprooted_; that would be
impossible--But they were all cropped flush with the earth wherever
found, and salt, acid, and all manner of nasty things poured into the
stumps.

       *       *       *       *       *

However, nothing happened at all to the vibrations.

People began to get fidgety, and started petitioning their
representatives in government to _Do Something_. A lot of speeches were
then made, all over Earth, about the noise and general disturbance of
the moonplant roots, but none of them offered a solution to the
increasing racket.

It was about this time that plumblines started hanging crooked. Oh, it
wasn't detected at first. How could it be, at first? Because you judge
things by plumblines, not vice-versa. However, in a month, when
everything was about five degrees off the vertical, notice began to be
taken.

When oranges began rolling off the ground in the California and Florida
groves, and huddling in a mound here and there upon the countryside, the
Spirit of Worry injected itself into the public consciousness. Niagara
Falls' spectacular skew-wise splashing toward the Canadian side didn't
set many hearts at ease, either.

And then someone remembered the moonplants, and saw that each new
apparent gravity-tug was coming from the stump of one of the plants, and
a leading scientist figured out the answer, after getting a snipped-off
segment of moonplant root and testing the hell out of it.

"It seems," he announced to the world, or that portion of the world that
was watching his appearance on TV; there being considerable competition
with a new series of NBC Specials on another channel, "It seems that
this Peter W. Merrill Moonplant is--er--magnetic, to a certain degree.
Though not magnetism as we know it. It's more as though each plant,
through the positioning of its roots, and the coiling of same, plus a
heavy concentration of iron in its physical makeup, has managed to make
itself--or, rather, the stump of itself, since all such plants were cut
down, a short while back--to make itself the center of an artificial
gravity field. This field seems to grow--Rather, these _many_ fields
seem to grow in strength by the hour, and they have a tendency to topple
things, the gravitational 'tug' being most disastrous near the centers
of the fields. The rims, though the angle of gravity is sharper there,
are safer for stability only because they are balanced by more 'tugs'
from adjoining fields...."

Well, he went on this way for an hour or so, and soon his
listeners--those who stayed tuned in--knew what the problem was: "Down"
wasn't going to be "down" much longer. It was going to depend on which
moonplant stump you happened to be near.

       *       *       *       *       *

The prospect didn't seem too much fun, and people started selling their
homes and such, and booking passage to the moon, where life was
controlled, but carefree, and free of annoying vibrations and rolling
oranges.

Lunar Real Estate enjoyed a fabulous boom for weeks after the telecast
by the scientist, but it was soon "all filled up," and further
immigrations would have to await the construction of more Domes to house
the newcomers.

The laggards, understandably, raised a fuss about this callous attitude,
and went moonward anyway until about two-thirds of the Earth's
population was on the moon, the place becoming so hopelessly crowded
that people had to half-rent rooms there, sleeping in alternating shifts
with other half-renters, and spending their waking hours wandering the
streets.

"Things," sighed one realtor to another, "can't get much worse."

And that's when the first meteor landed on Earth. In the general
excitement, first about vibrations, then about gravitational fields,
then about packing up and going to the moon, most newspapers had pushed
to the want-ad pages little articles by eminent astronomers, in which
were noted the odd behaviors of certain large planetoids in the asteroid
belt between Earth and Mars. These cosmic hunks of rock seemed to be
"peeling off" the general formation of the ellipse followed by their
fellows, and moving sunward[1] singly or in small homogenous groupings.

[Footnote 1: (Ergo: Earthward)]

Well, the first one landed and left a dent on Earth where the Congo used
to be, the shock being felt as far north as Oslo, to add to their
vibrational, gravitational and evacuational difficulties.

Scientists on the moon--being as singleminded as scientists
anywhere--became ecstatic. At last the mystery of the ages was solved:
Who put the pocks in the face of the moon? A Peter W. Merrill Moonplant,
of course! They looked down in rapture as meteor after meteor--drawn
across the countless miles of space by the pulsating gravity fields,
plunged into the Earth, leaving pocks visible to the naked moondweller's
eye. And darned if each meteor didn't strike dead center of each plant
network.

       *       *       *       *       *

After about a month, Earth looked almost exactly like the moon had once
looked, with the exception of one locale: Australia, and much of the
Pacific Ocean surrounding it.

"It will indeed be a titanic meteor that hits there!" the moon
scientists enthused. For their careful check of the records showed that
only one plant had been found on the whole continent of Australia,
toward the eastern coast; which meant that its network probably extended
beneath the Pacific itself, with a gigantic field reaching its hungry
magnetic fingers into space.

And then someone noticed that no more asteroids had peeled from the
formation. The void between the asteroid belt and Earth was barren of
hurtling rock.

"Wonderful!" the scientists enthused. "It means that each field down
there on Earth ceased its tug the moment its meteor struck it. That
means that once the final meteor lands, the Peter W. Merrill Moonplant
will be dead, and we can get some of the crowd off this place. Earth's a
bit ragged-looking, but after all, it's Home."

"Funny," said one of the younger scientists, "that the moonplant went so
far afield for meteors, and yet did not disturb the delicate
gravitational balance between Earth and the moon, its own Satellite."

"Let us hope," said an older scientist, "that this enormous Australian
network has not been saving itself for us." He laughed at this little
pleasantry, but no one joined him, because someone had just peered
through a telescope and noticed that Australia seemed to be getting
larger.

"You know what?" said the young scientist, finally. "We're falling to
the Earth, to form the largest pockmark of all!"

"What a spectacle!" cried another scientist. "Pity we won't be alive to
witness it. I wonder why the Peter W. Merrill Moonplant saved us for
last?"

"Possibly," said the young scientist, "because--as with a wedding--the
groom asks all his relatives to come and see him married, and finally
picks out the person who is to be the Best Man. The moonplant probably
considers the moon an old buddy."

The older scientists, however, gave this statement the stoniest of
non-replies, and refused even to speak to the hapless young man for the
duration of their journey downward to squashy death against the home
planet.

Romanticism and Science just don't mix.

THE END





End of Project Gutenberg's Old Friends Are the Best, by Jack Sharkey

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK OLD FRIENDS ARE THE BEST ***

***** This file should be named 33871.txt or 33871.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/3/8/7/33871/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
