The Project Gutenberg EBook of She Knew He Was Coming, by Kris Neville

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: She Knew He Was Coming

Author: Kris Neville

Release Date: October 11, 2010 [EBook #33934]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SHE KNEW HE WAS COMING ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Dianna Adair and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







[Illustration]


_Mary might have learned a more ladylike trade, but one thing is
certain: she had a shining faith in that space guy from Earth. Now,
about that cake she baked ..._




She Knew He Was Coming

By Kris Neville

Illustrated by Ed Emsh


Outside, the bluish sun slanted low across the green dust of the Martian
desert, its last rays sparkling on the far mountain tops. One by one,
lights flickered on in the city.

"Mary must be expecting that Earthman," Anne said. She held her glastic
blouse tight together over her breasts and leaned a little out of the
window.

Milly nodded. "The _Azmuth_ landed this morning."

The noises of commerce were fading. From the window Anne saw the neon
blaze up over the door. For the thousandth time she blinked between the
equivocal words: 30--BEAUTIFUL HOSTESSES--30. Laughter, dry and false,
filtered up from the tea bars along the street. She looked westward,
toward the spaceport, and made out the shadowy nose of the berthed space
liner looming against the night. She could picture the scene--a thousand
stevedores unloading cargo, refill men and native spacewriters scurrying
over the sleek hull, the Earth voyageurs shouting orders and curses.

"Maybe he isn't even on it." Anne turned from the window. She crossed to
the couch and sat down, fluffing out the green crinkly glass of her
skirt; pendant, multicolored birds flashed from the rings in her ears.
She tucked rosy feet under her scented body. "I don't like Earthmen,"
she said.

"They spend money."

"They make me sick," Anne said. "With their pale skins and ugly eyes and
hairy bodies."

"They have strong arms."

Anne's wide, red mouth curled in distaste. "They're like a bunch of
kids."

The room was lighted by soft, overhead fire. Heavy drapes hung from the
walls. Sweet, spicy incense curled bluely from the burners by the
window.

Before the mirror, Milly edged in the narrow line of her pink eyebrows
with a pencil. She folded her lips in, rubbing them together, licked
them, making them a glistening red. She pinched her cheeks.

"I wonder when they'll catch Crescent?" she said.

Anne yawned languorously. "It won't be long."

"I wouldn't want to be in her shoes," Milly said.

Anne patted her mouth lazily. "She ought to have known she couldn't run
away."

"What do you think Miss Bestris will do to her?"

Anne stood up, brushing out the wrinkles in her dress. "I should care."

"But what will she do?"

Anne shrugged. "Whip her, maybe. How should _I_ know?"

"Don't you feel you'd like to run away, once in a while?" Milly asked,
turning to look at the other girl.

Anne laughed coldly. "I've got better sense."

"But don't you _want_ to?"

Anne tossed her purple hair. "Where is there to go? Who is there to go
to?"

"Yes.... I guess you're right." Milly turned back to her reflection.

_Buzzzzzz_....

Both girls turned their heads to the buttons on the wall. The white one
was glowing.

"It's Miss Bestris."

"We'd better go," Milly said.

Together they walked down the heavily carpeted stairs to the sitting
room.

The Madame was waiting. She was a large woman, rolling in creases of
fat, and her pink hair was rough and clipped short. She had a pair of
dimples in her cheeks and a single gold band around her right wrist. She
was leaning against the piano.

"Hurry now, girls, hurry right along," she said.

More girls were entering the room; they spread out, sitting on the
chairs, curling at the Madame's feet. Their eyes--amethyst, gray or
golden--were on her face. Many had pink hair, others had tresses of
purple or salmon.

"Now, girls, I suppose you know there's an Earth ship in port?"

The girls nodded.

"So I expect we'll have visitors tonight. I want you to all look your
very best." She smiled at them. "Anne, why don't you wear that low-cut,
orange plastic with the spangles, and June, you the prim white one? You
look like an angel in it." June smiled. "And Mary...?"

"Yes, Miss Bestris?"

"Mary. Did you buy that neo-nylon I told you about?"

"No, Miss Bestris."

"Mary, Mary, Mary. I just don't understand you at all."

"I'm saving my money, Miss Bestris," Mary said intently.

"Yes, dear, I know that. We're _all_ saving our money. But we simply
must look presentable. We have a reputation to hold up."

"Yes, Miss Bestris."

"Then, Mary, dear, do--do, _please_, buy yourself something decent."

"Yes, Miss Bestris. I will.... Tomorrow. Tomorrow morning, if I ..."

[Illustration]

"Child? If you what?"

"Nothing, Miss Bestris."

"Well. See that you get it tomorrow. If you don't, I'm afraid I'll have
to take some of your money and get it for you."

Mary looked down at the floor. The flaming glow of the hydrojet torches
cast golden lights in her softly purple hair.

"By the way, Mary. Is that your cake in the oven?"

"Yes, Miss Bestris."

The other girls snickered.

"Let her alone," said the Madame. "If she wants to bake a cake, why
shouldn't she?"

No one answered.

Miss Bestris went on around the room, discussing the girls' clothing,
brushing this girl's hair, pinching that girl's cheek, chucking this one
under the chin, smiling, frowning. Then finally she stepped back and
nodded.

"You all look quite good, I think. I can be proud of you. And now, I
want you all to go to your rooms and make them extra attractive, and
then try to get a little rest, so you'll all be especially beautiful
when the boys come. Run along now."

The girls filed out, and night continued to settle. After a while, her
cigarette glowing in the gloom, the Madame waddled to her office. There
three people were waiting for her.

       *       *       *       *       *

The office was plain, businesslike, masculine; no lace, no ribbons, no
perfume, only the crisp smell of new paper, the tangy odor of ink, the
sweet smell of eraser fluid. When she came in the door the three people
stood up.

She waved her cigarette hand with a once delicate gesture and flame
light glinted dully on the gold band. "Please don't get up for me," she
said, but her tone was condescending and the three visitors sat down
respectfully.

Miss Bestris crossed to her desk; she perched on a corner of it, leaned
back, blew smoke.

"You wanted to see me about your girls?"

Two of the people, man and wife, looked at each other. "Yes," they said.
And the other man said, "Yes."

"Did you bring any pictures?"

They handed her pictures, and she held them up to the overhead torch.
She studied them critically, pursing and unpursing her lips in secret
calculation.

"This one," she said finally, holding out one of the pictures.

The man and wife rustled their clothing; they smiled faintly proud at
each other.

The other man got up slowly, retrieved his picture, left the room
without saying a word.

"We can't do for little Lavada," the woman whined. "She was a late
child, and we're getting old, and we thought she would be better here.
It's hard to do for a growing girl when you get old. And my husband
can't keep steady work, because of his health and ..."

"I'm sure she will be happy here," the Madame said, smiling.

"Yes," the man agreed. "It's for the best. But--you know--well, we hate
to do it."

"How old is she?"

"... Fourteen."

Miss Bestris studied the picture again. "She doesn't look over twelve."

"She's fourteen."

"And healthy--"

"We have doctors to see to that," the Madame said. "How much did you
have in mind?"

"Well," the man said, "it's been a month now since I worked, and with
debts and everything...."

"And something to put aside for winter," his wife added.

"We couldn't take less than a _milli dordoc_."

"And we wouldn't even think of it, but we don't have a scrap of bread in
the house."

"And all our bills, and winter coming on...."

Miss Bestris turned the picture this way and that. The parents waited.
The woman cleared her throat. The man shuffled his feet. The clock on
the wall went tick-tick, tick-tick.

"I'll give you eight hundred and thirty _dordocs_," the Madame said.

"Well...."

Miss Bestris bent forward, holding out the picture. "Here, then. Take
it. I wouldn't offer that, but I need a girl right now. One of mine ran
away last week, and I'm afraid she won't be able to work for a month or
so after they bring her back. I'm being generous. Eight hundred and
thirty, or take your picture and don't waste my time."

The man and woman stared at her. And the clock went _tick-tick_.

"Take it, Chav."

"... All right," the man said. "We need the money."

Miss Bestris leaned across the desk, pressed a button on her panel.
Almost immediately, a door slid silently open and her lawyer entered
with a white, printed, standard-form sales contract in his hand.
Efficiently and rapidly, he entered the particulars. "Sign here," he
said, and the parents signed.

"Now," said the Madame, "if you'll bring in Lavada tomorrow at nine,
I'll arrange for a doctor to be here. If his examination is
satisfactory, the money will be ready."

The lawyer left, and the woman said, "You understand, we wouldn't do
this but for ..."

"I understand, perfectly," Miss Bestris said. "You don't need to worry.
This is the best kind of house--Earthmen only, you know, and they're
very particular. My girls are given the best of care. I'm like a mother
to them, and if they are thrifty and diligent, they'll be able to save
enough money in a--a very short time to redeem their contract as
provided by law. You needn't worry at all."

"Well," the woman said, "I feel better after talking to you. I feel
better about the whole thing to hear you talk like that."

The clock went _tick-tick_.

"Uh," the man said, "you won't--? That is, our little daughter is
sometimes wilful and ... uh ... well ... Sometimes."

Miss Bestris smiled. "We know how to handle girls."

"You'll treat her...?"

"As I would my own child," Miss Bestris said; she took out another
cigarette, lit it. "I think we'll call her--well--Poppy. Earthmen like
to feel at home, you know."

The clock went _tick-tick_.

"Well, uh," the man said. "Uh. Thank you."

       *       *       *       *       *

In one of the rooms upstairs Mary sat before the dressing table with her
back to the mirror, while June and Adele occupied the two overstuffed
chairs. Night sounds drifted up from the yellow canal, and fresh flower
scents whispered on the warm air. The diaphanous glass curtains rustled
at the open window.

"They're too expensive," Mary said. "I'm sure Miss Bestris overcharges
us for them."

"Hush," said June, glancing around at the walls nervously. "Hush, Mary."
She smoothed at the delicate, plutolac lace fringe above her breasts.
"Imported material like this costs money. You can't get it for nothing,
and we have to have the best."

"I still think she charges too much."

Adele shrugged delicately and crossed shapely ankles. "I think Miss
Bestris must like you, or she wouldn't let you wear that dress again
tonight. You ought to watch out that you don't get on the wrong side of
her."

Mary laughed, her amethyst eyes sparkling. "I won't care. Not after
tonight."

"You're not going to run away?" June asked breathlessly. "You wouldn't
dare do that. You'd catch it, sure!"

Mary shook her head. "Not _run_ away."

Adele leaned forward and said huskily, "You got enough money to redeem
your contract?"

Again Mary shook her head. "No. It's nine hundred and ten _dordocs_. I
have only ninety-three. But I'll have enough in the morning!" She stood
up and crossed to the window, looked out toward the spaceport.

"How?"

"Tell us, Mary!"

"Tell you what?" Anne asked, coming into the room. Languidly she drew
the door closed behind her and rested against it. "Tell you what?" she
insisted, narrowing milky eyes.

"Mary says she can redeem her contract tomorrow."

Anne's wide mouth curled contemptuously. "Nonsense!"

"It's not," said Mary without turning.

Anne glided sensuously across the room to the bed, her tight fitting
plastic rippling with her tigerish muscles. She sat down.

"He said he'd take me away, this trip," Mary continued. "He'll sign off,
and then we'll both get a ship and go to one of the frontier planets.
Where it won't matter about--all this."

Anne laughed harshly. "My God! You believe _that_?"

"We've both been saving our money," Mary said dreamily. "He's in love
with me. He said so."

"Honey, that's what they all say."

Smiling, Mary turned from the window and leaned backward, stretching.
"You don't know him. He's different."

"They're all the same," Anne said, her mouth twisting bitterly.
"They're just alike. Don't believe any of them."

And Mary said, "With him, it's different. You'll see."

After a moment, Anne said, "That Earthman? That what's-his-name?" Mary
nodded, and Anne brushed an imaginary something off her knee. "An
Earthman," Anne said. "They're the worst of all."

"You don't know him, or you wouldn't say that."

Adele looked away from Anne. "You love him, don't you, Mary?"

"Yes."

"You're a fool," Anne said. "Listen to me. _Love_ a man? God! You'll
see. After him, there'll be another and another, and--just like
Rosy--you'll watch 'em leave you and laugh at you until finally you're
hurt so bad you don't think you can stand being hurt any more, and then
along comes another one, and it starts all over again, and then one
night you take a razor blade and go to the sink and stick out your
throat and...."

"No! No! You're wrong! He's not like the rest!"

Anne leaned back carelessly, resting, propped on one hand. "See. You
know I'm right, already."

"You're not!"

Anne shrugged. "Honey, tell me that tomorrow night."

"I better go take my cake out," Mary said. She fled the room in a swirl
of shimmering glastic.

Anne sneered, "I don't see why Miss Bestris puts up with her the way she
does."

"You're jealous," June said quietly.

Anne did not answer.

"Mary's decent," Adele said. "Maybe that's why. She's from the sticks,
and her parents still come to see her on visiting days, and there's
something about her so--so innocent. Maybe that's why Miss Bestris likes
her."

June said, "I think she's better than the rest of us. I think Miss
Bestris feels sorry for her in a way."

"Don't make me laugh," Anne said, facing June. "The only one that'll
ever feel sorry for her is herself!"

"You shouldn't have talked like that to her!" June snapped. "Why don't
you let her alone? She'll feel bad enough without you helping!"

Anne rolled over on the bed and stared up at the ceiling. June took a
helox lamp from her drawer and started to bake her hair darker. Those
Earthmen were so funny about colors.

In the kitchen, Mary took the cake out of the oven. It was steamy and
light and fluffy, and it smelled sweet and warm. She set it on the table
and mixed a two-minute green frosting which she spread, carefully, over
the cake. She patted here and there with the spatula and stood back, her
eyes proud and serious.

She hummed a little tune under her breath as she scrubbed the pots and
pans. Her hands moved in practiced rhythm, and the water splashed and
gurgled. When the kitchen was again spotless, she looked once more at
the cake, and then, turning out the light, she went back to her room.

Anne and Adele had left, but June was sitting quietly in the dusky
moonlight. Her white dress seemed vaguely luminous.

Laughing, Mary flicked on the light.

"It's a wonderful cake," she said. "The best one I ever made. Just the
way it should be."

"I wouldn't feel too bad, Mary, if he doesn't come to eat it," June
said. "I don't want to sound like Anne, but there was a lot of sense in
what she said."

"It's just like a real wedding cake." She hummed the snatch of Martian
tune. "Like in the tele-papers." She laughed with her eyes. "The
bridegroom takes the silver knife and cuts two large pieces of the cake
while the bride, dressed in filament coral, stands at his right hand.
She carries a bouquet of--Anne just likes to be mean!"

June frowned. Mary crossed to the dressing table. She studied her face
in the mirror. It was heart shaped, elfin; her purple hair was a riot of
curls, and her eyes were amethyst and gold. She smiled at herself. "I
want to look as pretty as I can tonight." She twisted around. "You don't
think he'll come either, do you?"

"I--no, Mary."

Mary looked back at the mirror. "He likes our canal blossom perfume."
She dabbed some of it on her ear lobes. "I like it best, too."

June stood up, crossed to the musikon, found a slow five-toned waltz.
She turned the music very low, and left the color mixer dim enough so
that only the faintest ghosts projected hues moved on walls and ceiling.

Mary continued to stare into the mirror. "But he will come. I know it."

June said nothing.

"Don't you see. I just _know_ he'll come."

June crossed back to her seat.

Mary turned from the mirror. "I'm sure he will. He's--I mean...."

June smiled wanly.

"Well, he will! You'll see!"

June said, "Even if it is an old dress, you look very nice in it."

"I've been learning his language. I can say 'thank you' and 'yes' and
'no' and 'I love you' and all kinds of things in it. He gave me a book,
and I've been studying. I want to be able really to talk with him. We've
got a lot to talk about. I want to find out about his parents, and what
he likes for supper and what kind of music he likes to hear, and--and
all sorts of things. I want to find out all about his planet, and...."

"Yes," June said wearily, "I know."

The music played on. The moving lights on the walls were like colored
reflections from a sunlit river.

"He may be a little late tonight; he has a lot to do, first. But he'll
be here."

_Buzzzzz_....

It was the red button; it blinked on and off.

"Visitors," June said.

"Look--" Mary said. "Look, June. I'm not half ready yet. Look. Tell Miss
Bestris I'll be down a little late. Tell her I have a special boy, and
it'll be all right. He wants me to wait for him."

June was on her feet. "... All right. You'd better not wait too long!"

"I won't."

After June was gone, Mary returned to the task of making her face
pretty, but after a moment, she turned from the mirror, leaned back, and
tried to relax. Underneath her dress, her heart was pounding.

The warm air carried sounds of the night creatures. One of the great
canal insects, screeching, flapped by the window. The tiny third moon
crept up over the horizon, and the buildings cast triple shadows.

_Buzzz. Buzzzz._

Still Mary waited.

_Buzzz. Buzzzz. Buzzzzzz...._

She was afraid to wait any longer. But by now she was sure that he would
be down stairs.

There was a last-minute flurry of combing and primping, and then she
rustled out of the room, her head erect, her eyes shining.

       *       *       *       *       *

The large reception room was filling. Overhead, the color organ threw
shimmering, prismatic beams on the ceiling. Beneath it, stiff,
embarrassed spacemen, mostly officers dressed in parade uniforms,
chatted in space-pidgin with the laughing, rainbow-haired girls.

Miss Bestris sat in one corner, her eyes roving the room: settling here
for a second, there for a second, checking, approving, disapproving,
silently. Occasionally she would smile or nod at one of the girls or one
of the spacemen, and once she frowned ever so slightly and shook her
head.

Anne was reclining on a couch, eating a golden Martian apple, listening
to a second mate; she played with a lock of his hair and smiled her wide
smile.

June, angelic, sat primly in a straight-backed chair, the captain at her
feet, a boyish, space-pale Earthman, drew embarrassed circles on the
carpet with his index finger.

In the next room, three couples were dancing to the slow music of an
Earth orchestra.

An inner door opened, and a uniformed native sheriff stepped in, a
crisp, military figure. "Miss Bestris?"

She stood up. "Yes?"

The Earthmen fell silent, waiting.

"We think we have your runaway." He turned to the door. "Bring her in."

Two more sheriffs entered, and between them, there was a young, slender
girl. Her face was gaunt and tear-stained. Her body trembled. She looked
at the Madame fearfully.

"You idiots!" Miss Bestris screamed. "Get her out of here! You'll ruin
my party! Take her out!"

The two men removed the girl. To the remaining sheriff, Miss Bestris
said, "Damn you, if you ever do anything like that again, I'll ...
I'll...."

"I'm sorry, Madame. But we wanted immediate identification. Would you
want us to hold the wrong girl?"

"That's her, all right! Now, get out! Wait for me in my office."

When they were gone Miss Bestris turned to the silent room. In quite
passable Esperanto she said, "I--am sorry. A misunderstanding. I assure
you, nothing. Go on with the party, and I'll see what I can do for the
poor girl."

She stood up and in her own language said, "Lively, girls! Smile! You,
Rita, hurry and serve tea!"

She made her exit.

The spacemen grumbled among themselves, coughed uneasily, watched the
closed door through which the Madame had gone. Listening, they could
hear only a muted mumble of sing-song sounds in several voices.

With determined animation, the girls moved about, smiled, chatted.

Rita came in, wheeling the tea tray, and the girls converged on it, each
trying to be the first to serve her escort. The tea was the Martian
stuff, concocted of a kind of local hemp. The Earthmen found it harsh
and bitter to the taste, but gentle on the soul.

Anne had filled two cups and returned to the second mate when she caught
sight of Mary coming down the stairs.

On the lowest step, Mary stood for a long time; her eyes eagerly
searched the crowd. Slowly a puzzled, hurt look came over her face.

June came to her side after a little while.

"Isn't he here?"

"No. Not yet."

"I'm sorry," June said, touching Mary's arm lightly.

"It's all right. It's early yet. I'll just sit down by Miss Bestris'
chair and wait for him."

She turned from June and went to the chair. Before she could sit down, a
space corporal came over, bowed, tried to take her hand. She shook her
head. He smiled twistedly and walked stiffly away.

Another man smiled at her. She shook her head slowly.

Someone came in the front door, and she leaned forward. Then she slumped
back limply.

She heard a tinkly laugh. She looked in its direction. She met Anne's
eyes, bright and amused. Just then Miss Bestris came in, her eyes angry
and her cheeks flushed. She strode across the room.

"Well," she said. "I'm glad to see you finally came down." She sank
heavily into her chair. "Cresent's back. They just brought her in. The
idiots came right in here with her. I'll bet I lost half-a-dozen
customers. These Earthmen are sensitive about such things."

Mary was still staring at the door; Miss Bestris looked down at her.

"Well, what are you sitting here for?"

"Please, Miss Bestris. I'm waiting for my special boy friend tonight."

She snorted and looked away. "Why isn't he here?"

"He will be."

"He'd better. I'll let you wait another--half an hour. That's all."

"Thank you, Miss Bestris. You're very kind to me."

"I indulge you more than I ought to, child," she said. "More than is
good for you, if the truth were known."

A man came in; Mary stiffened and then relaxed.

The mutter of voices blended into a steady hum. More couples were
dancing. Miss Bestris moved around the room. The music was tinny.

Another man came in.

"Your time's up," the Madame told Mary.

"Please, let me just wait for another few minutes."

Miss Bestris fixed her lips grimly. "I've had enough nonsense for
tonight. You heard me!"

"_Please!_"

"You heard what I said."

"Miss Bestris, I couldn't. Not tonight. Honest, I couldn't. If I had to
talk to anybody, I'd break down and cry. He'll ... come. I know he
will."

Miss Bestris whirled on her. "Listen, you little--" But she stopped,
suddenly. "All right," she said, gritting her teeth. "I can't afford
another scene tonight. But you'll be sorry for this."

Miss Bestris stormily looked away. The dancers danced; the music swelled
louder. Gradually, deliberately, the lights were waning.

"Haven't I always been good to you, Mary?" the Madame asked.

"Yes."

"Then like an obedient girl, do as I say. If he hasn't come by now, he
just won't. He's gone to some other house."

"No!" Mary said doggedly.

"Just remember, tomorrow, how you deliberately disobeyed me. Your silly
emotions are costing me money, and that's one thing I simply won't stand
for."

"He'll come." Mary said. "You won't lose money."

Couples sat side by side, laughing, talking in whispers. Occasionally
there were giggles. The room began to empty slowly.

The lights continued to dim until the rooms were gloomy. Even the
shifting shades of the color organ were no more than a faint ambience.
Anne, laughing, helped her second mate to his feet.

"I'll give you one more chance," Miss Bestris said. "The next man that
comes in...."

"No! I just couldn't! Not tonight!"

A few more customers drifted in. Then even the stragglers stopped
coming. It was very late.

"He's deserted you; you see that now?" Madame Bestris sneered.

Mary stood up. There were tears in her eyes. "You can't--you
don't--know--how I feel," she choked. "You don't care!" She turned and
ran up the stairs, crying.

Several Earthmen, still in the big room, turned to watch. The torches
were misty twinkles now. The last couples climbed the stairs and then
Miss Bestris, too, went to bed.

       *       *       *       *       *

The blue morning came. The town awoke; commerce began.

At seven, Miss Bestris lay in bed frowning, considering the events of
the previous evening. But she was not so annoyed that she forgot to call
a doctor on the teleview and arrange for him to come at nine to give a
physical examination.

Her bulk out of bed, she dressed and went to the kitchen to brew a pot
of hemp tea. The cleaning maid, moving about in the next room, heard
Miss Bestris call sharply: "Flavia! Come in here!"

Flavia appeared with a dust rag in her hand.

"Did you cut this cake?"

"No, ma'am."

Miss Bestris glowered. "That little idiot! She must have slipped down
here after we were all asleep and sat here and cried her silly little
eyes out! If she thinks she can pull that love-sick act on me she'll
soon find out different. Am I supposed to put up with having her moon
over every space tramp that comes in? Why, I've taken more from her--!"

"Yes, ma'am."

Miss Bestris waddled to the stairs, climbed them determinedly. At Mary's
door she stopped and twisted the knob. Locked!

Miss Bestris hammered. "Open up, Mary!" The door rattled under her hand.
"Open that door at once!"

No answer.

Miss Bestris pounded harder. "Open up, I say!"

Anne sauntered into the hall, her dressing gown swishing. "She really
made you look the fool last night, didn't she?" Anne said lazily.

"You--you slut! Mind your own business."

Anne smiled and shrugged.

"Open the door, Mary! Do you hear me! Open it!"

"Maybe she killed herself," Anne said. "It has happened."

"My God! No.... She wouldn't dare. You think she would?"

Anne shrugged again. "They do funny things sometimes."

Miss Bestris' face was red. "Run down and get my keys. In my desk. You
know where they are."

Then, "_For God's sake, hurry!_"

While she waited Miss Bestris rattled the door, pleading and cursing.

Finally Anne returned. Miss Bestris snatched the key with a shaking
hand. She hurled the door open and burst inside.

"See here, you little--!" She stopped.

The room was empty.

On the neatly made bed reposed a little stack of money. When Miss
Bestris got around to counting it, she found that it contained exactly
nine hundred and ten _dordocs_.

THE END


       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber's Notes:

This etext was produced from If Worlds of Science Fiction May 1953.
Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
copyright on this publication was renewed.

Obvious punctuation errors repaired.

Page 39 word "lambence" changed to "ambience" (no more than a faint
ambience) meaning a faint light.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of She Knew He Was Coming, by Kris Neville

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SHE KNEW HE WAS COMING ***

***** This file should be named 33934.txt or 33934.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/3/9/3/33934/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Dianna Adair and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
