The Project Gutenberg EBook of Riya's Foundling, by Algirdas Jonas Budrys

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Riya's Foundling

Author: Algirdas Jonas Budrys

Release Date: November 23, 2010 [EBook #34420]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK RIYA'S FOUNDLING ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









Riya's Foundling

By ALGIS BUDRYS

[Transcriber note: This etext was produced Science Fiction Stories 1953.
Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S. copyright
on this publication was renewed.]


[Sidenote: _Now, if the animal we know as a cow were to evolve into a
creature with near-human intelligence, so that she thought of herself as
a "person" ..._]


[Illustration]


The loft of the feed-house, with its stacked grainsacks, was a B-72, a
fort, a foxhole--any number of things, depending on Phildee's moods.

Today it was a jumping-off place.

Phildee slipped out of his dormitory and ran across the yard to the
feed-house. He dropped the big wooden latch behind him, and climbed up
the ladder to the loft, depending on the slight strength of his young
arms more than on his legs, which had to be lifted to straining heights
before they could negotiate the man-sized rungs.

He reached the loft and stood panting, looking out over the farm through
the loft door, at the light wooden fences around it, and the circling
antenna of the radar tower.

Usually, he spent at least a little time each day crouched behind the
grainsacks and being bigger and older, firing cooly and accurately into
charging companies of burly, thick-lipped UES soldiers, or going over on
one wing and whistling down on a flight of TT-34's that scattered like
frightened ducks before the fiery sleet of his wing rockets.

But today was different, today there was something he wanted to try.

He stood up on his toes and searched. He felt the touch of Miss Cowan's
mind, no different from that of anyone else--flat, unsystematic.

He sighed. Perhaps, somewhere, there was someone else like himself. For
a moment, the fright of loneliness invaded him, but then faded. He took
a last look at the farm, then moved away from the open door, letting his
mind slip into another way of thinking.

His chubby features twisted into a scowl of concentration as he
visualized reality. The scowl became a deeper grimace as he negated that
reality, step by step, and substituted another.

    _F is for Phildee._
    _O is for Out._
    _R is for Reimann._
    _T is for Topology._
    _H is for heartsick hunger._

Abruptly, the Reimann fold became a concrete visualization. As though
printed clearly in and around the air, which was simultaneously both
around him and not around him, which existed/not existed in spacetime,
he saw the sideslip diagram.

He twisted.

       *       *       *       *       *

Spring had come to Riya's world; spring and the thousand sounds of it.
The melted snow in the mountaintops ran down in traceries of leaping
water, and the spring-crests raced along the creeks into the rivers. The
riverbank grasses sprang into life; the plains turned green again.

Riya made her way up the path across the foothills, conscious of her
shame. The green plain below her was dotted, two by two, with the
figures of her people. It was spring, and Time. Only she was alone.

There was a special significance in the fact that she was here on this
path in this season. The plains on either side of the brown river were
her people's territory. During the summer, the couples ranged over the
grass until the dams were ready to drop their calves. Then it became the
bulls' duty to forage for their entire families until the youngsters
were able to travel south to the winter range.

Through the space of years, the people had increased in numbers, the
pressure of this steady growth making itself felt as the yearlings
filled out on the winter range. It had become usual, as the slow drift
northward was made toward the end of winter, for some of the people to
split away from the main body and range beyond the gray mountains that
marked the western limits of the old territories. Since these wanderers
were usually the most willful and headstrong, they were regarded as
quasi-outcasts by the more settled people of the old range.

But--and here Riya felt the shame pierce more strongly than ever--they
had their uses, occasionally. Preoccupied in her shame, she
involuntarily turned her head downward, anxious that none of the people
be staring derisively upward at the shaggy brown hump of fur that was
she, toiling up the path.

She was not the first--but that was meaningless. That other female
people had been ugly or old, that the same unforgotten force that urged
her up the mountain path had brought others here before her, meant only
that she was incapable of accepting the verdict of the years that had
thinned her pelt, dimmed her eyes, and broken the smooth rhythm of her
gait.

In short, it meant that Riya Sair, granddam times over, spurned by every
male on the old range, was willing to cross the gray mountains and risk
death from the resentful wild dams for the thin hope that there was a
male among the wildlings who would sire her calf.

She turned her head back to the path and hurried on, cringing in inward
self-reproach at her speed.

Except for her age, Riya presented a perfect average of her people. She
stood two yards high and two wide at the shoulders, a yard at the
haunches, and measured three and a half yards from her muzzle to the
rudimentary tail. Her legs were short and stumpy, cloven-hooved. Her
massive head hung slightly lower than her shoulders, and could be
lowered to within an inch or two of the ground. She was herbivorous,
ruminant, and mammalian. Moreover, she had intelligence--not of a very
high order, but adequate for her needs.

From a Terrestrial point of view, none of this was remarkable. Many
years of evolution had gone into her fashioning--more years for her one
species than for all the varieties of man that have ever been.
Nevertheless, she did have some remarkable attributes.

It was one of these attributes that now enabled her to sense what
happened on the path ahead of her. She stopped still, only her long fur
moving in the breeze.

       *       *       *       *       *

Phildee--five, towheaded, round faced, chubby, dressed in a slightly
grubby corduroy oversuit, and precocious--had his attributes, too.
Grubby and tousled; branded with a thread of licorice from one corner of
his mouth to his chin; involved in the loss of his first milk-tooth, as
he was--he nevertheless slipped onto the path on Riya's world, the
highest product of Terrestrial evolution. Alice followed a white rabbit
down a hole. Phildee followed Reimann down into a hole that, at the same
time, followed him, and emerged--where?

Phildee didn't know. He could have performed the calculation necessary
to the task almost instantly, but he was five. It was too much trouble.

He looked up, and saw a gray slope of rock vaulting above him. He looked
down, and saw it fall away toward a plain on which were scattered pairs
of foraging animals. He felt a warm breeze, smelled it, saw it blow dust
along the path, and saw Riya:

[Illustration]

    _B is for big brown beast._
    _L is for looming large, looking lonely._
    _B? L? Bull? No--bison._
    _Bison:_

           bison (bi'sn) _n._ The buffalo of the N. Amer. plains.

Phildee shook his head and scowled. No--not bison, either. What, then?
He probed.

Riya took a step forward. The sight of a living organism other than a
person was completely unfamiliar to her. Nevertheless, anything that
small, and undeniably covered--in most areas, at least--with some kind
of fur, could not, logically, be anything but a strange kind of calf.
But--she stopped, and raised her head--if a calf, then where was the
call?

Phildee's probe swept past the laboring mind directly into her
telepathic, instinctual centers.

Voiceless, with their environment so favorable that it had never been
necessary for them to develop prehensile limbs, female people had
nevertheless evolved a method of child care commensurate with their
comparatively higher intelligence.

Soft as tender fingers, gentle as the human hand that smooths the awry
hair back from the young forehead, Riya's mental caress enfolded
Phildee.

Phildee recoiled. The feeling was:

    _Warm_
    _Soft_
    _Sweet_
         Not _candy in the mouth_

         _Candy in the mouth_
    _Familiar_
    _Good_
    _Tasty_
    _Nice_

         _The feeling was_
    _Not Familiar_
    _Not Good_
    _Not Tasty_
    _Not Nice_

    _WHY?_:

    _M is for many motionless months._
    _T is for tense temper tantrums._
    _R is for rabid--NO!--rapid rolling wrench._

    _MTR. Mother._

Phildee's mother wanted Phildee's father. Phildee's mother wanted green
grass and apple trees, tight skirts and fur jackets on Fifth Avenue, men
to turn and look, a little room where nobody could see her. Phildee's
mother had radiation burns. Phildee's mother was dead.

He wavered; physically. Maintaining his position in this world was a
process that demanded constant attention from the segment of his mind
devoted to it. For a moment, even that small group of brain cells almost
became involved in his reaction.

It was that which snapped him back into functioning logically. MTR was
Mother. Mother was:


    _Tall_
    _Thin_
    _White_
    _Biped_

   _"In Heaven's name, Doctor, when will this thing be over?"_

    BL was Riya. Riya was:
    _Big brown beast, looming large, looking lonely._
    _BL=MTR_
    _Equation not meaningful, not valid._

       *       *       *       *       *

Almost resolved, only a few traces of the initial conflict remained.
Phildee put the tips of his right fingers to his mouth. He dug his toe
into the ground, gouged a semicircular furrow, and smoothed it over with
his sole.

Riya continued to look at him from where she was standing, two or three
feet away. Haltingly, she reached out her mind again--hesitating not
because of fear of another such reaction on Phildee's part, for that had
been far beyond her capacity to understand, but because even the
slightest rebuff on the part of a child to a gesture as instinctive as a
Terrestrial mother's caress was something that none of the people had
ever encountered before.

While her left-behind intellectual capacity still struggled to reconcile
the feel of childhood with a visual image of complete unfamiliarity, the
warm mind-caress went gently forth again.

Phildee made up his mind. Ordinarily, he was immune to the small
emotional problems that beclouded less rational intellects. He was
unused to functioning in other than a cause/effect universe. Mothers
were usually--though sometimes not--matronly women who spent the greater
part of roughly twenty years per child in conscious pre-occupation with,
and/or subconscious or conscious rejection of, their offspring.

In his special case, Mother was a warm place, a frantic, hysteric voice,
the pressure of the spasmodically contractile musculature linked to her
hyperthyroid metabolism. Mother was a thing from before birth.

Riya--Riya bore a strong resemblance to an intelligent cow. In any
physiological sense, she could no more be his mother than--

The second caress found him not unaccustomed to it. It enfolded his
consciousness, tenderly, protectingly, empathetic.

Phildee gave way to instinct.

       *       *       *       *       *

The fur along the ridge of Riya's spine prickled with a well-remembered
happiness as she felt the hesitant answering surge in Phildee's mind.
Moving surely forward, she nuzzled his face. Phildee grinned. He ran his
fingers through the thick fur at the base of her short neck.

_Big warm wall of brown fur._

_Cool, happy nose._

_Happy, happy, eyes._

Great joy welled up in Riya. No shameful trot across the mountains faced
her now. No hesitant approach to the huddled, suspicious wildlings was
before her. The danger of sharp female hooves to be avoided, of skulking
at the edge of the herd in hope of an anxious male, was a thing no
longer to be half-fearfully approached.

With a nudge of her head, she directed Phildee down the path to the old
range while she herself turned around. She stood motionless for a
sweeping scan of the plain below her. The couples were scattered over
the grass--but couples only, the females as yet unfulfilled.

This, too, was another joy to add to the greatest of all. So many things
about her calf were incomprehensible--the only dimly-felt overtones of
projected symbology that accompanied Phildee's emotional reactions, the
alien structure--so many, many things. Her mind floundered vainly
through the complex data.

But all that was nothing. What did it matter? The Time had been, and for
another season, she was a dam.

       *       *       *       *       *

Phildee walked beside her down the path, one fist wrapped in the fur of
her flank, short legs windmilling.

They reached the plain, and Riya struck out across it toward the
greatest concentration of people, her head proudly raised. She stopped
once, and deliberately cropped a mouthful of grass with unconcern, but
resumed her pace immediately thereafter.

With the same unconcern, she nudged Phildee into the center of the group
of people, and, ignoring them, began teaching her calf to feed.

_Eat. (Picture of Phildee/calf on all fours, cropping the plains
grass.)_

Phildee stared at her in puzzlement. Grass was not food. He sent the
data emphatically.

Riya felt the tenuous discontent. She replied with tender understanding.
Sometimes the calf was hesitant.

_Eat. (Gently, understandingly, but firmly. [Repetition of picture.])_
She bent her head and pushed him carefully over, then held his head down
with a gentle pressure of her muzzle. _Eat._

Phildee squirmed. He slipped out from under her nose and regained his
Feet. He looked at the other people, who were staring in puzzlement at
Riya and himself.

He felt himself pushed forward again. _Eat._

Abruptly, he realized the situation. In a culture of herbivores, what
food could there be but herbiage? There would be milk, in time, but not
for--he probed--months.

In probing, too, he found the visualization of his life with her ready
at the surface of Riya's mind.

There was no shelter on the plain. His fur was all the shelter
necessary.

_But I don't have any fur._

In the fall, they would move to the southern range.

_Walk? A thousand miles?_

He would grow big and strong. In a year, he would be a sire himself.

       *       *       *       *       *

His reaction was simple, and practiced. He adjusted his reality concept
to Reimannian topology. Not actually, but subjectively, he felt himself
beginning to slip Earthward.

Riya stiffened in alarm. The calf was straying. The knowledge was
relayed from her mother-centers to the telepathic functions.

_Stop. You cannot go there. You must be with your mother. You are not
grown. Stop. Stay with me. I will protect you. I love you._

       *       *       *       *       *

The universe shuddered. Phildee adjusted frantically. Cutting through
the delicately maintained reality concept was a scrambling, jamming
frequency of thought. In terror, he flung himself backward into Riya's
world. Standing completely still, he probed frantically into Riya's
mind.

And found her mind only fumblingly beginning to intellectualize the
simple formulization of what her instinctive centers had computed,
systematized, and activated before her conscious mind had even begun to
doubt that everything was well.

His mind accepted the data, and computed.

Handless and voiceless, not so fast afoot in their bulkiness as the
weakest month-old calf, the people had long ago evolved the restraints
necessary for rearing their children.

If the calf romped and ran, his mother ran beside him, and the calf was
not permitted to run faster than she. If a calf strayed from its
sleeping mother, it strayed only so far, and then the mother woke--but
the calf had already long been held back by the time her intelligence
awoke to the straying.

The knowledge and computations were fed in Phildee's rational centers.
The Universe--and Earth--were closed to him. He must remain here.

But human children could not survive in this environment.

He had to find a solution--instantly.

He clinched his fists, feeling his arm muscles quiver.

His lower lip was pulled into his mouth, and his teeth sank in.

The diagram--the pattern--bigger--stronger--try--try--this is not
real--_this_ is real: brown earth, white clouds, blue sky--try--mouth
full of warm salt ...

    _F is for Phildee!_
    _O is for Out!_
    _R is for Riya!_
    _T is for Topology!_
    _H is for happiness and home!_

       *       *       *       *       *

Riya shook herself. She stood in the furrows of a plowed field, her eyes
vacant with bewilderment. She stared uncomprehendingly at the walls and
the radar tower, the concrete shoulders of the air raid bunkers. She saw
antiaircraft quick-firers being hastily cranked around and down at her,
heard Phildee's shout that saved her life, and understood none of it.

But none of it mattered. Her strange calf was with her, standing beside
her with his fingers locked in her fur, and she could feel the warm
response in his mind as she touched him with her caress again.

She saw the other little calves erupting out of the low dormitory
buildings, and something within her crooned.

Riya nuzzled her foundling. She looked about her at the War Orphans'
Relocation Farm with her happy, happy eyes.

[Illustration]





End of Project Gutenberg's Riya's Foundling, by Algirdas Jonas Budrys

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK RIYA'S FOUNDLING ***

***** This file should be named 34420.txt or 34420.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/4/4/2/34420/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
