The Project Gutenberg EBook of Luna Escapade, by H. B. Fyfe

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Luna Escapade

Author: H. B. Fyfe

Release Date: October 6, 2012 [EBook #40961]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LUNA ESCAPADE ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net











                             Luna Escapade

                            _by H. B. Fyfe_

[Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from Orbit volume 1 number
2, 1953. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
copyright on this publication was renewed.]

[Sidenote: _SHE WAS JUST A CRAZY BRAT--OR WAS SHE?_]

[Illustration]


With over an hour to go before he needed to start braking for his
landing on Luna, Pete Dudley sat at the controls of the rocket freighter
and tried to think of anything else that needed checking after his
spinning the ship. He drummed absently with the fingers of his right
hand upon the buckle of the seat strap which restrained him from
floating out of the padded acceleration seat.

"Let's see, tail's right out there in front. I got the angle perfect.
Guess everything's okay."

He noticed his fingers drumming, and stopped.

"Cut that out!" he told himself. "Get nervous now and Jack'll be sending
some other vacuum on the next Mars run. There's Ericsson dead center in
the screen, waiting for you to plop down beside the domes. You couldn't
miss a crater that size if you tried."

He leaned back and stared speculatively at the curving tip of the Lunar
Rockies that ended in one of the largest craters on the far side of
Luna. His eyes squinted slightly and there was a crease between them, as
if he spent much time peering into instruments. There were deeper lines
beside his mouth, but the thin lips and pointed chin neutralized that
evidence of frequent smiling.

"Are we nearly there?"

Dudley's brown eyes opened so wide that the whites gleamed in the dim
light from his instruments. Then he shut them tightly and shook his head
quickly.

He had thought he heard a woman's voice, and of course he couldn't have.
Freight rockets were checked out of Terran spaceports with only a pilot
aboard. A lonely job for a man, but it was really only a way of keeping
in practice. He made six round trips to Luna a year, but the big one was
the three-month kick to Mars.

Then he smelled the perfume, so out of place in the machine-crowded
compartment. He turned around slowly.

She stood with one hand gripping the lead of a computing machine to keep
her feet on the deck. Dudley stared her up and down two or three times
before he realized his mouth hung open.

Slim and about five-feet-four, she looked like a nice little girl making
her first disastrous experiments with adult make-up. The slack suit of
deep blue, revealing a soft white blouse at the neck of the jacket, was
in the best of taste, but her heavy application of lipstick was crude.

_And her hair isn't naturally ash-blonde_, Dudley thought. _Yet she
looks like such a kid. Not pretty, but she might be in a few years._

"What are you doing here?" he demanded harshly.

For a second, her eyes were scared. Then the expression was supplanted
by a hard, make-believe confidence, leaving him merely with a fading
sense of shame at his tone.

"Same as you," she said boldly. "Going to Luna."

Dudley snorted. "Then relax," he growled, "because I can't stop you now.
Where the devil did you spend the last thirty-six hours?"

She tried a grin. "In the little room where the things are that pump the
air. I sneaked in the galley once, when you were asleep. Did you miss
anything?"

"No," he admitted, thinking back.

"See? I'm not enough trouble to be noticed!"

Dudley eyed her sourly. There was trouble behind this somewhere, he was
willing to bet, or else why had she stowed away? Running from a family
fight? When the port checkers at Ericsson saw her--!

"How old are you, kid?" he asked.

"Twenty-one."

The answer was too pat and quickly given. Even the girl seemed to
realize that, and she continued talking. "My name's Kathi Foster. You're
the next Mars pilot, according to the schedule, aren't you?"

"What about it?"

She let go of the cable and pushed her weightless body across the
control room to his chair.

"What's it like on Mars?" she asked breathlessly.

_What does she expect me to tell her?_ Dudley wondered cynically. _That
the whole population of the colony is only about four thousand? That
they still live mostly on hope, dreams, and regular rocket service? That
every one of them represents such a fantastic transportation expense
that the Commission only sends top-notch people?_

"It's pretty tough," he said.

She hesitated over his unhelpful reply, then plunged ahead.

"How about taking me along to see for myself?"

Dudley smiled with one corner of his mouth.

"You're not going anywhere except back to Terra on the next rocket," he
predicted flatly. "And I hope your father still has enough hair on his
head to own a hair-brush!"

"My father is dead."

"Then your--." He paused as she shook her head. "Well, don't you have
any family? Jobs on Luna are ... limited. The settlements just aren't
very big. You're better off down home."

Kathi's half-defiant, half-wheedling mask cracked. Her over-painted lips
twitched.

"What do you know about where I'm better off? If you knew the kind of
family I have--."

"Oh, calm down!" grunted Dudley, somewhat discomforted by the sight of
tears spilling from her blue eyes. "Things are never as bad as you think
when you're just a ... when you're young. When we land, we can say you
got left aboard by mistake. They'll just send you back without any
trouble."

"Like hell they will! I won't go!"

Dudley stared hard at her, until she dropped her gaze.

"You don't understand," she said more quietly. "I ... my family has been
kicking me around the law courts all my life just because my grandfather
left me his money. They're all trying to get their hands on it, or on me
to back up their claims. Do you realize I'm eight--I'm twenty-one and I
never lived a happy day in my life? I'd rather _die_ than go back!"

"Yeah, sure," said Dudley. "What did you really do to make you so scared
of going back? Smack up grandpop's helicopter, maybe, or flunk out of
school?"

"No, I got sick and tired of being shoved around. I wanted to get away
someplace where I could be myself."

"Why didn't you buy a ticket on a passenger rocket, if you had such an
urge to visit Luna?"

"My aunts and uncles and cousins have all my money tied up in suits."

He leaned back by pushing the edge of the control desk.

"Pretty fast with the answers, aren't you?" he grinned. "I wonder what
you'll think up for the spaceport police when _they_ ask you?"

"You don't believe--," she began.

He shook his head and to avoid further argument he picked up his
sliderule, muttering something about checking his landing curve.
Actually, he was not as convinced as he pretended that her story was all
lies.

_But what the hell?_ he thought. _I have my own troubles without
worrying because some blonde little spiral thinks she can go dramatic
over a family spat. She'd better learn that life is full of give and
take._

"You better get attached to something around here," he warned her when
the time came for serious deceleration.

"I ... I could go back where I was," she stammered. He suddenly realized
that for the past hour she had silently accepted his ignoring her. She
asked now, "What happens next?"

"We cut our speed and come down on the tail as near to the domes of the
Ericsson settlement as possible without taking too much of a chance.
Then I secure everything for the towing."

"Towing? I'm sorry; I never read much about the moon rockets."

"Natural enough," Dudley retorted dryly. "Anyway, they send out big
cranes to lower the rocket to horizontal so they can tow it on wheels
under one of the loading domes. Handling cargo goes a lot faster and
safer that way. Most of the town itself is underground."

He began warming up his tele-screen prior to asking the spaceport for
observation of his approach. Kathi grabbed his elbow.

"Of course I'm going to talk with them," he answered her startled
question.

"Can they see me here behind you?"

"I guess so. Maybe not too clear, but they'll see somebody's with me.
What's the difference? It'll just save them a shock later."

"Why should they see me at all? I can hide till after you leave the
ship, and--."

"Fat chance!" grunted Dudley. "Forget it."

"Please, Dudley! I--I don't want to get you in any trouble, for one
thing. At least, let me get out of sight now. Maybe you'll change your
mind before we land."

He looked at her, and the anxiety seemed real enough. Knowing he was
only letting her postpone the unpleasantness but reluctant to make her
face it, he shrugged.

"All right, then! Go somewhere and wipe that stuff off your face. But
stop dreaming!"

He waited until she had disappeared into one or another of the tiny
compartments behind the control room, then sent out his call to the
Lunar settlement.

The problem did not affect his landing; in fact, he did better than
usual. His stubby but deft fingers lacked their ordinary tendency to
tighten up, now that part of his mind was rehearsing the best way to
explain the presence of an unauthorized passenger.

In the end, when he had the rocket parked neatly on the extremities of
its fins less than a quarter of a mile from one of the port domes, he
had not yet made up his mind.

"Nice landing, Pete," the ground observer told him. "Buy you a drink
later?"

"Uh ... yeah, sure!" Dudley answered. "Say, is Jack Fisher anywhere
around?"

"Jack? No, I guess he's gone bottom level. We're having 'night' just
now, you know. Why? What do you want a cop for?"

Suddenly, it was too difficult.

_If she could hide as long as she did, she could have done it all the
way_, he told himself.

"Oh, don't wake him up if he's asleep," he said hastily. "I just thought
I'd have dinner with him sometime before I leave."

He waited sullenly while the great self-propelled machines glided out
over the smooth floor of the crater toward the ship, despising himself
for giving in.

_Well, I just won't know anything about her_, he decided. _Let her have
her little fling on Luna! It won't last long._

He closed the key that would guard against accidental activation of the
controls and, enjoying the ability to walk even at one-sixth his normal
weight, went about securing loose objects. When the space-suited figures
outside signaled, he was ready for the tilt.

Once under the dome, he strode out through the airlock as if innocent of
any thought but getting breakfast. He exchanged greetings with some of
the tow crew, turned over his manifesto to the yawning checker who met
him, and headed for the entrance of the tunnel to the main part of the
settlement.

Only when he had chosen a monorail car and started off along the tunnel
toward the underground city a mile away did he let himself wonder about
Kathi Foster.

"Her problem now," he muttered, but he felt a little sorry for her
despite his view that she needed to grow up.

Later in the "day," he reported to transportation headquarters.

"Hiya, Pete!" grinned Les Snowdon, chief of the section. "All set for
the Ruby Planet?"

Dudley grimaced. "I suppose so," he said. "Left my locker mostly packed,
except for what I'll need for a couple of days. When do we go out and
who's the crew?"

"Jarkowski, Campiglia, and Wells. You have three days to make merry and
one to sober up."

"I sober fast," said Dudley.

Snowdon shook his head in mock admiration. "Nevertheless," he said, "the
physical will be on the fourth morning from now. Don't get in any fights
over on Level C--or if you do, let the girl do the punching for you! A
broken finger, my boy, and you'll ruin the whole Martian schedule!"

"Ah, go on!" Dudley grinned, moving toward the door. "They can always
stick you in there, and make you earn your pay again."

"They're still paying me for the things I did in the old days," retorted
Snowdon. "Until I get caught up, I'm satisfied to keep a little gravity
under my butt. Oh ... by the way, your pal Jack Fisher left a call for
you. Something about dinner tonight."

Dudley thanked him and went off to contact Fisher. Then he returned to
the pilots' quarters for a shower and strolled along the corridors of
the underground city to a lunch-room. Food and water were rationed on
Luna, but not nearly as tightly as they would be for him during the next
three months.

That night, he joined Fisher and his wife for dinner at The View,
Ericsson's chief center of escape from the drabness of Lunar life. It
was the only restaurant, according to the boast of its staff, where one
could actually dine under the stars.

"Sometimes I wish that dome wasn't so transparent," said Fisher. "Sit
down, the girls will be back in a minute."

Dudley eyed him affectionately. Fisher was head of the settlement's
small police force, but managed to look more like the proprietor of one
of the several bars that flourished in the levels of the city just under
the restaurant. He was heavy enough to look less than his six feet, and
his face was as square as the rest of him. Dark hair retreated
reluctantly from his forehead, and the blue eyes set peering above his
pudgy cheeks were shrewd.

"Girls?" asked Dudley.

"We brought along a new arrival to keep you company," said Fisher. "She
works in one of the film libraries or something like that."

[Illustration]

_Which means that's as good an excuse as any for having her at
Ericsson_, thought Dudley. _Anyway, I'm glad Jack is the sort to be
realistic about things like bars and other ... recreation. There'd be
more guys turning a little variable from too much time in space without
some outlet._

"Here she comes with Myra," said his host. "Name's Eileen."

Dudley smiled at Mrs. Fisher and was introduced to the red-haired girl
with her. Eileen eyed him speculatively, then donned her best air of
friendliness. The evening passed rapidly.

For the next few days, besides seeing the Fishers and looking up the men
who were to be his crew, Dudley spent a lot of time with Eileen. There
seemed to be little difficulty about her getting time off from whatever
her official duties were. She showed him all the bars and movie theatres
and other amusements that the underground city could boast, and Dudley
made the most of them in spite of his recent visit to Terra. On the
Mars-bound rocket, they would be lucky, if allowed one deck of cards and
half a dozen books for the entertainment of the four of them.

It was on the "evening" of his third day that the specter haunting the
back of his mind pushed forward to confront him. He had listened for
gossip, but there had been no word of the discovery of an unauthorized
arrival. Then, as he was taking Eileen to her underground apartment, he
heard his name called.

There she was, with an escort of three young men he guessed to be
operators of the machinery that still drilled out new corridors in the
rock around the city. Somehow she had exchanged the black slack suit for
a bright red dress that was even more daring than Eileen's. In the
regulated temperature, clothing was generally light, but Dudley's first
thought was that this was overdoing a good thing.

"May I have a word with you, Dudley?" Kathi asked, coming across the
corridor while her young men waited with shifting feet and displeased
looks.

Dudley glanced helplessly at Eileen, wondering about an introduction. He
had never bothered to learn her last name, and he had no idea of what
name Kathi was using. The redhead had pity on him.

"My door's only a few yards down," she said. "I'll wait."

She swept Kathi with a glance of amused confidence and walked away. It
seemed to Dudley that she made sure the three young men followed her
with their eyes; but then he was kicking off for Mars within twenty-four
hours, so he could hardly object to that.

"Have you changed your mind?" demanded Kathi with a fierce eagerness.

"Not so loud!" hushed Dudley. "About what? And how did you get that
rig?"

Had he been less dismayed at her presence, he might have remarked that
the tight dress only emphasized her immaturity, but she gave him no time
to say more.

"About Mars, Dudley. Can't you take me? I'm afraid those illegitimate
blood-suckers are going to send after me. They could sniff out which way
a nickel rolled in a coal-bin."

"Aren't you just a shade young for that kind of talk?"

"I guess I'm a little frightened," she admitted.

"You frighten me, too," he retorted. "How are you ... I mean, what do
you--?"

She tossed her blonde hair.

"There are ways to get along here, I found out. I didn't get arrested
this time, did I? So why can't you take a chance with me to Mars?"

"Take an eclipse on that," said Dudley with a flat sweep of his hand.
"It's just out of the question. For one thing, there are four of us
going, and you can't hide for the whole trip without _somebody_ catching
on."

"All right," she said quietly. "Why not?"

"What do you mean, 'Why not?'"

"I'm willing to earn my passage. What if there _are_ four of you?"

For a long moment, Dudley discovered things about himself, with the
sudden realization that the idea appealed to some suppressed part of his
mind. He had never kidded himself about being a saint. The thing had
possibilities. _Maybe one of the others can be talked into restraint
into her._

He snapped out of it. "Don't be a little fool!" he grated. "If you want
my advice, you'll--."

"Well, I _don't_ want your goddam advice! If you're too yellow to try
it, I'll find somebody else. There'll be another rocket after yours, you
know. Maybe they'll have a _man_ on it!"

He felt his face go white and then flush as he stared at her. He did not
know what to say. She looked like a child, but the outburst was more
than a mere tantrum.

_Sounds as if she's never been crossed before_, he thought. _I ought to
haul off and slap a little self-restraint into her._

Instead, he beckoned to the three men, who had been edging closer with
aggrieved expressions.

"How about taking your girl friend along?" he said flatly.

One of them took her by the elbow and tried to murmur something in her
ear, but Kathi shook him off.

"If you are afraid for your license, Dudley, I'll say I hid without your
knowing it. I'll say one of the others let me in. Please, Dudley. I'm
sorry I talked to you like that."

She was making a fool of him, and of herself, he decided. And in
another minute, she would spill the whole thing, the way she was
sounding off. And her friends were beginning to look hostile as it was.

"What's the trouble?" asked one of them.

"Nothing that won't clear up if you pour a couple of drinks into her,"
said Dudley disgustedly.

He walked away, and they held her from following.

"_Dudley!_" she yelled after him. "They'll send me back! Please, Dudley.
I won't go. You remember what I said about going back--."

Her voice was getting too shrill. Someone in the group must have put his
hand over her mouth, for when Dudley looked back, they were rounding a
corner of the corridor more or less silently.

Eileen waited in the half-open door, watching him quizzically. "Friend
of yours?" she drawled.

"After a fashion," admitted Dudley, pulling out a handkerchief to wipe
his forehead. "Spoiled brat!"

He fumbled in a pocket of his jacket, and withdrew a small package.
"Here's the bracelet that matches that necklace," he said. "I knew I had
it in my locker somewhere."

Her thanks were very adequate.

"Aren't you coming in?" Eileen asked after the pause.

"No ... I don't ... I have to get a good night's sleep, you know. We
kick off tomorrow."

She pursed her lips in a small pout, but shrugged. "Then look me up when
you get back, Pete."

"Yeah. Sure."

He kissed her quickly and walked away, drumming the fingers of his right
hand against his thigh.

Except for the tenseness of blasting off and landing, the round trip to
Mars was as boring as he expected. Campiglia won too many chess games at
one move per watch, and the deck of cards wore out. For a few days,
Wells had a slightly infected finger after cutting himself, but it was a
small crisis. The layover on Mars was short, and the thrill was no
longer new.

Dudley was glad to step out of the big rocket on Luna.

They had come in during the sleeping period at Ericsson, so the four of
them had gone to their quarters for a few hours of sleep after the first
babble of welcome from those on duty when they landed. Dudley was
awakened by Jack Fisher.

"So early?" he grunted, squinting at his watch. "What brings you
around?"

Fisher settled his bulk in the only chair of the bedroom that was to be
Dudley's until his next Terra-bound rocket.

"Liable to be busy today," he said easily, "so I thought I'd have
breakfast with you."

"Fine!" said Dudley. "Wait'll I shave and I'll be with you."

When he returned from the bathroom, he thought that he had perfect
control of his features. There might not be anything wrong, but it
seemed odd that Jack should be around so soon. He wondered if the Kathi
Foster affair was in the background.

They went up a few levels to a minor eating place and had scrambled eggs
that almost tasted natural. Over the coffee, Fisher opened up.

"Had a little excitement while you were gone," he said.

"Yeah? What?"

Fisher let him wait while he carefully unwrapped the half-smoked remains
of a cigar. Tobacco in any form was strictly rationed in all Lunar
settlements.

"Ever hear of old Robert Forgeron?" he asked.

"The one they used to call 'Robber' Forgeron?"

"That's right. He had so many patents on airlock mechanisms and
space-suit gadgets and rocket control instruments that he made the
goddamnedest fortune ever heard of out of space exploration. Died a few
years ago."

Dudley maintained a puzzled silence.

"Seems the old man had strong ideas about that fortune," continued
Fisher. "Left the bulk of it to his only granddaughter."

"That must have made headlines," Dudley commented.

"Sure did." Fisher had the cigar going, now, and he puffed economically
upon it. "Especially when she ran away from home."

"Oh?" Dudley felt it coming. "Where to?"

"Here!"

Fisher held his cigar between thumb and forefinger and examined it
fondly.

"Said her name was Kathi Foster instead of Kathi Forgeron. After they
got around to guessing she was on Luna, and sent descriptions, we picked
her up, of course. Shortly after you kicked off for Mars, in fact."

Dudley was silent. The other's shrewd little eyes glinted bluely at him
through the cigar smoke.

"How about it, Pete? I've been trying to figure how she got here. If it
was you, you needn't worry about the regulations. There was some sort of
litigation going on, and all kinds of relatives came boiling up here to
get her. All the hullabaloo is over by now."

Dudley took a deep breath, and told his side of the story. Fisher
listened quietly, nodding occasionally with the satisfaction of one who
had guessed the answer.

"So you see how it was, Jack. I didn't really believe the kid's story.
And she was so wild about it!"

Fisher put out his cigar with loving care.

"Got to save the rest of this for dinner," he said. "Yes, she was wild,
in a way. You should hear--well, that's in the files. Before we were
sure who she was, Snowdon put her on as a secretary in his section."

"She didn't look to me like a typist," objected Dudley.

"Oh, she wasn't," said Fisher, without elaborating. "I suppose if she
_was_ a little nuts, she was just a victim of the times. If it hadn't
been for the sudden plunge into space, old Forgeron wouldn't have made
such a pile of quick money. Then his granddaughter might have grown up
in a normal home, instead of feeling she was just a target. If she'd
been born a generation earlier or later, she might have been okay."

Dudley thought of the girl's pleading, her frenzy to escape her
environment.

"So I suppose they dragged her back," he said. "Which loving relative
won custody of the money?"

"That's still going on," Fisher told him. "It's tougher than ever, I
hear, because she didn't go down with them. She talked somebody into
letting her have a space-suit and walked out to the other side of the
ringwall. All the way to the foothills on the other side."

Dudley stared at him in mounting horror. Fisher seemed undisturbed, but
the pilot knew his friend better than that. It could only mean that the
other had had three months to become accustomed to the idea. He was
tenderly tucking away the stub of his cigar.

"Wasn't so bad, I guess," he answered Dudley's unspoken question. "She
took a pill and sat down. Couple of rock-tappers looking for ore found
her. Frozen stiff, of course, when her batteries ran down."

Dudley planted his elbows on the table and leaned his head in his hands.

"I should have taken her to Mars!" he groaned.

"She tried that on you, too?" Fisher was unsurprised. "No, Pete, it
wouldn't have done any good. Would've lost you your job, probably. Like
I said, she was born the wrong time. They won't have room for the likes
of her on Mars for a good many years yet."

"So they hauled her back to Terra, I suppose."

"Oh, no. The relatives are fighting that out, too. So, until the judges
get their injunctions shuffled and dealt, little Kathi is sitting out
there viewing the Rockies and the stars."

He looked up at Dudley's stifled exclamation.

"Well, it's good and cold out there," he said defensively. "We don't
have any spare space around here to store delayed shipments, you know.
We're waitin' to see who gets possession."

Dudley rose, his face white. He was abruptly conscious once more of
other conversations around them, as he stalked toward the exit.

"Hey," Fisher called after him, "that redhead, Eileen, told me to ask
if you're taking her out tonight."

Dudley paused. He ran a hand over his face. "Yeah, I guess so," he said.

He went out, thinking, _I should have taken her. The hell with
regulations and Jack's theories about her being born too soon to be
useful on Mars. She might have straightened out._

He headed for the tunnel that led to the loading domes.

Ericsson was a large crater, over a hundred miles across and with a
beautifully intact ringwall, so it took him some hours, even with the
tractor he borrowed, to go as far as the edge of the crater. Jack Fisher
was waiting for him in the surface dome when he returned hours later.

"Welcome back," he said, chewing nervously on his cigar. "I was
wondering if we'd have to go looking for you." He looked relieved.

"How did she look?" he asked casually, as Dudley climbed out of his
space suit in the locker room.

Dudley peeled off the one-piece suit he had worn under the heating pads.
He sniffed.

"Chee-rist, I need a shower after that.... She looked all right. Pretty
cute, in a way. Like she was happy here on Luna."

He picked up towel and soap. "So I fixed it so she could stay," he
added.

"What do you mean?"

He looked at Fisher. "Are you asking as a friend or as a cop?"

"What difference does it make?" asked Fisher.

"Well, I don't think you could have tracked me with your radar past the
ringwall, so maybe I just went for a ride and a little stroll, huh? You
didn't see me bring back a shovel, did you?"

"No," said Fisher, "I didn't see you bring it back. But some people are
going to get excited about this, Pete. Where did you bury her?"

"Blood-suckers!" said Dudley. "Let them get excited! Luna is full of
mysteries."

"All right," said Fisher. "For my own curiosity, then, I'm asking as a
friend."

"I found a good place," said Dudley. "I kind of forget where, in the
middle of all those cliffs and rills, but it had a nice view of the
stars. They'll never find her to take her back! I think I owed her that
much."

"Ummm," grunted Fisher.

As Dudley entered the shower, the other began to unwrap a new cigar, a
not-displeased expression settling over his square, pudgy face.

Under the slow-falling streams of warm water, Dudley gradually began to
relax. He felt the stiffness ease out of his jaw muscles. He turned off
the bubbling water before he could begin imagining he was hearing a
scared voice pleading again for passage to Mars....





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Luna Escapade, by H. B. Fyfe

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LUNA ESCAPADE ***

***** This file should be named 40961.txt or 40961.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/0/9/6/40961/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
