The Project Gutenberg EBook of Desire No More, by Algirdas Jonas Budrys

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Desire No More

Author: Algirdas Jonas Budrys

Release Date: October 7, 2012 [EBook #40968]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DESIRE NO MORE ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, David E. Brown and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net










He had but one ambition, one desire: to pilot the first manned rocket to
the moon. And he was prepared as no man had ever prepared himself
before....

[Illustration]




  DESIRE NO MORE

  by Algis Budrys

  (_illustrated by Milton Luros_)


  "_Desire no more than to thy lot may fall...._"
                                                   --Chaucer


The small young man looked at his father, and shook his head.

"But you've _got_ to learn a trade," his father said, exasperated. "I
can't afford to send you to college; you know that."

"I've got a trade," he answered.

His father smiled thinly. "What?" he asked patronizingly.

"I'm a rocket pilot," the boy said, his thin jaw stretching the skin of
his cheeks.

His father laughed in the way the boy had learned to anticipate and
hate. "Yeah," he said. He leaned back in his chair and laughed so hard
that the Sunday paper slipped off his wide lap and fell to the floor
with an unnoticed stiff rustle.

"A _rocket_ pilot!" His father's derision hooted through the quiet
parlor. "A ro--_oh, no!_--a rocket _pilot_!"

The boy stared silently at the convulsed figure in the chair. His lips
fell into a set white bar, and the corners of his jaws bulged with the
tension in their muscles. Suddenly, he turned on his heel and stalked
out of the parlor, through the hall, out the front door, to the porch.
He stopped there, hesitating a little.

"_Marty!_" His father's shout followed him out of the parlor. It seemed
to act like a hand between the shoulder-blades, because the boy almost
ran as he got down the porch stairs.

"What is it, Howard?" Marty's mother asked in a worried voice as she
came in from the kitchen, her damp hands rubbing themselves dry against
the sides of her housedress.

"Crazy kid," Howard Isherwood muttered. He stared at the figure of his
son as the boy reached the end of the walk and turned off into the
street. "_Come back here!_" he shouted. "A _rocket_ pilot," he cursed
under his breath. "What's the kid been reading? Claiming he's a rocket
pilot!"

Margaret Isherwood's brow furrowed into a faint, bewildered frown.
"But--isn't he a little young? I know they're teaching some very odd
things in high schools these days, but it seems to me...."

"Oh, for Pete's sake, Marge, there aren't even any rockets yet! _Come
back here, you idiot!_" Howard Isherwood was standing on his porch, his
clenched fists trembling at the ends of his stiffly-held arms.

"Are you sure, Howard?" his wife asked faintly.

"Yes, I'm _sure_!"

"But, where's he going?"

"_Stop that! Get off that bus! YOU hear me?_ Marty?"

"_Howard!_ Stop acting like a child and _talk_ to me! Where is that boy
going?"

Howard Isherwood, stocky, red-faced, forty-seven, and defeated, turned
away from the retreating bus and looked at his wife. "I don't know," he
told her bitterly, between rushes of air into his jerkily heaving lungs.
"Maybe, the moon," he told her sarcastically.


Martin Isherwood, rocket pilot, weight 102, height 4', 11", had come of
age at seventeen.


The small man looked at his faculty advisor. "No," he said. "I am not
interested in working for a degree."

"But--" The faculty advisor unconsciously tapped the point of a yellow
pencil against the fresh green of his desk blotter, leaving a rough arc
of black flecks. "Look, Ish, you've got to either deliver or get off the
basket. This program is just like the others you've followed for nine
semesters; nothing but math and engineering. You've taken just about
every undergrad course there is in those fields. How long are you going
to keep this up?"

"I'm signed up for Astronomy 101," Isherwood pointed out.

The faculty advisor snorted. "A snap course. A breather, after you've
studied the same stuff in Celestial Navigation. What's the matter, Ish?
Scared of liberal arts?"

Isherwood shook his head. "Uh-unh. Not interested. No time. And that
Astronomy course isn't a breather. Different slant from Cee Nav--they
won't be talking about stars as check points, but as things in
themselves." Something seemed to flicker across his face as he said it.

The advisor missed it; he was too engrossed in his argument. "Still a
snap. What's the difference, how you look at a star?"

Isherwood almost winced. "Call it a hobby," he said. He looked down at
his watch. "Come on, Dave. You're not going to convince me. You haven't
convinced me any of the other times, either, so you might as well give
up, don't you think? I've got a half hour before I go on the job. Let's
go get some beer."

The advisor, not much older than Isherwood, shrugged, defeated. "Crazy,"
he muttered. But it was a hot day, and he was as thirsty as the next
man.

The bar was air conditioned. The advisor shivered, half grinned, and
softly quoted:

  "Though I go bare, take ye no care,
  I am nothing a-cold;
  I stuff my skin so full within
  Of jolly good ale and old."

"Huh?" Ish was wearing the look with which he always reacted to the
unfamiliar.

The advisor lifted two fingers to the bartender and shrugged. "It's a
poem; about four hundred years old, as a matter of fact."

"Oh."

"Don't you give a damn?" the advisor asked, with some peevishness.

Ish laughed shortly, without embarrassment. "Sorry, Dave, but no. It's
not my racket."

The advisor cramped his hand a little too tightly around his glass.
"Strictly a specialist, huh?"

Ish nodded. "Call it that."

"But _what_, for Pete's sake? What _is_ this crazy specialty that blinds
you to all the fine things that man has done?"

Ish took a swallow of his beer. "Well, now, if I was a poet, I'd say it
was the finest thing that man has ever done."

The advisor's lips twisted in derision. "That's pretty fanatical, isn't
it?"

"Uh-huh." Ish waved to the bartender for refills.


The _Navion_ took a boiling thermal under its right wing and bucked
upward suddenly, tilting at the same time, so that the pretty brunette
girl in the other half of the side-by-side was thrown against him. Ish
laughed, a sound that came out of his throat as turbulently as that
sudden gust of heated air had shot up out of the Everglades, and
corrected with a tilt of the wheel.

"Relax, Nan," he said, his words colored by the lingering laughter.
"It's only air; nasty old air."

The girl patted her short hair back into place. "I wish you wouldn't fly
this low," she said, half-frightened.

"_Low?_ Call _this_ low?" Ish teased. "Here. Let's drop it a little, and
you'll _really_ get an idea of how fast we're going." He nudged the
wheel forward, and the _Navion_ dipped its nose in a shallow dive,
flattening out thirty feet above the mangrove. The swamp howled with the
chug of the dancing pistons and the claw of the propeller at the
protesting air, and, from the cockpit, the Everglades resolved into a
dirty-green blur that rocketed backward into the slipstream.

"Marty!"

Ish chuckled again. He couldn't have held the ship down much longer,
anyway. He tugged back on the wheel suddenly, targeting a cumulous bank
with his spinner. His lips peeled back from his teeth, and his jaw set.
The _Navion_ went up at the clouds, her engine turning over as fast as
it could, her wings cushioned on the rising thrust of another thermal.

And, suddenly, it was as if there were no girl beside him, to be teased,
and no air to rock the wings--there were no wings. His face lost all
expression. Faint beads of sweat broke out above his eyes and under his
nose. "Up," he grunted through his clenched teeth. His fists locked on
the wheel. "Up!"

The _Navion_ broke through the cloud, kept going. "Up." If he listened
closely, in just the right way, he could almost hear ...

"Marty!"

... the rumble of a louder, prouder engine than the Earth had ever known.
He sighed, the breath whispering through his parting teeth, and the
aircraft leveled off as he pushed at the wheel with suddenly lax hands.
Still half-lost, he turned and looked at the white-faced girl. "Scare
you--?" he asked gently.

She nodded. Her fingertips were trembling on his forearm.

"Me too," he said. "Lost my head. Sorry."


"Look," he told the girl, "You got any idea of what it costs to maintain
a racing-plane? Everything I own is tied up in the Foo, my ground crew,
my trailer, and that scrummy old Ryan that should have been salvaged ten
years ago. I _can't_ get married. Suppose I crack the Foo next week?
You're dead broke, a widow, and with a funeral to pay for. The only
smart thing to do is wait a while."

Nan's eyes clouded, and her lips trembled. "That's what I've been trying
to say. _Why_ do you have to win the Vandenberg Cup next week? Why can't
you sell the Foo and go into some kind of business? You're a trained
pilot."

He had been standing in front of her with his body unconsciously tense
from the strain of trying to make her understand. Now he
relaxed--more--he slumped--and something began to die in his face, and
the first faint lines crept in to show that after it had died, it would
not return to life, but would fossilize, leaving his features in the
almost unreadable mask that the newspapers would come to know.

"I'm a good bit more than a trained pilot," he said quietly. "The Foo Is
a means to an end. After I win the Vandenberg Cup, I can walk into any
plant in the States--Douglas, North American, Boeing--_any_ of them--and
pick up the Chief Test Pilot's job for the asking. A few of them have as
good as said so. After that--" His voice had regained some of its former
animation from this new source. Now he broke off, and shrugged. "I've
told you all this before."

The girl reached up, as if the physical touch could bring him back to
her, and put her fingers around his wrist. "Darling!" she said. "If it's
that _rocket_ pilot business again...."

Somehow, his wrist was out of her encircling fingers. "It's always 'that
_rocket_ pilot business,'" he said, mimicking her voice. "Damn it, I'm
the only trained rocket pilot in the world! I weigh a hundred and
fifteen pounds, I'm five feet tall, and I know more navigation and math
than anybody the Air Force or Navy have! I can use words like
brennschluss and mass-ratio without running over to a copy of
_Colliers_, and I--" He stopped himself, half-smiled, and shrugged
again.

"I guess I was kidding myself. After the Cup, there'll be the test job,
and after that, there'll be the rockets. You would have had to wait a
long time."

All she could think of to say was, "But, Darling, there _aren't_ any
man-carrying rockets."

"That's not my fault," he said, and walked away from her.


A week later, he took his stripped-down F-110 across the last line with
a scream like that of a hawk that brings its prey safely to its nest.


He brought the Mark VII out of her orbit after two days of running rings
around the spinning Earth, and the world loved him. He climbed out of
the crackling, pinging ship, bearded and dirty, with oil on his face and
in his hair, with food stains all over his whipcord, red-eyed, and
huskily quiet as he said his few words into the network microphones. And
he was not satisfied. There was no peace in his eyes, and his hands
moved even more sharply in their expressive gestures as he gave an
impromptu report to the technicians who were walking back to the
personnel bunker with him.

Nan could see that. Four years ago, he had been different. Four years
ago, if she had only known the right words, he wouldn't be so intent now
on throwing himself away to the sky.

She was a woman scorned. She had to lie to herself. She broke out of the
press section and ran over to him. "Marty!" She brushed past a
technician.

He looked at her with faint surprise on his face. "Well, Nan!" he
mumbled. But he did not put his hand over her own where it touched his
shoulder.

"I'm sorry, Marty," she said in a rush. "I didn't understand. I couldn't
see how much it all meant." Her face was flushed, and she spoke as
rapidly as she could, not noticing that Ish had already gestured away
the guards she was afraid would interrupt her.

"But it's all right, now. You got your rockets. You've done it. You
trained yourself for it, and now it's over. You've flown your rocket!"

He looked up at her face and shook his head in quiet pity. One of the
shocked technicians was trying to pull her away, and Ish made no move to
stop him.

Suddenly, he was tired, there was something in him that was trying to
break out against his will, and his reaction was that of a child whose
candy is being taken away from him after only one bite.

"Rocket!" he shouted into her terrified face. "_Rocket!_ Call that pile
of tin a rocket?" He pointed at the weary Mark VII with a trembling arm.
"Who cares about the bloody _machines_! If I thought roller-skating
would get me there, I would have gone to work in a _rink_ when I was
seventeen! It's _getting there_ that counts! Who gives a good goddam
_how_ it's done, or what with!"

And he stood there, shaking like a leaf, outraged, while the guards came
and got her.


"Sit down, Ish," the Flight Surgeon said.

_They always begin that way_, Isherwood thought. The standard medical
opening. Sit down. What for? Did somebody really believe that anything
he might hear would make him faint? He smiled with as much expression as
he ever did, and chose a comfortable chair, rolling the white cylinder
of a cigarette between his fingers. He glanced at his watch. Fourteen
hours, thirty-six minutes, and four days to go.

"How's it?" the FS asked.

Ish grinned and shrugged. "All right." But he didn't usually grin. The
realization disquieted him a little.

"Think you'll make it?"

Deliberately, rather than automatically, he fell back into his usual
response-pattern. "Don't know. That's what I'm being paid to find out."

"Uh-_huh_." The FS tapped the eraser of his pencil against his teeth.
"Look--you want to talk to a man for a while?"

"What man?" It didn't really matter. He had a feeling that anything he
said or did now would have a bearing, somehow, on the trip. If they
wanted him to do something for them, he was bloody well going to do it.

"Fellow named MacKenzie. Big gun in the head-thumping racket." The
Flight Surgeon was trying to be as casual as he could. "Air Force
insisted on it, as a matter of fact," he said. "Can't really blame them.
After all, it's _their_ beast."

"Don't want any hole-heads denting it up on them, huh?" Ish lit the
cigarette and flipped his lighter shut with a snap of the lid. "Sure.
Bring him on."

The FS smiled. "Good. He's--uh--he's in the next room. Okay to ask him
in right now?"

"Sure." Something flickered in Isherwood's eyes. Amusement at the Flight
Surgeon's discomfort was part of it. Worry was some of the rest.


MacKenzie didn't seem to be taking any notes, or paying any special
attention to the answers Ish was giving to his casual questions. But the
questions fell into a pattern that was far from casual, and Ish could
see the small button-mike of a portable tape-recorder nestling under the
man's lapel.

"Been working your own way for the last seventeen years, haven't you?"
MacKenzie seemed to mumble in a perfectly clear voice.

Ish nodded.

"How's that?"

The corners of Isherwood's mouth twitched, and he said "Yes" for the
recorder's benefit.

"Odd jobs, first of all?"

"Something like that. Anything I could get, the first few months. After
I was halfway set up, I stuck to garages and repair shops."

"Out at the airports around Miami, mostly, wasn't it?"

"Ahuh."

"Took some of your pay in flying lessons."

"Right."

MacKenzie's face passed no judgements--he simply hunched in his chair,
seemingly dwarfed by the shoulders of his perfectly tailored suit, his
stubby fingers twiddling a Phi Beta Kappa key. He was a spare man--only
a step or two away from emaciation. Occasionally, he pushed a tired
strand of washed-out hair away from his forehead.

Ish answered him truthfully, without more than ordinary reservations.
This was the man who could ground him He was dangerous--red-letter
dangerous--because of it.

"No family."

Ish shrugged. "Not that I know of. Cut out at seventeen. My father was
making good money. He had a pension plan, insurance policies. No need to
worry about them."

Ish knew the normal reaction a statement like that should have brought.
MacKenzie's face did not go into a blank of repression--but it still
passed no judgements.

"How's things between you and the opposite sex?"

"About normal."

"No wife--no steady girl."

"Not a very good idea, in my racket."

MacKenzie grunted. Suddenly, he sat bolt upright in his chair, and swung
toward Ish. His lean arm shot out, and his index finger was aimed
between Isherwood's eyes. "You can't go!"

Ish was on his feet, his fists clenched, the blood throbbing in his
temple veins. "What!" he roared.

MacKenzie seemed to collapse in his chair. The brief commanding burst
was over, and his face was apologetic, "Sorry," he said. He seemed
genuinely abashed. "Shotgun therapy. Works best, sometimes. You can go,
all right; I just wanted to get a fast check on your reactions and
drives."

Ish could feel the anger that still ran through him--anger, and more
fear than he wanted to admit. "I'm due at a briefing," he said tautly.
"You through with me?"

MacKenzie nodded, still embarrassed. "Sorry."

Ish ignored the man's obvious feelings. He stopped at the door to send a
parting stroke at the thing that had frightened him. "Big gun in the
psychiatry racket, huh? Well, your professional lingo's slipping, Doc.
They did put _some_ learning in my head at college, you know. Therapy,
hell! Testing maybe, but you sure didn't do anything to help me!"

"I don't know," MacKenzie said softly. "I wish I did."

Ish slammed the door behind him. He stood in the corridor, jamming a
fresh cigarette in his mouth. He threw a glance at his watch. Twelve
hours, twenty-two minutes, and four days to go.

Damn! He was late for the briefing. Odd--that fool psychiatrist hadn't
seemed to take up that much of his time.

He shrugged. What difference did it make? As he strode down the hall, he
lost his momentary puzzlement under the flood of realization that
nothing could stop him now, that the last hurdle was beaten. He was
going. He was going, and if there were faint echoes of "Marty!" ringing
in the dark background of his mind, they only served to push him faster,
as they always had. Nothing but death could stop him now.


Ish looked up bitterly at the Receptionist. "No," he said.

"But _everybody_ fills out an application," she protested.

"No. I've _got_ a job," he said as he had been saying for the last half
hour.

The Receptionist sighed. "If you'll _only_ read the literature I've
given you, you'll understand that all your previous commitments have
been cancelled."

"Look, Honey, I've seen company poop sheets before. Now, let's cut this
nonsense. I've got to get back."

"But _nobody_ goes back."

"Goddam it, I don't know what kind of place this is, but--" He stopped
at the Receptionist's wince, and looked around, his mouth open. The
reception desk was solid enough. There were IN and OUT and HOLD baskets
on the desk, and the Receptionist seemed to see nothing extraordinary
about it. But the room--a big room, he realized--seemed to fade out at
the edges, rather than stop at walls. The lighting, too....

"Let's see your back!" he rapped out, his voice high.

She sighed in exasperation. "If you'd read the _literature_ ..." She
swiveled her chair slowly.

"No wings," he said.

"Of course not!" she snapped. She brushed her hair away from her
forehead without his telling her to. "No horns, either."

"Streamlined, huh?" he said bitterly.

"It's a little different for everybody," she said with unexpected
gentleness. "It would have to be, wouldn't it?"

"Yeah, I guess so," he admitted slowly. Then he lost his momentary awe,
and his posture grew tense again. He glanced down at his wrist. Six
hours, forty-seven minutes, and no days to go.

"Who do I see?"

She stared at him, bewildered at the sudden change in his voice. "See?"

"About getting out of here! Come on, come on," he barked, snapping his
fingers impatiently. "I haven't got much time."

She smiled sweetly. "Oh, but you do."

"Can it! Who's your Section boss? Get him down here. On the double. Come
on!" His face was streaming with perspiration but his voice was firm
with the purpose that drove him.

Her lips closed into an angry line, and she jabbed a finger at a desk
button. "I'll call the Personnel Manager."

"Thanks," he said sarcastically, and waited impatiently. Odd, the way
the Receptionist looked a little like Nan.


The Personnel Manager wore a perfectly-tailored suit. He strode across
the lobby floor toward Ish, his hand outstretched.

"Martin Isherwood!" he exclaimed enthusiastically. "I'm _very_ glad to
meet you!"

"I'll bet," Ish said dryly, giving the Personnel Manager's hand a short
shake. "I've got other ideas. I want out."

"That's all he's been saying for the past forty-five minutes, Sir," the
Receptionist said from behind her desk.

The Personnel Manager frowned. "Um. Yes. Well, that's not unprecedented."

"But hardly usual," he added.

Ish found himself liking the man. He had a job to do, and after the
preliminary formality of the greeting had been passed, he was ready to
buckle down to it. Oh, he--shucks?--the Receptionist wasn't such a bad
girl, either. He smiled at her. "Sorry I lost my head," he said.

She smiled back. "It happens."

He took time to give her one more smile and a half-wink, and swung back
to the Personnel Manager.

"Now. Let's get this thing straightened out. I've got--" He stopped to
look at his watch. "Six hours and a few minutes. They're fueling the
beast right now."

"Do you know how much red tape you'd have to cut?"

Ish shook his head. "I don't want to sound nasty, but that's your
problem."

The Personnel Manager hesitated. "Look--you feel you've got a job
unfinished. Or, anyway, that's the way you'd put it. But, let's face
it--that's not really what's galling you. It's not really the job, is
it? It's just that you think you've been cheated out of what you devoted
your life to."

Ish could feel his jaw muscles bunching. "Don't put words in my mouth!"
he snapped. "Just get me back, and we'll split hairs about it when I get
around this way again." Suddenly, he found himself pleading. "All I need
is a week," he said. "It'll be a rough week--no picnic, no pleasures of
the flesh. No smoking, no liquor. I certainly won't be breaking any
laws. One week. Get there, putter around for two days, and back again.
Then, you can do anything you want to--as long as it doesn't look like
the trip's responsible, of course."

The Personnel Manager hesitated. "Suppose--" he began, but Ish
interrupted him.

"Look, they need it, down there. They've got to have a target, someplace
to go. We're built for it. People have to have--but what am I telling
_you_ for. If you don't know, who does?"

The Personnel Manager smiled. "I was about to say something."

Ish stopped, abashed. "Sorry."

He waved the apology away with a short movement of his hand. "You've got
to understand that what you've been saying isn't a valid claim. If it
were, human history would be very different, wouldn't it?"

"Suppose I showed you something, first? Then, you could decide whether
you want to stay, after all."

"How long's it going to take?" Ish flushed under the memory of having
actually begged for something.

"Not long," the Personnel Manager said. He half-turned and pointed up at
the Earth, hanging just beyond the wall of the crater in which they were
suddenly standing.

"Earth," the Personnel Manager said.

Somehow, Ish was not astonished. He looked up at the Earth, touched by
cloud and sunlight, marked with ocean and continent, crowned with ice.
The unblinking stars filled the night.

He looked around him. The Moon was silent--quiet, patient, waiting.
Somewhere, a metal glint against the planet above, if it were only large
enough to be seen, was the Station, and the ship for which the Moon had
waited.

Ish walked a short distance. He was leaving no tracks in the pumice the
ages had sown. But it was the way he had thought of it, nevertheless. It
was the way the image had slowly built up in his mind, through the
years, through the training, through the work. It was what he had aimed
the _Navion_ at, that day over the Everglades.

"It's not the same," he said.

The Personnel Manager sighed.

"Don't you see," Ish said, "It _can't_ be the same. I didn't push the
beast up here. There wasn't any _feel_ to it. There wasn't any sound of
rockets."

The Personnel Manager sighed again. "There wouldn't be, you know. Taking
off from the Station, landing here--vacuum."

Ish shook his head. "There'd still be a sound. Maybe not for anybody
else to hear--and, maybe, maybe there _would_ be. There'd be people,
back on Earth, who'd hear it."

"All right," the Personnel Manager said. His face was grave, but his
eyes were shining a little.


"Ish! Hey, Ish, wake up, will you!" There was a hand on his shoulder.
"Will you get a _load_ of this guy!" the voice said to someone else. "An
hour to go, and he's sleeping like the dead."

Ish willed his eyes to open. He felt his heart begin to move again, felt
the blood sluggishly beginning to surge into his veins. His hands and
feet were very cold.

"Come on, Ish," the Crew Chief said.

"All right," he mumbled. "Okay. I'm up." He sat on the edge of his bunk
looking down at his hands. They were blue under the fingernails. He
sighed, feeling the air moving down into his lungs.

Stiffly, he got to his feet and began to climb into his G suit.


The Moon opened its face to him. From where he lay, strapped into the
control seat in the forward bubble, he looked at it emotionlessly, and
began to brake for a landing.


He looked for footprints in the crater, though he knew he hadn't left
any. Earth was a familiar sight over his right shoulder.

He brought the twin-bubble beast back to the station. They threw
spotlights on it, for the TV pickups, and thrust microphones at him. He
could see broad grins behind the faceplates of the suits the docking
crew wore, and they were pounding his back. The interior of the Station
was a babbling of voices, a tumult of congratulations. He looked at it
all, dead-faced, his eyes empty.

"It was easy," he said over a world-wide network, and pushed the press
representatives out of his way.


MacKenzie was waiting for him in the crew section. Ish flicked his
stolid eyes at him, shrugged, and stripped out of his clothes. He pulled
a coverall out of a locker and climbed into it, then went over to his
bunk and lay down on his side, facing the bulkhead.

"Ish."

It was MacKenzie, bending over him.

Ish grunted.

"It wasn't any good was it? You'd done it all before; you'd been there."

He was past emotions. "Yeah?"

"We couldn't take the chance." MacKenzie was trying desperately to
explain. "You were the best there was--but you'd done something to
yourself by becoming the best. You shut yourself off from your family.
You had no close friends, no women. You had no other interests. You were
a rocket pilot--nothing else. You've never read an adult book that
wasn't a text; you've never listened to a symphony except by accident.
You don't know Rembrandt from Norman Rockwell. Nothing. No ties, no
props, nothing to sustain you if something went wrong. _We couldn't take
the chance, Ish!_"

"So?"

"There was too much at stake. If we let you go, you might have
forgotten to come back. You might have just kept going."

He remembered the time with the _Navion_, and nodded. "I might have."

"I hypnotized you," MacKenzie said. "You were never dead. I don't know
what the details of your hallucination were, but the important part came
through, all right. You thought you'd been to the Moon before. It took
all the adventure out of the actual flight; it was just a workaday
trip."

"I said it was easy," Ish said.

"There was no other way to do it! I had to cancel out the thrill that
comes from challenging the unknown. You knew what death was like, and
you knew what the Moon was like. Can you understand why I had to do it?"

"Yeah. _Now get out before I kill you._"


He didn't live too long after that. He never entered a rocket again--he
died on the Station, and was buried in space, while a grateful world
mourned him. I wonder what it was like, in his mind, when he really
died. But he spent the days he had, after the trip, just sitting at an
observatory port, cursing the traitor stars with his dead and
purposeless eyes.




TRANSCRIBER'S NOTES:


  Text in italics is surrounded with underscores: _italics_.

  Obvious typographical errors have been corrected without note.

  This etext was produced from Dynamic Science Fiction, January, 1954.
    Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Desire No More, by Algirdas Jonas Budrys

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DESIRE NO MORE ***

***** This file should be named 40968.txt or 40968.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/0/9/6/40968/

Produced by Greg Weeks, David E. Brown and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
