Project Gutenberg's The Martian, by Allen Glasser and A. Rowley Hilliard

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Martian

Author: Allen Glasser
        A. Rowley Hilliard

Release Date: October 9, 2012 [EBook #40992]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MARTIAN ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net











                             The Martian

based upon the Third Prize ($15.00) Winning Plot of the Interplanetary
Plot Contest won by Allen Glasser, 1610 University Ave., New York

                  By A. R. Hilliard and Allen Glasser

[Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from Wonder Stories
Quarterly Winter 1932. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence
that the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]

[Illustration: The water was evaporated by the ever-shining sun until
there was none left for the thirsty plants. Every year more workers died
in misery.]

       *       *       *       *       *

     [Illustration: ALLEN GLASSER who furnished the plot]

     [Illustration:A. ROWLEY HILLIARD who wrote the story]

     Many writers of science fiction, who have not given the matter much
     thought, assume that a man of intelligence from one planet would
     meet a cordial and sympathetic welcome on another world. It is
     assumed that people are everywhere educated, curious about other
     worlds and other cultures, and eager to help a visitor from an
     alien race.

     Unfortunately there is no assurance that such is the case. Even
     were the members of another race, on another world possessed of
     education, there would be bound to be among them low and brutish
     elements. And if a stranger from another world, dazed by new
     conditions and unable to make his wants known, were to fall into
     their hands his fate might not be happy.

     We have read no story that pictures with such clarity and insight
     the experiences of a man on another world than his own, than does
     this present story. With the basis of a splendid plot Mr. Hilliard
     has worked up a simply marvelous story.

       *       *       *       *       *

The rolling, yellow sand reflected the heat of the sun in little,
shimmering waves. It reflected the sun's light blindingly throughout all
its visible expanse, with the exception of one spot where lay a circular
shadow. In the great steely-blue dome of the sky there were no clouds.

The shadow, although not large, was very dark and distinct. The curved,
even line of its circumference was precisely drawn.

In the air was a persistent rattle of sound--a series of closely spaced
explosions, ever rising in intensity.

Suddenly a small, uneven shadow detached itself from the circular one;
and floated swiftly across the sand. The rattling sound increased to a
tremendous booming roar, and the large shadow began to fade. At the same
time, the smaller one grew steadily darker.

High above the sand, a man was falling--much too swiftly.

The surface of the sand had been shaped into hills by the prevailing
winds. These long, ridge-like hills, or dunes, were convex and gradual
in slope on their windward sides, but on their lee sides they were
concave, and very steep.

It was near the top of one of these steep slopes that the man landed.
His frail legs and body crumpled under the weight of his head; he
pitched forward, and half rolled, half slid to the bottom where he came
to rest more gently, the target of a small avalanche of sand.

Immediately, he began to struggle; and, failing in his attempts to
rise, stretched his slim arms skyward and uttered a sharp, squealing
cry, painfully prolonged. Far above him a spherical object rapidly
diminished in size. Fixedly he watched the sunlight glinting on its
polished grey sides; watched it shrink to a tiny ball, a point, and
then--nothing. He was alone.

The pressure was horrible. He buried his head in the hot sand, and
clapped his ears in a vain attempt to ease the throbbing pain. They must
have underestimated the weight of the Toonian atmosphere if they had
expected him to live long here! It did not hurt his body, but his head
was being crushed. He knew that he would soon die--and was glad. This
wild, senseless punishment would be at an end.

He opened his eyes again, and stared in growing fascination and wonder
at the great arched blue dome above him. Gradually the spectacle of this
weirdly beautiful canopy occupied his whole attention. It was like a
soft curtain of light blue material hiding the blackness of the sky and
the gleaming stars;--yet the sun shone through. For a moment he forgot
his loneliness, his pain, in rapt contemplation of the immense
perfection above him--but only for a moment. Then the explanation came
to him. That beautiful blue was the heavy atmosphere of Toon, which was
slowly crushing him to death! He closed his eyes.

The heat was terrific, but not as intense as he had expected. Toon was
nearer the Sun than was his own world--millions of miles nearer; yet he
was not badly burnt, and this puzzled him. The explanation must again
lie in the heavy atmosphere--serving as insulation, he finally
decided.... He didn't care.

He felt strangely detached. What signifies life--or death--to a tiny
being separated by fifty million miles from any of its kind? Deposited
on this strange planet, he had no hopes of survival; his only emotion
was astonishment that he had lived a moment.

He struggled to remove the parachute that had been so inadequate in
easing his fall. Movement--even the raising of an arm was serious
effort. He was glued to the ground by the tremendous gravitational pull
of a planet so much greater in size than his own. He relaxed.

Why struggle? With the passing of hope, all incentive to effort passes
also. He felt no distress at the thought of death. Life, not death,
would be freakish in this great wasteland.

And he was past anger now. What they had done to him they had done
through hate and fear. Only hate and fear could conceive of so fantastic
a torture for a fellow being. There was no satisfaction now in the
knowledge that they had feared him; nor did he care about their hate....
They had won. They would have their way, and all the people of the Loten
would suffer in consequence....

Loten! A wave of sick loneliness swept over him.... A point in the sky,
obscured by a weird curtain of blue--his home!

       *       *       *       *       *

Certainly, no man had ever suffered thus! A surge of self-pity welled up
within him. Certainly no being had ever been forced to long for the
world--the globe which gave it birth! This horror was reserved for him
alone....

He clenched his fists. Reason returned to rescue him from emotion. Loten
did not exist for him. He was outside of the world--a tiny flame of
consciousness in space. And what did that amount to, after all, he asked
himself.... What, but Death?...

For a long time he lay there in the sand, quite motionless.

The sun was sinking. Its blazing heat was abating somewhat; its face was
large, and red. For miles, across the surface of the sand, the shadows
of the dunes were stretching out.... And out of the sunset a tiny speck
of black appeared.

Where he lay the man heard the sound of it--a steady drone, or buzz. At
first it did not catch his attention, its inception was so gradual; but
soon it became a roar, and he opened his eyes with a start. He had heard
no sound since the departure of the space ship--had expected none. An
uneasy excitement gripped him. He strained his eyes upward....

Suddenly, over the dune against which he lay, there shot a something,
roaring thunderously. He cowered down, stunned by the terrific sound of
it; but he watched it with wide eyes, as it moved across the sky.

It was T-shaped; with the cross-piece going before. Beneath it hung two
wheels. It gleamed metallically.

Without attempting to rise, he howled shrilly, time after time, catching
his breath in gasps--while the thing moved steadily away.

Following an undeviating line, it left him far behind, diminished to a
speck, and disappeared. The sound of it lingered when he could see it no
longer.

His breath came quickly, spasmodically, through parted lips; his throat
was tight, and his heart pounded. The staggering surprise of what he had
seen and heard left him incapable of thought. His mind was a racing
turmoil of questions. His contentment, his resignation were
gone--destroyed in a moment; and in their place rose a great uneasiness.

The return of Hope, to a man who has definitely put it away from him, is
a joy closely akin to pain in its intensity. His whole body shook as he
struggled with the sand, attempting to rise.

He had seen a machine, he knew. It could not have been an animal. It was
not alive, and it was made of metal.... A machine meant reasoning
beings. There must be reasoning beings on Toon--where Loten's scientists
had argued that they could not be! And machines that travelled through
space! Perhaps....

As the new possibilities of his situation burst upon him, his
homesickness returned a thousandfold; and he knew that he could rest no
longer--could not wait in the sand for death. He must struggle--he must
strive, until the end came--because there was a chance!

Immediately, his mind became purposeful, and he took stock of his
position. He knew that the whole of Toon was not like this great stretch
of sand. Thousands of years of observation of the bright planet had
convinced the scientists of the Loten that it bore vegetation--and
probably animal life of some sort....

But rational beings! His astonishment re-asserted itself. Five thousand
years of systematic signalling had brought no response, and the project
had lately been abandoned. Yet....

He shook his head, and returned to his problem. He must not waste time
now.

He had food enough in his stomach to last three days at least, and he
would not need water for even longer. He suddenly realized, with
enormous satisfaction, that the pain in his head was considerably less
than at first. Perhaps his system would be able to adjust itself to the
atmospheric pressure....

The great question was where--and how--to go. He must go somewhere. Only
motion would satisfy his craving for accomplishment of some sort. He
would get no help on this great, sterile plain. He had no guarantee that
another of the flying machines would come near him, and even if it did
there was not much hope of attracting its attention. No, he must
move....

He decided to follow in the direction the machine had taken. Its
destination might be near-by--or it might be thousands of miles away.
The probability seemed to be in favor of the former hypothesis, because
the machine had been moving so very slowly.... Anyway, it was a chance!

Pulling his legs up under him, he made another determined attempt to
rise; and finally succeeded in standing erect. But it made his legs ache
terribly; and when he tried a step he slipped, falling back with a
jarring thud.

He would have to crawl.

       *       *       *       *       *

Ridding himself of the parachute, and with no further hesitation, he set
out, crawling slowly and laboriously, keeping the sun at his back.

The heat was less oppressive now. The sun had sunk to a point where its
rays were no hotter than at midday on his Loten; and he marvelled at the
similarity of the two climates. He had seen none of the water vapors
that astronomers described as almost constantly enveloping Toon.
Toon--what he had seen of it--seemed to be as dry as the Loten, if not
more so.

He climbed the long, gradual slope of a dune; and, after surveying the
endless stretch of sand which met his view at the top, slid down the
steep side, and crawled doggedly on.

Night was falling. The blue dome above him steadily darkened until it
began to take on the appearance of his own native sky.

He was dead tired within an hour. He lay still for a time, breathing
deeply--marshalling his strength. He was in excellent physical
condition, but here his body was so heavy that the slightest motion was
a strain. Soon, however, his eager spirit drove him onward.

At the end of another hour, happening to raise his head, he uttered an
involuntary cry. Points of light glimmered in the sky.... So he was to
see the stars after all!--though only at night, it seemed. He was
relieved. In the back of his mind had been the ever-growing certainty
that he would not be able to keep a direct course. He rested again, and
picked out certain designs that would be helpful as guides.

He wondered if one of them were Loten. They were very dim and they
blinked strangely; and their arrangement was meaningless to him. He
fixed upon one of them--the brightest--and imagined that it might be
_his_ world--where his friends were, and his enemies; where his wives
grieved for him perhaps; where his children laughed and played; where he
might one day return....

He crawled along through the sand.

It was not really dark--only twilight. He wondered if this were night on
Toon. It must be. Almost directly ahead of him--just a little to the
right--was a radiance close to the horizon. It puzzled him. Soon it was
spreading over the sky--a pale, ghostly light. Then a bright point
appeared--a line; it grew. He stared in abject wonder while a great,
white disk mounted into the sky, illuminating the scene around.

He rested a while, and watched it. It was Toon's satellite. It could be
nothing else. But beside it the two luminaries of his own world were as
pygmies. He was still watching it, fascinated, when he resumed his
journey.




CHAPTER II.

Signs of Life


All through the night he travelled; and into the rising sun. The noonday
heat forced him to take a prolonged rest, but he fought on as soon as
possible; and sunset found him crawling weakly onward. The cool of night
revived him somewhat. He knew that the strain under which he labored
would hasten his time of sleep, and that worried him. Even now, he was
often in a semi-conscious state. Still, he could not stop.

When the sun rose again, it shone through trees; and far across the
yellow sand his tired eyes saw green hills. The sight invigorated
him--spurred him on to stronger efforts. Soon after midday he lay
panting in the shade of trees.

The trees astonished him. They towered above him, fully five times as
high as any he had ever seen. Their stems were of enormous girth--rough
and hard to the touch. There seemed to be something moving in their
heavy foliage, far above him, and he heard faint, sharp whistling
sounds. He looked around uneasily.

The size of the trees worried him. If there were animal life, it might
be proportionately large. He shuddered. The desert, although
uncomfortable, had had one advantage: he had been alone there.

Still, it was not loneliness that he was seeking, he thought grimly.
Obviously, he....

He stiffened. He had been staring abstractedly at the coarse grass which
grew thickly around him. Now his eyes became focussed upon a movement
there--not three feet away. The grass was waving strangely, in a
peculiar, uneven line; and he caught sight of something slim and green,
that was not the grass. His throat contracted painfully. The thing did
not seem to move, yet it was coming nearer. Whenever he caught sight of
a part of its body, it appeared stationary; yet the waving of the grass
was closer, and ever closer. It was very close now....

Suddenly his power of locomotion returned. He rolled over backward, and
scrambled along the ground to a tree. Grasping the rough trunk, he
pulled himself erect; and held himself in that position, panting.

He could see the thing more plainly now. It was like a long, green whip
in the grass. Its forepart was raised in the air, and terminated in a
triangular head, with two bright eyes whose steady, unwinking stare made
him tremble weakly. With an effort he took his eyes from the creature;
and, pushing himself away from the tree, ran desperately, as far as his
legs would carry him. When he fell, he continued to crawl--farther, and
ever farther into the green woods.

He wondered if all creatures crawled in this world of Toon. Perhaps the
great gravitational pull made erect postures impossible.

For a long time he climbed steadily, threading his way through the
underbrush, skirting fallen trees. He felt increasingly drowsy. His
sleep period would come soon, he knew. He could not stave it off much
longer. And when he had slept, he must eat....

He came to level ground. Ahead was an opening in the trees, where a wide
ledge of stone was revealed. Out upon this he crawled, and gazed at the
scene that opened out below. Miles of waving tree tops met his view; but
what held his attention was a strip of silver cutting the green.

He felt a warm glow of satisfaction. Water, in his mind, was closely
associated with organization, transportation facilities, reasoning
beings....

Yet he must be wary. He had no idea what sort of beings they might be.
This might be a canal, but it was strangely irregular in its course. At
least he was making progress....

A peculiar, ringing sound came from the trees below. It was utterly
unfamiliar to him. Nerving himself, he determined to discover what it
was. He climbed down from the stone, and began the journey down the
hill.

As he progressed the sound became louder, and others were added. He was
puzzled by a low, intermittent muttering. It made him vaguely uneasy,
and with every moment his agitation increased. The muttering was now
very definitely spaced into irregular but continuous tones.

And he knew that he was listening to a conversation.

He was frightened. Now that he was so near to what he had been seeking,
his courage left him; and he lay trembling, flat on the ground, awed by
the booming voices of the creatures.

They must be very large, he thought, to utter such deep tones.

He had lain there for perhaps five minutes, when, suddenly, there came a
rending crash; and, peering ahead, he saw the green top of a tree sway
violently, sink, and disappear from sight. At the same time there came a
louder cry, followed by the blending of two thunderous voices, speaking
simultaneously.... Then a heavy thud, and another cry....

       *       *       *       *       *

He crawled cautiously forward. He reached the fallen tree. Its trunk was
suspended above the ground by the projection of a number of its large
branches. He peered beneath it.

Directly before him, in a small clearing, two creatures were struggling
together. They stood erect upon their huge legs, using their crudely
bulky arms and hands to strike and tug at each other. They were
tremendous in size--fully three times human stature; yet their heads
were smaller than men's. Their erect posture gave them a weirdly
half-human look, which was belied by the brutal savagery of their
aspects. Their brows were low; their heads were covered with long hair;
and in their gaping mouths he saw rows of sharp, white fangs. Their
skin, instead of being golden, was a dirty grey in color, and was
covered with short curling hair or fur.

But he could see very little of their bodies, because--and this sight
seemed to him the strangest of all--they were almost entirely covered
with cloth. This woven material was brown in color, and shaped to hang
close to their bodies, even over the arms and legs. He lay very still,
watching the titanic struggle with ever growing wonder.

They appeared to be evenly matched. Once, one of them was hurled heavily
to the ground, but he leaped effortlessly to his feet. Both of them
grunted and uttered sharp exclamations at intervals. They tramped back
and forth, tearing up the grass, crushing down the small bushes.

They must greatly hate each other, he thought--or perhaps it was natural
for them to fight like this. Now one of them was tiring--the smaller.
Its movements were slower, and it stepped almost constantly backward.
Suddenly from its bulbous nose spurted a red stream. He shuddered. The
sight of these two strangely man-like creatures beating and tearing at
one another sickened him.

The larger creature was pressing its advantage, advancing upon the other
with cruel, flailing blows. Suddenly the smaller one crumpled to the
ground, and lay still. The other turned away. It seemed satisfied. It
grasped an object which was leaning against a tree--a cutting tool
apparently, consisting of an edged block of metal attached to a long
handle of wood; and without a backward glance at its fallen foe, made
off through the trees.

The creature on the ground was alive. He could see the rise and fall of
its breathing under the cloth covering of its breast. But the bright,
red blood was still running out of the nose. It had lost an astonishing
amount; and he feared that, unassisted, it would soon die. He must try
to help.

With wildly beating heart, he crawled under the tree trunk and out into
the clearing.

As he moved through the grass, he made a slight rustling sound, which
the creature heard. It turned its head, and stared directly at him. He
stopped fearfully....

The creature uttered a loud cry, and scrambled to its feet. He raised
one hand, attempting a friendly gesture; but the creature, after
watching him for a moment with wide eyes, bounded swiftly away into the
woods. He heard the thumping and crashing of its passage through the
underbrush long after it had disappeared from sight.

His first sensation was one of immense relief. He had been desperately
afraid.

Evidently the thing had been afraid of him, too. And that was
surprising.... Clearly, these could not be the reasoning things that had
built the flying machine he had seen. His relief was quickly followed by
disappointment. For a moment he had imagined that his first objective
had been reached. Now he realized that he might be as far from it as
ever. Toon was immense. Probably, now, he was in a country inhabited by
inferior beings--beings that would be constantly hostile and dangerous
to him. If that were so, his quest would end here, he knew. Sleep could
not be warded off any longer. He could not protect himself. Soon he
must eat--and there was no food.

He crawled into the bushes; and lay down, lonely and sick. He would stay
here. This was failure--and the end. But he was not sorry for having
tried....

Above him the sky was not blue, now; but a strange, dead grey. Nowhere
could he see the sun. The wind sighed mournfully in the trees.

He slept.




CHAPTER III.

In Confinement


He awakened in shivering terror. His entire body was wet. Water was
falling on him. It was falling on the ground all around and on the
trees--thousands, millions of drops. He choked, as he tried to breathe
the damp, saturated air. Desperately he looked around for some
protection, but there was none. He covered his face as best he could
with his folded arms, and cried out in fear.

There came a shout; and he heard something moving toward him, but he did
not care. Horror of the falling water crowded all other emotions from
his mind.

One of the creatures was standing over him. He heard others approaching.
They were shouting loudly back and forth to one another. In a moment,
there was a circle of them, all around him.

He was too distressed to pay them any attention. After a time one of
them bent down and grasped him under the armpits. He felt himself lifted
into the air. He did not struggle, even when their faces were all around
him--very close.

Now they were walking through the trees, one of them carrying him in its
huge arms, quite gently. He was scarcely conscious of his surroundings.
It was becoming more and more difficult to breathe.

Then he felt himself laid down on something soft and dry. The water was
not falling on him now. He opened his eyes.

They had placed him under a shelter. He could hear the water on the
black covering above him. There was one of them on each side of him,
where he lay on what seemed to be a cushioned seat....

Suddenly there came a rumble, and the seat beneath him quivered and
shook. He struggled to sit up. One of the creatures aided him, and
wrapped a dry cloth about his body. He was grateful.

The seat was bumping up and down violently. On each side, he could see
the trees moving slowly backward. He realized that he was in a vehicle.
It jolted constantly, and he imagined that it must run directly on the
rough ground. It made a continuous and tremendous noise. But it was a
machine of transportation, however crude; and he quickly forgot his
bodily discomfort, as the implications of this fact crowded through his
mind.

He looked with a new interest at his captors. They were talking
together excitedly--evidently about him, for they never removed their
eyes from him. In spite of their strangeness and savagery, they must
have reasoning minds. He could be pretty sure of that, now....

The vehicle came to rest, and to either side he saw structures, made,
evidently, of cut trees. Then his heart leaped again, as he saw that
they had glass. So they knew how to make that! There were only a few
pieces of it let into the walls--but it was certainly glass, and his
hopes rose a bit higher.

They carried him into one of the houses. It was quite dark. They set him
down upon a large table. They were increasing rapidly in numbers,
jostling in through the door and crowding around the table.

In the wall near him there was one of the pieces of glass. Abashed by
the dozens of staring eyes, he looked through this, and saw a broad
field, its soil turned up in long, straight rows--evidently for
planting. Near the center of the field were two creatures, which
immediately commanded his attention.

They were not alike. One was similar to those he had already seen, but
the other was even larger and of a different shape. Four legs carried
the great, bulky body, which rested in a horizontal position, as did the
thick neck and long, tapering head. It was dragging the tool which
turned up the furrows of soil, while the other followed behind,
governing its directions.

Clearly, he thought, there were many types of creatures on Toon. He
would have to try to understand their relations to one another....

Inside the room there was much noise, and the air was hot, damp, and
very unpleasant to breathe. He was not afraid of the creatures now; and
instinctively he realized that it was curiosity that brought them here,
and that they meant him no harm. A few were trying to speak to him,
looking directly into his eyes and making monosyllabic sounds. This
amused him at first. They would not be quite so hopeful if they
understood from where he had come.

But in another moment his amusement had vanished. One of the creatures,
standing near, placed a finger close to where he sat, at the same time
uttering a short disyllabic sound:

"Table!"

A thrill shot through him. He had expected no such intelligence on the
part of his captors. A new wave of hope surged up within him....
Carefully, he repeated the gesture and the word.

       *       *       *       *       *

His action was followed by a burst of excited conversation in the room.
Several made sharp, guttural noises which he guessed meant gratification
or amusement.

Immediately a number of them took up the game; and he eagerly did his
part, repeating the sounds they made and identifying them with objects.
With every possible gesture he tried to indicate to them his pleasure
and gratification.

He was sorry when they began to go away.

It had been getting steadily darker for some time, when, suddenly, the
room was brilliantly illuminated; and, looking quickly around, he saw a
number of bright globes. This event brought him to a high pitch of
elation. The character of the vehicle in which he had ridden had made
him fear that they knew nothing of electricity, but here was tangible
evidence that they did. His dream of a return to Loten seemed less like
a wild imagining at every moment.

He was beginning to think of these creatures as people, almost human
beings.

Now, only two of them remained. From their glances he knew that they
were talking about him. Finally, one of them lifted him from the table;
and, walking swiftly, carried him through the door, across a short
stretch of open ground, and into a smaller and darker structure, there
laying him down upon a bed of cloths and cushions in one corner of the
single room. The other followed them in, carrying a china dish and cup.
Setting these beside him, they both pointed with their fingers to their
open mouths. He understood immediately, and was glad. He needed
nourishment badly.

But when he looked into the dish his pleasure abated. It contained an
assortment of what appeared to be parts of plants and--he tried to
conceal his horror--animal flesh.

Looking up, he nodded--a gesture that he had quickly learned; and to his
great relief they turned and left the room, closing the door. He heard a
sharp click.

The flesh he immediately put aside. He did not like to think what its
origin might be. He studied the plants. They had evidently been
subjected to a heat process, but had not been chemically refined in any
way. The percentage of nourishment in them must be very low, and it
would be necessary for him to eat great quantities to sustain his
strength. He wondered how long his stomach could stand it.

These people must eat almost daily to sustain themselves on such fare,
he reasoned, marvelling.

With a pronged implement that they had given him, he set to work to mash
the food into as soft a mass as possible. This process they accomplished
easily with their fangs, he knew.

The taste was anything but pleasing, and he had great difficulty in
swallowing; but he finally managed to assuage his hunger, and felt
better. He drank a little water from the cup, which contained enough to
supply him for at least five days.

This done, he stretched himself out upon the bed, and gave himself over
to pleasant reflection. A far cry, he thought, from the man lying
helpless in the desert, devoid of all hope, to the one who had
established contact with a race of intelligent beings who would
doubtless be willing to help him return to his own native world. He
reflected that if the flying ship had hot happened to come near him, he
would most certainly have perished by now--perished in a foreign world,
far away from those he loved, never knowing there was a chance for his
salvation. But now he had taken the first step.... Anything was possible
now.

His attention returned to his surroundings. The bare room was lighted by
a bulb hanging from wires in the center. From it dangled a cord, the
purpose of which he quickly guessed. The walls and floor were bare wood,
and rough. Along the whole length of one wall extended a low, narrow
table, or bench, strewn with a miscellaneous collection of objects which
aroused his curiosity.

He crawled to the bench, and pulled himself erect by grasping its edge.
He was just tall enough to see along its surface. Near him rested a
large roll of what he first thought was cord; but on closer examination
he decided that it was metal wire covered with a fibre insulation.
Obviously it was for the conduction of electricity. Scattered around it
were a number of cylinders of varying sizes, which he saw were wound
closely with very fine wires. Clearly, these people did more with
electricity than make light, he thought, encouraged.

       *       *       *       *       *

There was nothing else in the room except a pile of rusty metal in one
corner. The whole place was depressingly dirty and dreary. He thought
that he would feel better without the light. He made his way to the
center of the room, and stretched upwards. Finding that he could just
reach the cord, he jerked it; and returned in the darkness to his cot.

He lay there quietly, trying to calm his nerves. He wondered what they
would do with him....

He was still wondering the same thing at the end of four days. They did
not move him. They did nothing except come and look at him--a great many
of them at first, but less and less as time went on. They came in the
daytime--never at night. They fed him; and a few still tried to talk to
him. This pleased him, and he strove eagerly to understand and imitate;
but they soon got tired and stopped.

He learned to distinguish the males and females among the people that
came, by differences in stature, length of hair, and clothing. He
observed, with complete bewilderment, that the males often carried in
their hands burning cylinders which they raised regularly to their
mouths, blowing out smoke into the air. He guessed, finally, that this
must be some sort of sanitary precaution.

Now, however, he was left alone most of the time. They brought him food,
and then went away. He was uneasy. Physically, he felt far from well.
The damp air made his throat and chest ache; and he feared that the long
deprivation of sunlight was hurting him. He could not understand.

Gathering his courage one day, he attempted to open the door. He reached
up and turned the knob the way he had seen the people do. But it would
not move when he pushed. He remembered the clicking sound he had heard
every time after they went out.

He became frightened. He did not understand this confinement. Why would
they not let him out?

There passed another day, of mental torture. Would they let him die in
this dark, dreary place? Had all his efforts merely led to a lonely,
purposeless death?

He wondered what they would do if he went out of his own accord; and
finally decided that he must do it, even at the risk of offending them.
Further inactivity he could not bear.

Within five minutes he had formed a plan of action. It was night--the
best time to work; for he must work undisturbed for a time.

He made his way to the bench, and collected three of the wound wire
coils, which he dropped to the floor. With a cutting tool that he found
he managed to get a length of wire from the large roll. The tool was
very heavy.

Next, he crawled to the corner, and selected a number of small pieces of
metal. He rested for a while, studying the light bulb which hung in the
center of the room. From the light it gave and the size of the filament,
he roughly estimated the power of the current.

Then, with a graphite writing instrument that he had found, he drew a
diagram on the floor. He took a very long time doing this, and labeled
it carefully. When he had finished, the little window at the end of the
room showed that dawn was breaking outside.

Hurriedly then, he set to work with the metal, the coils, and the
wire,--twisting, winding, connecting and cross-connecting--constantly
glancing at his diagram and at the window. Finally, when it was broad
daylight outside, he gave a sigh of satisfaction.

He had achieved an ugly, jumbled apparatus, vaguely cylindrical in shape
with a point of metal at one end. He laid it on the floor; and making
his way to the bench, secured two more lengths of wire. He crawled under
the bench to where the power line for the light ran down the wall, and
there connected them. Then, securing his cup of water, he dipped into it
the ends of his two wires, and observed them for a moment. Satisfied, he
carried them to his cylindrical apparatus, and connected one of them at
the end opposite the metal point. The other he did not immediately
connect.




CHAPTER IV.

The Circus


He was breathing hard now, and his face was flushed. For a long time he
sat very still and listened, but he heard no sound. At last, moving very
slowly, he carried his cylinder to the door. He raised it, and placed
the point against the metal lock, under the knob. He pressed his lips
tightly together, and set his jaw.... With the end of the wire which he
had not connected he touched a point on the cylinder.

There was no sound. There was no movement of the cylinder. Yet the metal
lock dissolved, and daylight shot through the place where it had been. A
cloud of light grey dust drifted lazily to the floor.

He disconnected the wires. Carefully he hid the thing under the cushions
of his bed. Then he pushed open the door, and crawled out into the
sunlight. The sun felt warm and pleasant on his back.

He heard a cry, and looked up fearfully. One of the men of Toon was
running towards him carrying a dish. It was the man that brought his
food.

His throat was tight, and he was trembling. He knew that this was the
supreme moment. He nodded his head and smiled. He raised one hand, palm
upward.

The man stopped directly in front of him, and growled--then raised an
arm, pointing at the door of his prison.

He made a little murmuring sound to the man; and raising his face to the
sun, smiled and nodded once more. The man pushed him backwards with one
foot, always pointing at the door.

He turned, and crawled back into the shed. Dully he watched the man; who
stood for a long time staring at the door where the lock had been--then
strode to the pile of metal and picked up a chain.

He did not move when he felt the chain around his body. He closed his
eyes, and did not open them until he heard the door shut. He did not
move all that day. He only watched the little window. When, finally, the
little window grew black, he drew his machine from under the cushions,
and connected it again at the wall. The chain was fastened to a leg of
the bench, and allowed him to do this. He destroyed a portion of the
chain, and loosened it from his body. He crawled to the wall farthest
from the house where the people lived. Moving the machine in a slow arc,
he cut a hole in the wall. Disconnecting the wires, he used them to
fasten the machine around his waist. Then he went out into the night.

He did not know where he was going--except that he was going away from
these beings that held him prisoner without a reason. At first they had
seemed kind--but they were kind no longer. Something had changed them,
he thought; but he could not guess what....

He had progressed less than a hundred yards when a sudden tumult of
sound froze him with terror. It was coming at him through the dark, a
hoarse, senseless, animal cry. And bounding toward him he saw the dark
shadow of a beast. He knew instinctively that here was an unreasoning
creature--and all the strength went out of him. He lay flat and limp on
his face. Now he heard its panting breath, and felt the heat of it on
his body....

At the same time, but only semi-consciously, he heard the loud shouts of
men. As in a dream, he felt himself grasped roughly and lifted from the
ground. Soon he knew that he was back in the shed again. He saw a man
standing above him holding his machine.

He felt strangely detached--as if he were not there at all. He saw the
man look at the machine; look at the door; look at the chain; look at
the hole in the wall; look at the light cord. He saw the man connecting
his machine to the light cord; he felt powerless to warn the man that he
might be connecting it wrong--that there were two ways: one right, one
wrong....

An explosion threw the man heavily against the wall. He could see the
man struggling slowly up--coming towards him--kicking him. But he could
hardly feel the kick at all--and everything got dark....

When light came back it was just a small square above him. That puzzled
him, until he reached out and found wooden walls all around him--very
close. He was in a box. He became suddenly fully conscious of the fact.
Looking down at him from above he saw the faces of two of the men of
Toon.

He cried out involuntarily, struggling to escape. One of the creatures
shook a heavy piece of metal threateningly over his head. He cowered
down, shuddering, at sight of the merciless gleam in its eyes. The light
was blotted out, as they placed a cover over him; and he was deafened by
a long and thunderous pounding.

Then began a time of horror in the darkness. His active mind had nothing
to feed upon but fear. Only too clearly was it brought to him that he
did not know the ways of these creatures of Toon. What was deadly fear
to him might be commonplace to them. He had hoped to find them friendly,
merciful--yet friendship and mercy were qualities of his own experience
in a world different from theirs. Why had he thought to find them here?

       *       *       *       *       *

He had no measure of time. For endless hours he lay there in the dark,
bracing himself against the sides to protect his head and body as much
as possible; for the box seemed almost constantly in motion--jolting,
tilting, and bumping until he was weak and breathless from the strain.

His mind, worn out by its relentless self-torture, sank at last to
semi-consciousness.

Suddenly light returned, and he was dragged roughly from his prison. He
was in a large room where the combination of odor, heat, and noise was
overpowering. Great numbers of the men of Toon were there, hurrying in
all directions, seemingly very busy. He noted immediately that their
clothing was different from that which he had seen, and wondered what
the significance of that might be.... He felt strangely calm, now.

Before him was an immense, bulky man, who stood with legs apart and arms
folded, staring at him with wide, unwinking eyes. This man had a face
that was light red in color and rounded, almost swollen-looking in
shape. He nodded, and his cheeks shook loosely. He nodded several times,
and seemed very pleased. He spoke sharply; and others, standing around,
sprang into action.

They brought a red cloth, and tied it around the captive's loins. They
forced him to crawl back and forth on the floor, while the big man
looked on, nodding and chuckling. Then the big man ran hot, cushion-like
hands over his head and body; pried open his mouth; grasped his hand and
shook it vigorously up and down; and, with a final nod, turned and
walked away.

He understood none of this, and was very unhappy.

They placed him upon a high, draped platform, where there was a small
chair and nothing else. There were a number of similar platforms in the
room.

It was impossible for him to maintain his previous indifference to his
surroundings. Around the walls of the room were long rows of barred
enclosures, containing creatures of every conceivable size, shape, and
color. Some were hideous; some were strangely beautiful; all were
absorbingly interesting. For a time, he forgot everything else while he
watched them and listened to the sounds that they made. Certainly, he
thought, a scientist of the Loten would give twenty years of his life
for the opportunity to see these creatures! Some of them were amazingly
like reconstructions that had been made from fossilized bones found on
the Loten.

They brought him food, which he judged must be the cooked seeds of
grain. It was soft, and he forced himself to eat a little, although he
was not hungry. He feared that he would have to learn to eat daily, for
food concentrates seemed to be unknown here.

His mind was occupied trying to understand the meaning of this place.
Great numbers of people were crowding into the room, now. Rows of them
stood around his platform.

The other platforms were now occupied also. On them were beings
resembling the people around them, but each one differing in some
strange way from the normal. Some were enormously large, some small. And
he saw one which was shaped like the men of Toon, yet was no taller than
himself.

An endless stream of people surged through the room, circulating around
the platforms and cages--gazing fixedly at their occupants.

He began to understand. These were exhibits--creatures strange to the
crowds who came to look at them. Toon was very large; and transportation
methods were poorly developed. Perhaps, therefore, these people had
never seen many of the parts of their own globe.

Their staring eyes made him uncomfortable. Wherever he looked they
were--staring eyes and gaping mouths. He felt suddenly ashamed. He
wanted to hide himself--but they would not let him do that, he knew. How
long would they keep him here, he wondered? There seemed to be no limit
to the crowds. This must be a great center of population....

And in a flash he had forgotten the people, with their staring eyes,
forgotten his shame, forgotten his bodily discomfort.... A center of
population! Those words blazed in his mind. Once more, he knew the joy
of hope.

With a sudden clear perception he realized that they could not have
helped him more if they had done it consciously. He had arrived at a
goal, which, a few days ago, had seemed impossible of attainment. Here,
if anywhere, he would find help....

He must learn the language. That was imperative.... And again his good
fortune amazed him. These people were constantly talking. His position
was ideal for studying their speech. From what he already knew, it was
quite simple; and it should not take long to learn enough to serve his
purpose.

       *       *       *       *       *

It took longer than he had expected, mainly because the people were not
there all of the time. They came only at certain periods of the day; and
he soon made a surprising discovery--that they slept during a great part
of every night. In fact, almost one third of their time seemed to be
spent in an unconscious state. The creatures in the cages slept even
more. He could see no signs of intelligence in these caged creatures.
They were dumb, and were completely dominated by the men.

He missed the sun badly. These people, in their dark houses and their
draped bodies, did not seem to need it. Often he felt quite ill, but
tried not to worry about his health.

At night, when alone, he practiced the sounds he had learned; and
rehearsed the things he was going to say when his chance came.

He passed through a sleep period; and then, on the ninth day, decided
that he was ready. To the attendant who brought his food he said:

"I talk."

The man started violently, and gaped at him.

"Talk?" he repeated blankly.

"Yes!"

The attendant looked at him uncertainly for a long time, and then walked
slowly away.

He was disappointed. But he was not kept waiting long. Soon the man
returned, accompanied by another.

"Blumberg wants to see you," they said. He did not understand that, and
shook his head. However, they lifted him from his platform, and carried
him out of the room. They took him up a long series of steps and through
dark corridors, into a small room.

Here it was cool and light. In the center was a desk, and behind it sat
the large man he had seen once before.

"Set him on the desk here," ordered the large man. "Now, little
feller--they tell me you're talking!"

"I talk."

"Well, well, well!" said the large man jovially. "What'll we talk
about?... I'm Blumberg, and I run this circus.... Who are you?"

He understood only the last words, but they were what he was waiting
for.

"I am man of Loten," he said carefully. "Loten is world more far from
heat star."

"What? Say that again!"

"I not live in your world--in this world...."

"The hell you don't."

Again he did not understand what the large man meant, and looked around
helplessly. Then he saw a writing instrument on the desk, and picked it
up. Blumberg pushed forward a piece of white paper. Quickly he drew, in
its center, a large circle with lines extending from its circumference
to indicate radiation. Outside it he drew four small circles at varying
distances from the central one.

"Hey, Edgar--come here!" called Blumberg.

A pale young man who had been sitting in a corner approached the desk,
saying, "Yes?"

He looked pleadingly at the pale young man. He placed his fingertip on
the large circle, and said, "Heat star!"

"Sun," said the young man quickly.

"Sun!" he repeated gratefully. Next he indicated the third little circle
from the center.

"This world?" he said.

"Earth," said the young man.

"Earth? This world is Earth?"

"Yes."

Blumberg grumbled: "What is this--a joke?"

He could not understand Blumberg. Eagerly he looked into the face of the
pale young man, and indicated the fourth little circle.

"Mars," said Edgar.

"Mars!" he cried jubilantly. He pointed his finger at himself. "I am man
of Mars," he said.

There was silence in the room, while they both stared at him. Then the
big man began to laugh. His body shook, and his red cheeks jumped up and
down.

"So you are a Martian--eh?"

"Yes--a Martian."

Blumberg was still laughing. "That oughta go big in the show--huh,
Edgar?" he said.

"Yes, sir," said the young man.

"If you live on Mars, what're you doing here?"

The Martian had been expecting this question.

"They send me away to Earth."

"Why did they send you away to Earth?"




CHAPTER V.

Blumberg Promises


The Martian began to speak slowly, carefully. Through long days and
nights he had rehearsed his story, knowing he would have to tell it. The
pale young man helped him often, at points where he lacked words....

He told of the scarcity of water on Mars--of how there was only a
little, that had to be preserved carefully.

Here Blumberg interrupted. "How much water has this chap been drinking?"

"Less than a cup, sir--in almost ten days," said Edgar. "The attendant
was telling me ..."

Blumberg grunted. "Go on!" he said.

He told of the social order of Mars--of the three great classes: the
Aristocrats, the Scientists, and the Workers. The Aristocrats, he
explained, were the rulers, who utilized the knowledge of the Scientists
and the energy of the Workers to build up a State for themselves.

He told how, once a year, the water rushed down the canals from the
melting polar ice caps, spreading vegetation over the face of the
planet, and of how quickly this precious water disappeared, evaporated
by the ever-shining sun, until there was none left for the thirsty
plants, and they died. Thus, every year the famine was worse on Mars,
and more Workers died.

He told how he, and other Scientists, had wanted to spread oil on the
canals to stop evaporation, and of how the Aristocrats had forbidden
them to do it.

He told of the plan he had conceived to control the waters at the head
of the canals when the ice melted in the spring, so as to force the
Aristocrats to come to terms.

And finally, he told of their premature discovery of his plan; of their
great anger and fear; of their determination to punish him as no man had
ever been punished before; of his banishment from the very world in
which he lived.

There was a long silence when he had finished. At last Blumberg coughed,
and shook himself.

"That's a fine story," he grumbled, "but you left somethin' out.... What
I wanta know is: how did you get _here_?"

"In a space traveller," said the Martian.

"What's that?"

Carefully, laboriously, he described the space ship. With the pencil he
sketched diagram after diagram, while the pale young man helped him and
labeled them as he directed. The young man was becoming visibly excited.
When the Martian had finished, he burst out:

"By god, it would--it _would_ do it!... Look--"

"Shut up!" said Blumberg. The perspiration was standing out in large
beads on his forehead.

"Fellow," he said heavily, "if you're lying, you've got one hell of an
imagination!"

"You not have space travellers?" asked the Martian tensely.

"No.... Just ships that travel in air," answered the pale young man. He
heard the other's painful catch of breath, and continued quickly: "But
with these diagrams it would be easy to--"

"Shut up, Edgar.... Shut up--an' get outta here!" barked the big man.
The other turned, and left the room without a word.

"Now, look here, fellow," said Blumberg, "I'm goin' to take your word
for it. I'm probably crazy to believe you; but I've seen most of the
funny critters of this world in my time, an' I ain't ever seen one like
you. So you may come from Mars, for all I know."

The other looked at him eagerly, trying to understand his words. "You
think I am man of Lo--of Mars?"

"Yes--that's right."

The Martian quivered with excitement. He held out his arms in a gesture
of appeal.

"You help me?..."

"Yes."

"You help me go to Mars?"

Blumberg looked down at the desktop, and was silent.

"Yes. I'll help you," said Blumberg suddenly. He stood up, and patted
the other softly on the head.... "Sure ... you bet!"

       *       *       *       *       *

The Martian lay upon his back on a leather couch in a small room where
they had taken him. His eyes were wide and shining. His hands clenched
and opened convulsively. It seemed to him that he had been waiting for
days.

The door opened, and Blumberg entered, followed by a smaller man. As the
Martian struggled to his knees to greet him, he spoke heartily.

"Hello there! Think I wasn't comin'? No use being in too much of a
hurry, y'know.... Meet Dr. Smith. He's a scientist like you...."

The Martian nodded and smiled at them happily. Dr. Smith looked at him
long and curiously, meanwhile automatically seating himself in a chair
close to the couch. Blumberg, who was pacing the room, cleared his
throat.

"Now, look here," he said, "I'm willing to help you, but you've got to
help me do it ...--"

The Martian understood him immediately.

"Yes!" he replied quickly. "Yes."

"Good!... Now, Dr. Smith is going to ask you questions about things we
need to know. You tell him all you can."

"Yes ... I tell him!"

Dr. Smith had many questions to ask, on many and diverse subjects. At
first, communication between the two was very difficult; but both were
highly intelligent and understanding men, and before long they became
fairly successful in exchanging ideas. Blumberg paced constantly about
the room. Occasionally he went out, but always returned quickly.

The catechism went on for hours; and ended only to be resumed early the
next day.

And so it continued on the following day, and on the day after. The
Martian was puzzled. They seemed to want to know so many things! Dr.
Smith had questioned him on every subject--mechanics, electricity,
magnetism, chemistry, colloids, catalysts, transmutation of
metals--everything. He feared that they were wasting time, but did not
think it proper to object when they were going to so much trouble on his
account. Nevertheless, he could not help worrying; and that night, when
the pale young man brought him his food, he asked timidly:

"Do they make the ship?..."

The pale young man looked at the floor, biting his lips. Then he went to
the door, opened it, and looked out into the hall. He closed the door
softly, and came near the couch. He looked straight into the Martian's
eyes.

"There is no ship!"

"No ship?"

"No." The young man was flushed and angry. He spoke very fast: "That fat
crook is not helping you.... But you are helping him--you bet!..."

"Does--does he not think--think I am the Martian?..."

"Oh, he thinks you're a Martian, all right! He knows you are. He's
taking out patents already."

The other shook his head uncomprehendingly.

"Don't you see it? Where you come from they know things that they never
even imagined here. You got knowledge in your head worth millions of
dollars; I mean, you have facts which are of great value to Blumberg.
Why, already you've told him to make gold out of lead--something very
precious from something worthless. And a hundred other things besides.

"He does not care about you; he cares about your knowledge.... Do you
see?"

"Yes."

The young man's anger suddenly abated, and he glanced fearfully at the
door.

"I'm sorry," he said gruffly, "but somebody had to tell you. You won't
get any help here!"

He turned, and almost ran from the room.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Martian sat perfectly still for a long time. Then he climbed down
from the couch, and crawled to the door. He reached up and grasped the
knob. The young man had left it unlocked, and in a moment he was in the
dim hallway. He crawled along, keeping close to the wall, until he came
to the top of a stairway. He felt the cool night air on his face. Very
slowly he lowered himself down the steps. He came to a wide door leading
out into the open.

Seated in a chair by this doorway was a man, whistling. The Martian
waited patiently in the shadows until the man stood up, yawned, and
strolled away.

Outside, there were high, dark buildings all around him. He found
himself in a narrow canyon running between them. He crawled down this
canyon to the right, close against the buildings. The paving beneath him
was hard, and hurt his knees. But he did not stop.

Someone was walking towards him. He could not escape being seen. He was
near a large light on a pole. He raised his hand in a gesture of
greeting....

It was a woman. Suddenly she saw him, and gasped. Then she
screamed--piercingly. The sound echoed and re-echoed between the high
walls of the buildings.

Windows and doors banged. Footsteps pounded on the pavement. Soon there
were many people around him. Some of them were holding the woman. She
hung limply in their arms.

A man strode into the group, swinging a club, and speaking
authoritatively:

"Here! What's the trouble? Move on there!" He glanced at the woman.
"Fainted? Take her to a drug store, somebody. She'll be all right....
What's this?" He grasped the Martian by the arm, and raised him to the
light.... "Well, I'm damned!"

Followed by the curious crowd, he half carried, half dragged his captive
along the street, around a corner, and through a lighted doorway. He
slammed the door shut.

"Found a freak, Yer Honor.... Scared a woman half to death! It musta
got outa the 'Garden'; I found it on Forty-ninth Street...."

The man seated behind the high desk nodded, and picked up a telephone.
Into this he spoke in a low voice, waited, and then spoke again. Finally
he laid it down, and said, "He is coming over. Hold on to it." He
resumed his writing.

The Martian watched the man writing on the high desk. He thought that
this man must be some person of authority--some ruler of the people,
perhaps. After long and painful uncertainty, he nerved himself to speak:

"Please help me...."

The man behind the desk looked up and smiled. "Yes. That is what we are
here for.... Only be patient," he said, and returned to his writing.

The Martian remained quiet. He would not dare disturb the man again, but
he kept watching him....

"Good morning, Your Honor!"

At the sound of the voice, he gave a start of surprise and fear.
Blumberg walked towards him, smiling. He struggled, and averted his
eyes. But his captor held him tightly. Blumberg patted him on the head
with his large, soft hand. He trembled.

"One of yours?" said the man behind the high desk. "What is the trouble
with him? He seems distressed."

Blumberg smiled at the other, and tapped his own head three times with
his fingertip. The other raised his eyebrows.

"Tell the Judge about yourself," said Blumberg softly. "He is a great
man, and he can help you."

The Martian was surprised that Blumberg would allow him to speak. He
made a desperate effort:

"I am a native of Mars. Please, I must return home. Please help me....
I--"

"See!" said Blumberg. He was laughing.

The Judge nodded. "Can you handle him?" he asked.

"Sure! They get along better with me than in--other places. I know how
to treat 'em; and they make a good living."

"All right," said the Judge. "Take him along. But don't let me catch him
running around the streets again, or you might rate a fine."

"Don't worry! We're going on the road in a couple of days now. You won't
see him again.... Well, good morning to you!"

"Good morning!" said the Judge.

The Martian lay, face down, on the leather couch. Over him stood
Blumberg, breathing hard. With a light cane that he carried he struck
the Martian sharply on his frail back.

"Don't try it again, or you'll get more of that!" he said softly.

The Martian did not move or utter a sound until he heard the door slam.
Then he made his way to the table; and, grasping the edge, pulled
himself erect. There was something on the table that he wanted....

The door opened softly, and the pale young man came in.

"You should not have tried it," he whispered.

The Martian pointed to the window. Over the top of a building lower than
its neighbors a small, square patch of sky was visible, and in this
patch a few stars twinkled faintly.

"Is Mars there?" he asked.

The young man was silent for a moment, looking at the floor and biting
his lips. Then:

"Yes," he said. "As it happens, it is. Mars is the brightest of those
stars, and the topmost."

"Thank you," said the Martian. "You have been very kind to me!"

The pale young man looked at him, and at the table. Then he turned,
without a word, and left the room.

The Martian did not take his eyes from the little point of light. But
one of his hands reached over the table, and grasped a knife which lay
there. His eyes still on Loten--his home, he plunged the knife into his
heart. And the little point of light, while he fixedly watched it,
flickered--and died.


THE END.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Martian, by 
Allen Glasser and A. Rowley Hilliard

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MARTIAN ***

***** This file should be named 40992.txt or 40992.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/0/9/9/40992/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
