The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Revolt of the Star Men, by Raymond Gallun

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Revolt of the Star Men

Author: Raymond Gallun

Release Date: October 11, 2012 [EBook #41027]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE REVOLT OF THE STAR MEN ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                        The Revolt of the Star Men

                            By RAYMOND GALLUN

[Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from Wonder Stories
Quarterly Winter 1932. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence
that the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]


[Illustration: A bulk dropped down on the nose of the craft. A pair of
hands gripped the barrels of the machine gun and tore them from the
mountings.]

       *       *       *       *       *


                        THE REVOLT OF THE STAR MEN

                  _By the Author of "The Space Dwellers"_


     [Illustration: RAYMOND GALLUN]

     The creatures that people this exciting story of Mr. Gallun, may
     seem at first blush to be impossible monstrosities. Yet, on
     consideration, we must realize that they are not so far-fetched.

     Even in our picayune little corner of the universe, we find in the
     insect kingdom a form of life that has survived through every
     possible earth catastrophe in the last 40,000,000 years. With their
     skeletons on the outside of their bodies instead of on the inside,
     insects are able to protect their bodies from heat, cold, and from
     accidents that would kill us. If the insect's shell were harder and
     thicker and made of heat-resisting material, it might conceivably
     be able to live in space without other protection.

     The point is that Mr. Gallun makes his Space Men so convincing that
     we can do nothing but believe in them. And he has woven about them
     such a thrilling story of adventure on two worlds that one will
     have to read and reread it, to get from it the fullest enjoyment.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was in the reading room of the Neilson-Aldebar space liner, _Ekova_,
that two young people came unexpectedly upon a third person who sat
alone, absently skimming through a copy of the _Interplanetarian_. When
the girl caught sight of him she uttered a little acclamation of
surprise. "Hekki-you!" she cried.

The one addressed looked up. A smile of greeting came over his swarthy,
aristocratic features. "Hello, Jan. It is I--none other," he said.
"Aren't you glad to see me?" Here he shot a quick glance at the girl's
companion.

"Why certainly I am, Hekki," she replied a trifle nervously. "But how
can it be? A week ago you left for the deepest, most mysterious part of
the Taraal desert on Mars, to collect objects of ancient art, and now
you are here. Where have you kept yourself during the voyage?"

The other smiled again--this time a cryptic, secretive smile.
"Business," he said mysteriously. "It called me to Earth at the last
moment, and since we left the docks at Taboor, it has kept me occupied
in my stateroom. This is but the third time I have ventured out of it.
Alka brought me my meals." Hekki arched his finely penciled eyebrows
slightly as he looked up at the lady's companion. "And you too have had
business, Janice," he added. "A new boy friend?" There was a hint of
something unpleasant in his tone, but the girl ignored it.

She nodded her golden head. "We met on the night of the departure from
Mars, and since then, we've had a happy week together. Austin," she
said, turning to the youth, "I want you to know Hekalu Selba of Taboor.
Hekki, this is Austin Shelby, who hails from Chicago. You ought to get
along well together, because you are both so interested in mechanics,"
she added. The men shook hands. For the past few moments Shelby had been
trying to analyze from the scanty data at hand the character of Hekki.
He saw the tapering, effeminate hands--one twiddled nervously a long
Martian cigarette--the dark straight hair and fine features; the mouth,
that could curl so insolently; the faultless, white silk clothing.

Shelby decided that he did not like Hekki. The reason at first seemed
obvious, but presently the young Earthman realized that his feeling
towards this child of the Red Planet was stronger than mere dislike.
What was the explanation? Was it because Hekki was a friend of Janice
Darell? Since he had met her aboard the _Ekova_ on this glorious return
to Earth, after having spent a whole Martian year at an engineering
school at Taboor, Shelby had learned to know love. Was he jealous of
this noble of another world? A little, perhaps. But this did not account
for the vague, sinister aura he sensed about Hekalu Selba.

Something in Shelby's brain was trying to surge its way to the surface
of his consciousness; he struggled with it, and it came out clear. Only
thirty-six hours before, during the period designated for sleep, he had
wandered into a seldom frequented passageway, high up in the hull of the
_Ekova_. Here there were portholes through which he could see the
curving metal expanse of the ship's huge form, gleaming dimly under the
stars of space. It had looked like the back of a great silver whale.

For a minute or two he had stared absently through the little circular
window, and then, hearing footsteps down the corridor, he had turned to
see two figures some hundred feet distant moving away from him. They had
obviously entered from a side passage and had probably not seen him. One
had been this very Hekalu Selba; Austin was sure of it. Beside him had
moved a shadow. The Earthman had not seen it clearly, for the
illuminating globes burning here during the sleep period were dim and
far between.

He had but a vague fleeting impression of a huge knotty form, bent and
grotesque. Its arms were so long that its big hands almost dragged on
the floor. Its head was very large and bulbous. The pair had seemed to
carry something heavy between them, but Austin had not seen what it was.
In a moment the Martian had opened a door in the side of the passage
and the two had vanished into it.

When Austin had returned to his stateroom, he was not quite sure he had
really seen the monstrous horror. Surely nothing like it was known to
exist within the orbit of Jupiter! Shelby had thought of reporting the
incident to the commander of the vessel, but he had dismissed the idea
as too pointless. Now, however, the memory of that vague black form was
haunting him. He knew that it was the key, in part at least, to his
feeling toward Hekalu Selba.

The Martian had cast his magazine aside. He was patting the soft
cushions of the divan on which he was lounging. "Sit here, my friends,"
he said in his smooth, precise English. "We shall talk, and then perhaps
we shall have a little refreshment." The two complied.

"It will be only for a moment," said the girl. "The ship lands in an
hour, and I haven't gathered my things together yet."

Shelby was intensely interested in this queer individual, about whose
personality there lingered a strangely indefinable web of mystery--of
evil, almost.

"So you too have a passion for mechanics," he said. "Somewhere I am sure
I have heard of you before. Kelang Aggar, an instructor of mine at
Taboor, spoke occasionally of a young Martian student--"

"Kelang Aggar is my friend," Hekki broke in. "He assisted me with
several experiments. But they were nothing--a new alloy, very hard, and
having a high point of fusion. The heads of the Space Ship Construction
Company said it was ideal for rocket nozzles, but they paid me a mere
pittance for the invention. This, and a few even lesser ones are my sole
accomplishments in the line of mechanics." Hekalu Selba laughed lightly.

"Let us talk of other things, my friends," he continued. "Let us allow
our minds to ramble. See those two beautiful potted palms over
there--children of the deserts of Earth, and beside them the slender
graceful stem of the purple Kelan, dug from the marshes along the Selgur
waterway of my own planet. I have seen them both in their native
habitat, waving their fronds as though in cadence with some great silent
symphony of the universe. See that tapestry over yonder, with the beast
woven into it?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Here Janice Darell pointed up toward the flattened glass dome that
roofed the room. "There is old Mother Earth looking down at us, and the
sun is peeping around her rim," she said. "See how the light of Sol
sifts through the terrestrial atmosphere. There is a streak of red, of
gold, of opal, and beyond are the stars and the blackness of space."

"The contrast of the forces of darkness with those of light," Shelby put
in softly.

Hekki was smiling absently. "There are many contrasts," he mused. "The
contrast of life and death, of power and weakness, of nightmare and
reality."

Words popped into Austin Shelby's head, and, carelessly, he uttered them
without thinking: "You often walk with your nightmares, don't you,
Hekalu?"

A hard light came into the Martian's eyes as he stared straight at the
Earthman. "Perhaps," he said, "and you, Mr. Shelby, often walk in your
sleep!" But apparently the incident was immediately forgotten.

Austin wondered how much the girl knew about the luxurious Hekalu. A
quick glance of intelligence passed between them.

"I'll have to pack now," Janice said. "Won't you boys walk along with me
a little ways?" She took Austin's arm as they arose. Hekki fell in
beside them. At the entrance to the corridor which led to the girl's
stateroom they paused.

"My business will occupy me tonight and tomorrow," said Hekalu, "so I
shall bid you goodbye until, let us say, the following evening, Jan, but
if you like I shall have Alka take you home."

"Mr. Shelby has asked permission to perform that little service, you
industrious old business man," she replied mischievously. And again that
dark shadow flickered momentarily on the Martian's features.

"But you will let me see you the day after tomorrow?" he asked. "I have
found a little paradise out at Oak Park patterned after the fairy
palaces of my own planet, and besides, I have a new jewel to show you."

"Fie on your jewels, Hekki," she smiled, adopting the stiff trite speech
the Martians often fell into. "But anyway, perhaps I shall favor you
with my incomparable company. The time you mention is still a ways away.
_Sidi yadi_,[1] my friend. Remember I shall be expecting a view-phone
call from you soon." Then turning to Shelby: "I'll meet you in the
lounge right after the boat lands. Don't fail me!"

[Footnote 1: Martian farewell.]

"You needn't worry about that, Jan," he assured her.

In a moment she was hurrying up the corridor in the pink glow of the
lights. As Austin gazed after her, he could not help but think how
wonderful was this fluffy little wisp of blonde beauty. Was she for him?
Over her he felt there lurked a dark shadow, but this only strengthened
the spell she had cast over him, for it gave to him the pleasure which
virile males experience when they know that their loved one requires
protection.

Hekki cleared his throat to attract the attention of his companion. When
Shelby turned toward him he was fumbling in one of the voluminous sleeve
pockets of his blouse. Presently he drew forth a very thin rectangle of
a substance resembling ivory, and handed it to the Earthman. Shelby
glanced at it. It was one of the name cards commonly used by Martian
men. It bore the legend in the interplanetary symbols:

     Hekalu Selba, Akar
        414 Teldasa
       Taboor, P. 4.

Beneath in small letters appeared Hekki's Chicago address.

"I shall want to see you again soon, my friend," said the Martian
cordially. "There are many things at my establishment which I would like
to show you--much that we can talk about."

Austin Shelby accepted the card and handed Hekki his own. Here was an
opportunity to get some first hand information on the mysterious man of
Mars and his more mysterious, perhaps sinister doings. The idea that he
might be placing himself in a dangerous position, Shelby gave scarcely a
moment's thought, for he had in him the spirit of the adventurer.

"Thank you, Akar Hekalu. I shall get in touch with you. And in the
meanwhile you can reach me at my address through the view-phone at
almost any time for I shall be working on a new mechanism there. _Sidi
yadi._"

"_Sidi yadi_, my friend."

The two men parted.

       *       *       *       *       *

Fifteen minutes later a rustling whisper was audible throughout the
_Ekova_, above the steady purr of the forward-pointing decelerating
rockets. It became a deep-toned soughing which rapidly increased in
volume to a loud roar, and then to a screeching hiss. The ship swayed
and rocked a little. It was tearing its way into the terrestrial
atmosphere.

In the conning tower forward, the pilot and his assistant were working
calmly and cooly over the bewildering array of controlling mechanisms.
Getting those thousands of tons of metal safely lowered into a space
ship's cradle on the landing stage, was a difficult task, but the
experience and efficiency of the two men was quite competent to cope
with it.

Far below was a vast sea of winking lights--Chicago, its colossal
skyscrapers looming up severe and white and beautiful in the glow.

The pilot's nimble fingers turned a small horizontal wheel at his side.
The liner dipped and dropped slowly earthward toward an area of white
light. A mass of cloud poured over the huge hull for an instant and then
passed by. The outer shell of the great silvery whale which had been
chilled to a degree from absolute zero, by the cold of space had been
warmed but slightly by the rapid passage through the atmosphere and now
gleamed with jewel-like hoar frost.

Down, down it floated until it was only three hundred feet above the
landing stage. A red signal light gleamed suddenly on a panel within the
control room, and the wizard of that eerie chamber shifted a tiny lever.
The space ship halted and hung motionless supported by its repulsion
plates. On the ground in the glare of floodlights white-clad men hurried
about. Four mighty arms of metal groped upward from a mass of heavy
framework. They clutched the craft with a grating noise, and then, with
the slow deliberation of a sleepy giant, they drew it gently down into
its cradle.

Within the _Ekova_ all was abustle. Its doors, built solidly like the
breeches of big cannons, swung open, permitting the cool night air to
enter the ship, which for seven days had been a world sufficient unto
itself. Gangplanks were let down, and the passengers, jesting gaily with
one another began their leisurely descent to the ground. Customs
officials worked feverishly. A webby derrick arm pointing out from an
opening in the side of the liner, was unloading mail and costly material
and equipment sent to Earth from the Red Planet.

The routine processes of debarkation over, Shelby and Janice Darell
entered the covered causeway which led to the great terminal building of
the Space Travel Company.

The two had caught but a fleeting glimpse of Hekki. He was talking
earnestly to a white-clad official, and had not seen them; nor had they
tried to attract his attention. Conspicuous among the Martian's numerous
possessions was a large basket of metal wickerwork, such as were
commonly used to convey dogs and similiar pets from place to place. The
sight of that basket had aroused again in Shelby's mind that peculiar
sense of the presence of something sinister. Was the monster he had seen
in Hekalu Selba's company hidden within that case of woven wire?

Within the causeway was a moving walk which carried Shelby and his
companion to the depot. Here the intermittent whirring of pneumatic
tube-cars operating in a vast network throughout the city was audible.
The young Earthian pair, and the two attendants bearing their light
luggage entered an elevator, which carried them swiftly to the landing
platform for atmospheric craft on the roof of the building.

Shelby presented his identification tag and gave the number of his plane
to the official in charge. The man led the way to a hangar at the side
of the platform. Shelby had sent an order by radio to the Sutherland
Aircraft Company a few hours before, and, complying with his request, a
bright new flier had been delivered and housed here, awaiting his
arrival.

The official closed a switch on the wall of the building, and the hangar
door rolled open. While the two Earthians were entering the craft the
attendants quickly placed the luggage into the load compartment.

Shelby fumbled with the destination mechanism and pressed the starting
lever. The propellers, whirled at high speed by the soundless atomic
motor, thrummed softly. In a moment, the plane, unguided by human hands,
hoisted itself almost vertically into the night and was off. Unerringly
it would carry its occupants to their destination.




CHAPTER II

A Strange Story


Shelby looked down at his companion. For a time she had been strangely
quiet. Could it be that there was just a hint of a troubled look on her
beautiful face? The young engineer felt himself drawn to her more than
ever. He wanted to know more about his new Martian acquaintance, but he
disliked to ask a direct question concerning him, for he feared vaguely
that it might give her offense.

"Jan," he said, "you look worried. Is anything wrong?"

She shook her head, slowly, absently, without looking at him. "No, I was
just thinking." She paused, and then in the same absent manner she
continued: "Only Hekalu Selba is back, and I thought I was rid of him."

Reassured somewhat by her words, but still taking care to conceal any
hint of the menace he had sensed about the Martian, Shelby asked: "What
possible difference can his presence in Chicago mean to you? He seemed
to me to be a very ordinary Martian nobleman--evidently supplied with
plenty of money, and having no other motive in life than to enjoy
himself, and perhaps to help others enjoy themselves. A perfectly
harmless individual."

Janice's face grew serious. "You say those things because you do not
know Hekki," she said. "Shall I tell you about him? It would relieve me
to share my knowledge with someone."

The young man nodded but made no comment.

"Two years ago," she began, "I went to Taboor on Mars to study
sculpture. Not long after my arrival at school, in the company of a
number of other art students, I attended a ball given at a glorious old
palace in the heart of the ancient Martian quarter. Our gracious host
was Hekalu Selba himself. I met him, danced with him, and talked with
him. From the first he was attracted to me and I to him, and so we were
often together.

"Though some of his peculiar affectations were obnoxious to me, I
thought that his good qualities far overbalanced his failings. He seemed
always kind and considerate in his dealings with all about him; he was
well informed on almost every possible subject; he painted pictures and
played various musical instruments with a skill that was little short of
genius, and his tales of his travels and adventures in the little-known
region beyond the orbits of the minor planets could not fail to delight
any listeners. Dreamer and brilliant artist--that was Hekki as I saw him
then. Effeminate--yes, but brave and resourceful too.

"Our intimacy grew. He made frequent proposals of marriage to me, but I
put him off, saying that I was not sure I loved him. I informed Father
back here in Chicago of our friendship. His next letter showed plainly
his enthusiasm over the idea of the possible marriage of his daughter
with this young noble of the ancient Martian house of Selba. 'Get him,
Jan,' he wrote. 'He'd be the catch of a lifetime. Why, his total assets
would make the treasure of Croesus look like a little piece of twisted
copper wire.' Poor practical old Dad! For once his business judgment was
in the wrong. It was well that I did not follow his advice."

At this point Jan's story was interrupted by the sudden dropping of the
plane. They had reached their destination. The craft descended
vertically and landed with a light impact in the center of a small
private roof garden at the summit of a great apartment building.

"Dad won't be home now," said Jan. "He was delayed in New York, and will
not appear until tomorrow. There isn't anyone else around here except
old Rufus, so we needn't go down stairs. Let's sit over there instead."
She pointed toward a quaintly wrought bench beside a splashing fountain.
The moon was shining, and the solitary cypress tree cast a spear-like
shadow over the pool. There was a faint fragrance of flowers in the
night.

Janice and Shelby seated themselves and the girl continued:

"Shortly after my meeting with Hekalu Selba rumors began to come to me.
Men died mysteriously, and there were people who made vague hints that
my noble friend was responsible. An uncle of Hekki's had made him the
principal heir to his fortune--shortly afterward the uncle contracted a
virulent disease and passed away. On both planets men that were
obnoxious to Hekki were murdered--capable business rivals and people who
perhaps 'knew too much.' Always the circumstances of their deaths were
peculiar. Frequently they were found in locked rooms to which an
assassin could scarcely have gained entrance without breaking his way.
But such violent methods had not been used. Never was there a shred of
evidence to implicate the noble.

       *       *       *       *       *

"But I was beginning to see Hekalu's true color. The lavish display of
his wealth--his estates and his art treasures, and the endless round of
good times he sought to provide, were merely an attempt to cover up his
wickedness. One afternoon that I was with him, he was under the
influence of the Elar drug. His face was red and his eyes gleamed with a
wicked light. He proposed to me again, and when I made an angry refusal
he threatened me--said that if there was another whom I loved he would
destroy him and me too.

"That, I assured myself, was the end. Hekki tried to make up, but when
he found that I would have nothing to do with him he vanished. I think
he went off into the outer regions of the solar system again. He was
gone for a long time, and I devoted myself entirely to my studies.

"Then suddenly, out of the blue, I received a letter from Hekki. It came
from a small village far to the west of Taboor. A gift accompanied it.
Hekki informed me that in a valley far out in the unexplored Taraal
desert he had run across a ruined city built by the Melbar kings some
seventy-five thousand years ago. He hoped to make an enormous fortune
from the art treasures he had found there.

"The gift and the small photograph he sent me, I shall show you at the
first opportunity. They are packed away now. The former is a dagger with
a flexible blade of a shiny black substance unknown to me. It does not
seem to be metal. The hilt is a lump of platinum. It is carved to
represent some strange animal with scores of coiling tentacles. Hekki
says that the object is one of his treasures, found on the site of the
ancient city. But I have doubted this. I know something of the art of
the Melbar kings, and certainly the dagger does not resemble the
products of their craftsmen. The same is true of those wares of Hekki's
which my friends have bought. They are strange--belonging neither to
Earth nor Mars.

"The picture too is equally puzzling. It depicts a night scene in a
desert valley. Jagged hills in the distance and the nearer moon of Mars
in the sky. The floor of the valley is in shadow and things there are
indistinct. There are shapes there--vast shapes, odd and grotesque. And
there is something in the foreground which might be almost human!

"In his letter Hekki asked if he might see me again, and I immediately
wrote and told him that I would. To you, Austin, this probably seems a
crazy thing to do, but like most everyone who is young, I had a genuine
love for intrigue and mystery, even though they might be dangerous
things to meddle with.

"Hekalu came to Taboor, but I saw comparatively little of him. He seemed
always to be tremendously busy. Sometimes he would be extravagantly
jubilant, as though he had met with some tremendous success, or again he
would apparently be worried almost to the point of madness. What these
emotional changes meant, he would never tell me.

"Several times old Alka, his favorite slave, spoke to me. 'The Master is
not as he used to be, Miss Darell,' he would say. 'He works feverishly
with odd mechanisms, and every night when he is at home he stares out
into space toward the farther planets with his new super-telescope.
Always, what he sees makes his face turn white and hard; sometimes, he
smiles and sometimes his features look like a devil's mask.'

"And still Hekki's weird treasures continued, and still continue to come
from the Taraal.

"A group of men was sent by the heads of the Place of Knowledge out into
the desert to investigate. They disappeared. The officials of the
Planetary Patrol made only a hasty and unsuccessful investigation.

"On the day of my departure from Mars, after having finished my course,
I saw Hekki, believing that it was for the last time. He said he was
going back into the Taraal. And then he popped up on the liner. And
that, Austin, is all I know about Hekalu Selba. What do you make of it?
What is he trying to do out there in the desert?" She placed her hand
lightly on Shelby's arm and looked up appealingly into his face. "Can't
you offer some suggestions, Austin? You know that when suspicious events
are troubling you, a plausible explanation eases your mind even though
you cannot know the truth. And I am afraid, afraid that he is
deliberately following me to Earth!"

While Jan had been telling of her acquaintance with the Martian, Austin
had been staring at a very large Sadu moth which hovered, and leisurely
moved about on thrumming gorgeous wings, which spanned fully eighteen
inches. It moved from blossom to blossom in a nearby flower bed,
delicately sipping nectar. Always its great luminous eyes, which glowed
like coals of gleaming fire, were turned toward the pair. Shelby had
scarcely noticed it, for he was absorbed with the girl's account; but
now, when it edged closer towards them, and then made a sudden
mischievous swoop not six inches above their heads, its presence could
no longer be ignored. The girl gave an exclamation of revulsion and
shrank involuntarily toward her companion. He leaped to his feet, and
picking up a pebble from beside the fountain, hurled it at the night
prowler.

"You dirty eavesdropper!" he shouted angrily. "The man who brought your
kind from Mars for ornamental purposes must have been crazy!"

       *       *       *       *       *

The moth buzzed up into the cypress tree and squatted there, silently,
apparently resting. Only its eyes continued to glare fixedly, almost
malignantly at the occupants of the garden. But they quickly forgot
about its presence.

"I don't know whether I can offer a sensible explanation for Hekalu's
actions or not, Jan," Shelby said. "However, as far as his activities in
the Taraal are concerned, it seems quite possible that he did discover
ruins there, and is trying to keep other fortune seekers away. The ruins
may of course not really belong to the Melbar dynasty. They might have
been built by some contemporary race. Just what he is doing among the
minor planets, we can't any more than guess at. Probably he's just
adventuring like a few other people. And as for his following you to
Earth--well, I admit that you _do_ seem to be popular!"

"You're making it sound awfully simple, Austin," said Jan. She paused
and thought for a moment, and then, with seeming irrelevance she
continued: "Haven't you heard of queer clusters of luminous specks
recently seen by astronomers not far beyond Mars? They called them
meteor clusters, but they drifted about here and there, not following
definite paths as meteors should do."

"You're trying to suggest that they are space ships, aren't you, Jan?"

She nodded.

"But they aren't," Shelby assured her. "They don't polarize the
reflected light of the sun as space ships do. Besides, where could they
have been built? Certainly not among the planetoids. And any place on
the planets, the Taraal desert for instance, would be an almost equally
impossible site for their construction.

"Think of the enormous crews of men and the vast supplies of food and
water and materials that would have to be taken out there into the
wilderness. Undoubtedly Hekalu could back such a project financially,
but he would be discovered before he had made a fair start, and the
Martian Planet Patrol would wipe him out of existence. Still, though I
don't think that the luminous specks are man-built vessels, I am equally
certain that they aren't meteors either."

"Then what are they?"

The young man smiled and shrugged. "I don't know," he said. The
intuitive feeling that unknown, and not too beneficient forces were at
work in the ether about, was troubling him again, making his scalp
muscles tingle.

For a moment Shelby stared at the ground. "Jan," he said, "I didn't tell
you what I saw on the liner. I didn't tell anyone because I don't want
to be called a lunatic. But I guess it's all right to let you in on this
now. Briefly, during the sleep period, I came upon Hekalu Selba prowling
in a passageway aboard the _Ekova_, in the company of a vague thing that
may have been similar to that shape in the photograph--long arms, big
head, squat and muscular. If we knew what that thing was, and where it
came from, the snarl might be half untangled."

Janice Darell's face took on a sudden surprised look. "You actually saw
what you say you saw?" she cried. When her companion nodded, she
continued excitedly with wide-open eyes. "I still believe that Hekalu
knows something about the meteor cluster. And the beast figures in
somewhere too. Austin," she cried, "what if Hekki is trying something
really great? I know you don't take stock in any such idea, but just
supposing he is--what if--"

"Let him try!" the young man cut in. "I almost wish he would! I'm afraid
he would get the surprise of his life." He was staring straight at the
unwinking, malignant eyes of the Sadu moth.

"What do you mean?"

Shelby drew a small black case from his sleeve pocket and opened it. He
took from it a device which looked like a tiny pistol. There were
several other odds and ends of mechanisms in the case. "For a year I
have been working on a new weapon," he said. "All the parts are
completed, and tonight I shall finish assembling them. This little gun
is the projector for a new ray which I have discovered--an etheric
vibration of extremely short wavelength. A portion of the atomic energy
in any solid or liquid substance the ray touches is instantly released.

"You doubt whether it is effective? Well, I can't give you any proof
now; I can only say that when I was back on Mars, fooling with my first
cumbersome projector, which produced only the weakest of vibrations, I
blasted a big hole in the wall of my apartment, and nearly killed the
Martian physician who lived in the rooms next to mine. I had a devil of
a time explaining the explosion, and narrowly missed getting myself into
serious trouble. In a few days I shall try to sell the weapon to the
Earth Government. If they are convinced of its value, and I don't see
how they can help but be convinced, our friend from the Red Planet will
have to be very careful if he tries anything."

Shelby glanced at his wrist watch. "Eleven thirty--my bed time," he said
with mock seriousness. "But Jan, there's one favor I want to ask you
before I go. Try not to see anymore of Hekalu Selba, Akar."

Janice Darell made a valiant attempt to act the part of one whose pride
and sense of freedom had been deeply outraged. "Mr. Shelby," she said,
"what right have you to tell me what I shall or shall not do?" But a
light laugh broke from her lips and spoiled her bluff.

"There are two reasons," replied her companion seriously. "First,
because we both believe that Hekalu Selba is dangerous; second--because
I love you." He leaned closer toward her with the light of eagerness in
his eyes. "Oh, I know I'm crude, Jan," he said passionately. "I'm just a
clumsy engineer, not a poet or ladies' man. What I'm trying to say to
you must seem awfully trite, but anyway, I want you with me always."

"You mean--?"

He nodded.

"All right, Austin," she said quietly, looking straight into his eyes.

His arms crept around her, and now he drew her gently to him.

Some moments later, in the nearby pergola, the door which led to the
rooms below opened, and an ancient negro clad in gaudy pajamas and
bathrobe peered out into the garden. He saw the pair and recognized the
girl. A happy grin came over his wrinkled black face. "Well, if dat
ain't a mos' pretty sight to look at," he muttered. "My baby done come
back at las', and dat sho' am a han'some boy she got dar!" He turned,
and leaving the door open and the light burning on the stair, descended.
Very softly and wistfully he was crooning an old darky love song.

It was an hour later before Shelby's craft whirred up into the
moon-bathed night over the winking lights of the city. And at the same
time the big-eyed Sadu moth which had been crouching in the cypress
tree, rose on its velvety wings and sped away, as though some urgent
mission had suddenly claimed its attention.




CHAPTER III

Hekki's Proposal


When Shelby reached his apartment, he immediately donned his laboratory
smock and set to work. But he had scarcely finished mounting a tiny coil
of wire within the hand-grip of his weapon, when the view-phone bell
rang insistently.

The inventor pulled off his smock and threw it over the materials on his
work bench, so that the person at the other end of the view-phone
connection, whoever it was, would not be able to see them. Then he
snapped the television and audio switches. The mists in the view-plate
cleared, and there before him, as real as though he were actually in the
room, sat Hekalu Selba. The Martian's eyes gleamed with suppressed
excitement.

"Mr. Shelby," he was saying, "it may seem strange that I should be
calling you so soon, but I have something simply colossal to talk over
with you. You must come up to my place immediately! I realize that you
may be very busy, but this _is_ important!" And he added, "It's nothing
to discuss over the view-phone. Will you come?--please!"

Shelby was about to make a cold reply, but he checked himself. An
intense curiosity gripped him.

"All right, Akar Hekalu," he said. "I'll be there." The switches
clicked.

Hastily Austin changed to his street clothes, and then gathered together
the material for his weapon and placed them in the wall safe. Only one
thing he selected from the jumble of apparatus--a tiny pinkish crystal,
without which it was impossible to produce the Atomic Ray. This he
secreted in a hollow button on his sleeve.

For a long moment he stared at his automatic, which lay on his work
bench. "Better take you along," he muttered at length, "--may need you."

A wizened black-clad man whom Shelby surmised was the slave Alka, met
him at the entrance on the landing platform of a quaint Martian tower
atop a huge apartment building, and ushered him into an elevator. He was
whisked rapidly downward, and emerged into the central light-well which
pierced the structure from top to bottom. The barbaric tapestries upon
the walls of this tall cylindrical chamber, the tiling of the floor,
which consisted of squares and circles and spear points of various
colored stone, fitted artfully together, giving an effect of pleasant
disorder. And most of all, the smell of strange incense in the air, told
Shelby that he had dropped into a little bit of old Pagar or Mars.
Evidently the Prince of Selba was master of the entire tower, which, in
itself, was by no means small.

Alka led the way down a short passage, and admitted the Earthman to a
large sumptuously furnished room, one end of which was softly
illuminated by a quaintly beautiful floor lamp. The farther end of the
room was in complete darkness. The Pagarian architects had made it
imitate the interior of a natural cavern, for where the light approached
the gloom, two glassy stalactites gleamed with a scintillant elfin
light.

Shelby had but a moment to take note of his surroundings--the dark
hangings woven with silver threads, the embossed shield and spear of an
ancient Martian warrior mounted on the wall--before Hekalu entered. The
young man saw at once that the noble had lost his air of bored languor
which he had noticed about him at the time of their first meeting. His
eyes flashed with excitement and his movements were quick and cat-like.

"I see that you have come quickly, Mr. Shelby," said the Martian, "and I
am glad. Won't you sit down?"

With scarcely a pause he continued: "I have great wealth, my friend, and
while your means do not seem to be small, I believe that it would be
very convenient to you to have them supplemented. Suppose I gave you
say, ten times as many jewels as are in the tray over on that stand?"
Shelby looked in the direction the Martian indicated. He saw a flat
shallow container of considerable size. At its center squatted a
repulsive thing about eight inches high, carved from a clear crystalline
substance from which there flashed countless points of icy, wicked
fire--a huge diamond!

Heaped around it were hundreds of magnificent red _tabalti_, most prized
of all gems. An expert appraiser had recently told Shelby that in two
worlds only thirteen of them were known to exist. And now he was being
offered all these stones by one who hinted that he was willing to give
him ten times as many--an utterly staggering fortune!

Hekalu's words fairly dumbfounded Shelby, but they grated upon his sense
of pride as well. Nevertheless, his face gave no hint of what passed
through his mind. An angry reply, he decided, was out of place.

"Naturally, Akar Hekalu, you want something in return for your amazing
generosity," he said coolly. "Of course, I could not accept your offer
under any other circumstances."

The Martian nodded. "I have it from a reliable source, Mr. Shelby, that
you are the inventor of a terrible weapon--an atomic ray which might be
dangerous in the hands of unworthy persons. Turn the weapon over to me
as well as all information concerning its operation and construction,
and promise to say not a word more about the weapon to anyone, and I
will give you the jewels at once."

A flash of surprise passed across Shelby's face but he quickly masked
it. So this was it! But how was it that the noble had learned of his
invention? Could it be that Janice Darell was playing a double
hand?--his Jan. He dismissed the idea as preposterous and utterly
disloyal.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Earthman rose to his feet and addressed the Martian coldly. "If I
have such a device I believe that I can place it in better hands than
yours."

Hekalu Selba's face gave no hint of anger; in fact he seemed at the
point of laughing. "You have done as I expected you would. Your refusal
shows me how patriotic you are and gratifies me very much, Mr. Shelby,"
he said blandly. "You are as a man of Earth should be. However, there is
another side to the question. I have certain plans and to have you at
large might endanger their fulfillment. Therefore I must ask you to
accompany me on a little trip. That weapon of yours will be well taken
care of. Now, kindly raise your hands high above your head." The Martian
was pointing a bejeweled automatic straight at the chest of his visitor.
"You are being covered from two other points in this room so try not to
cause any misunderstanding," he added.

Shelby saw the wisdom of obeying the order for he felt quite certain
that Hekalu Selba and his minions would not hesitate to shoot him down.
What a colossal idiot he had been! He had sensed a trap when the noble
had called him over the view-phone and yet he had taken no sensible
precautions!

Hekki was searching him now. His long fingers were moving deftly from
pocket to pocket. They closed upon his automatic and drew it forth.
"Ah," the Martian breathed, "it's as I thought. You have brought a
souvenir. A most worthy precaution. And, now that you are no longer in a
position to cause any trouble," he continued sneeringly, "I may as well
tell you about my ambition--Oh, it is simple enough; men have thought of
it before but none had the nerve or ability to put it over. Briefly it
is this--to become Master of both Earth and Mars! My friends are waiting
for me out there beyond the Red Planet--waiting for their commander. And
there is another little hope--there is a certain beautiful flower of
your race--" Here he stopped to allow his captive to imagine the rest.

A hard light came into Austin Shelby's eyes. It was the only outward
indication of the sudden tornado of emotions and thoughts that swirled
in his mind. This man sought to enforce his will upon the planets! The
question of whether he was capable of realizing this tremendous dream or
not, the Earthman did not pause to debate.

Fifty years before, Saranov had attempted it, and as a result a score of
great cities became shambles. Certainly the present foe of mankind was
more powerful than Saranov. The monstrous associate of Hekalu and the
flitting specks of light far beyond Mars seemed to bear out the
nobleman's boast. And if he somehow got possession of the Atomic Ray!
And Jan--What was he going to do to Jan! Certainly it was she to whom he
had referred! It was this last idea which hammered on Shelby's brain
hardest of all. A little fiend within him seemed to shriek. "Escape!
Send your weapon to the War Office! Kill Selba if you can, for
everything is at stake!" Escape, yes, but how?

"Place your wrists together behind your back now," Hekalu was saying. "I
have a pair of magnificent manacles--careful. Do not make an abrupt
movement."

A crazy idea had come into the Earthman's mind. He did not expect his
plan to work but it was all he could do. With an air of one resigned to
his fate, he obeyed the order. He felt the Martian fumbling with the
manacles. He was evidently using only one hand. The other presumably
still held the automatic leveled at Shelby's back. But it was useless to
think of such things.

A slim finger touched the young engineer's wrist. He caught it, twisted
it back at the same time, then, summoning all the quickness and force he
could muster, he ducked low and hurled himself backward straight into
the Martian. There was a loud report. A hot pain seared into the fleshy
folds beneath Austin's left shoulder blade. Those hidden in the darkness
at the farther end of the room did not dare to fire for fear of injuring
their master. Now Shelby was grappling with Hekalu. He gripped the hand
that held the automatic.

Two more reports--ineffective, and then the two fell clawing and in a
heap on the floor. The shaded lamp was upset and its illumination globes
were broken. There was darkness. Shelby heard the shuffle of running
feet coming across the marble pavement of the chamber. Help for Hekalu!
He'd have to hurry. But the Martian noble, racially much frailer than
the people of Earth, was no match for the athletic Shelby. In a moment
he was pinned, unable to move. The Earthman tore his weapon from him and
thrust its muzzle against his recent opponent's chest. Before he fired
he saw the Martian's bold smile; whatever failings Hekalu Selba had,
cowardice was not among them.

On the heels of the gun's report Shelby darted from the room and down
the short hallway which led back to the central light-well of the Selba
establishment. If he could only somehow reach his plane! He gripped the
doorknob and shoved fiercely, but the stout metal panels were immovable.
He might have known that the outer door would be locked! Oh, what an
unutterable ass he had been!

Now what? A hoarse cry of triumph caused him to turn. Alka was racing
toward him with leveled pistol. A spray of projectiles spread toward
Shelby but the slave's aim was bad and none of them took effect. A split
second later Alka pitched to the floor with a bullet through his brain.

       *       *       *       *       *

But there was another to be reckoned with--one who waddled along rapidly
on short powerful legs. Its arms were long and black and more powerfully
muscled than a gorilla's. One hand brandished a metal knob-stick, and
the other, a long-barreled pistol of Martian design. Silvery armor set
with jewels that glittered wickedly in the dim light of the hallway
crossed the creature's breast. Its head was bulbous, and its face, set
deep in plates of shining black chitin-like armor, consisted only of two
enormous eyes and a lipless mouth. No nose at all! The horror Shelby had
seen on the liner!

The Earthman fired at the monster. The first bullet clinked harmlessly
on his opponent's breast-plate. The second thudded full force upon its
skull, but apparently the hard smooth skin of the creature was too tough
to allow projectiles hurled from a pistol to penetrate it for it did no
real damage--only infuriated the monster. Black hard lids dropped
protectingly over its eyes, and its mouth worked convulsively. It
quickened its pace and brought its own pistol into play.

Shelby had made a hasty survey of the hall and had noted the stairway
beside the door he had tried to open. He darted up this, ducking low
behind the stone railing to avoid his weird pursuer's bullets. Perhaps
in the chambers above he could find a means of escape. He was leaving a
trail of blood on the marble steps, and his wound pained him terribly.
He felt sick and weak.

When he had reached the top of the stairs, the unknown horror was
already halfway up. It had returned its pistol to its holster.
Apparently it had been so maddened by Shelby's shots, that only tearing
its quarry to pieces could satisfy its lust for vengeance. And the thing
was gaining rapidly!

But the Earthman gritted his teeth and kept doggedly on. He fought back
the nauseous giddiness that was creeping upon him. He'd have to escape.
Oh God! There was too much at stake--the world and Jan--what was
happening to Jan? True, he had killed Selba, but certainly the Martian
had minions--men who could carry on without him. He could scarcely have
built up all his plans single-handed!

Four flights of steps Shelby and his pursuer ascended. Was there a way
of reaching the roof and the plane in this direction? And if there were,
could the Earthman reach it before the long arms of the thing so close
behind wrapped themselves about him? Such an event, Shelby knew could
not mean anything less than failure, and possibly immediate death. The
fiend behind did not cry out or order him to halt. In fact it made no
vocal sound at all. Not even its breathing, which should have been heavy
and labored, was audible. Only the hurried shuffle of its unshod feet.
Its silent relentlessness was nerve-wracking.

The engineer saw before him at the top of the stair a small doorway, and
beyond it a spiral runway leading upward. The light grillwork gate stood
invitingly open. Catching the grill with one hand as he rushed through
the door, Shelby sought to slam it shut and latch it. He almost had
succeeded, and then a huge hand closed upon the bars. One jerk, and a
quick grab with the other immense paw and the strange flight and pursuit
would be at an end.

But the jerk was delayed. Shelby fired his last round. It did the
monster little harm, even though the distance between the two was but
four feet. Nevertheless it caused the armored horror to leap back a
step, and the moment thus provided was sufficient.

As Shelby stumbled up the dark spiral he heard the thing below tearing
at the closed grill. He knew that it could not delay the thing for long.
He had just reached the trapdoor at the top of the long climb, when a
muffled ripping crash echoed up dimly from far beneath him. The gate was
down!

Feverishly he struggled with the heavy trap. Normally it would not have
been difficult for him to lift the rectangle of aluminum alloy; but
wounded as he was, forcing his numbing limbs to obey him required almost
super-human effort. When he had at last succeeded in hoisting it on its
hinges, he could again hear the soft padding of hurrying feet.

The engineer found himself in a large room, one wall of which was
curved, conforming to the outer contour of the cylindrical tower.
Scattered illumination globes gave a dim light to the place. The room
was evidently a storehouse for Hekalu's laboratory supplies. Complex
mechanisms stood about, evidently waiting to be installed. There were
hundreds of metal drums presumably containing chemicals. There were
bolts of heavy fabric and stacks of ingots neatly corded. Set in the
ceiling of the chamber were several circular windows through the heavy
glass of which bright stars shone. Directly above was the roof, and but
a few paces distant, the landing stage!

Escape seemed tantalizingly near, but with sinking heart, Shelby noted
that there was no easy means of ascent to the roof. He'd have to try to
smash one of those windows. But the monster hurrying up the spiral
claimed his immediate attention.

Deeply thankful for the peculiar eccentricities of Martian architecture,
he hurriedly proceeded to pile ingots on the closed trapdoor. Each of
these ingots weighed well over a hundred and fifty pounds. Fortunately
for the wounded Earthman, the distance he had to carry them was only a
few feet.




CHAPTER IV

Capture!


He had transferred five to their new position before his pursuer arrived
beneath the trap and began to push upward mightily upon it. Shelby
transferred several more ingots to the pile just to make sure that the
monster could not enter. Then, fighting off the diaphanous veil of
unconsciousness that was trying to drop over him, he looked about for
something with which to effect his escape.

A long bar of metal caught his eye. He seized it, and with all his
strength thrust upward at one of the ceiling windows. But the thick
glass, crisscrossed by rods of metal, was not easily shattered.

A rattling noise attracted his attention. He glanced back toward the
trap. His pile of ingots was trembling as if shaken by a miniature
earthquake. The door was rising upward! It settled back and rose again.
An inch crack appeared, and through it Shelby could see two eyes and the
muzzle of a pistol. He leaped out of range just in time to avoid the
bullet that whizzed across the room and flattened itself against the
wall.

He darted around toward the hinged side of the trap, where he knew that
the black horror could not fire at him, and devoted his attention to
another window. He would have reinforced the barricade with more ingots,
but he realized that by spending his nearly exhausted strength that way
he would be defeating his own purpose.

A dozen times he jabbed up viciously with the bar before a tiny crack
appeared in the round pane of glass. The trapdoor behind him was being
shaken violently. An ingot on top of the pile was jarred from its place
and crashed to the floor. Yes, the window was giving. A small hole
appeared in it.

A pair of shiny black forearms had forced their way from under the edge
of the trapdoor. Slowly and mightily the shoulders of the monster surged
upward. The door was rising, and this time it did not seem that it would
sink back.

Shelby had finished his task. Now, with the upper end of the bar thrust
through the opening he had made in the window, and the lower end resting
in a slight depression in the floor, he proceeded to climb it to safety.
His head and shoulders were through the hole when the monster at last
burst its way into the room below. But the thing was just an instant too
late to hinder him.

Sweating and bloody, Shelby drew himself to the roof and staggered over
to the landing stage. Yes, his plane was there.

The night air, and the flush of success was refreshing him. His
exaltation leaped higher and higher as his plane swept him up from the
summit of the tower of the mysterious Selba.

A wild refrain was drumming in his mind: "Hekalu Selba is dead! I have
killed him!" There was nothing more to do but notify the Municipal Air
Patrol--an S. O. S. with his siren would accomplish that. They would
raid the tower. If any of the Martian's fellow plotters sought to
continue with the project the Earthman's new weapon would take care of
them.

Shelby was reaching for the siren button, and then a terrific explosion
thundered up from somewhere below, and several hundred yards to his
right. He saw the orange flash, and then, in an instant the whole city
went dark. Another crash came and another. Shelby saw a dark form glide
through the air. From far beneath him he heard a troubled murmur mixed
with the din of colliding vehicles. Sirens shrieked. In the distance to
his right, a great plume of lurid flame blossomed in the sky.

The low purr of a machine gun sounded behind him, and he heard the
almost inaudible tick-tick of poisoned needle-darts piercing the
fuselage of his craft.

He zoomed sharply upward for a thousand feet, and then glanced back.
There was a dim shadow out there--he was being followed. But this
discovery, and the realization that the city was attacked made but a
vague impression upon his fast-dimming mind. The warm fluid that oozed
from his shoulder, making his clothing sodden and sticky, had all but
drained his vital energy.

Somehow he began to doubt that he had killed Selba. It had been only a
dream, and the monstrous thing that had sought his life had been a dream
too. Hekalu was pursuing him now, trying to kill him! The idea took
hold, for he could no longer distinguish fancy from reality. It brought
to him a vague fear which would have been completely out of place with
him had he not been so near gone from loss of blood. It was like a
child's fear of the dark.

He began to fly towards home in a wild zigzag course like a dazed bat,
but this favored him, for it enabled him to avoid the darts from the
pursuing plane. Luckily he remembered that while under fire combat
fliers do not make use of their automatic pilots except as a last
resort, for these devices cannot direct the complex movements necessary
in dodging enemy bullets. Automatically Shelby watched the guiding
instruments and followed their directions.

Several times he signaled with his siren, but no one answered him.
Thousands of sirens were hooting, and the Air Patrol was very busy. The
darkness, the explosions and the muffled roar from the streets
continued.

Two ideas now possessed Shelby's mind and he clung to them with the grim
persistence of a wounded tiger. One was to get home, secure his weapon
and rush it to the federal authorities. The other was to hurry to Janice
Darell.

Presently his plane bounded down awkwardly on the landing platform of
the building in which his apartment was located. He stumbled out, and
down the dark stair. The elevators were not working. Somehow he found
his door and unlocked it. He groped toward the wall safe. It was open,
and the little black case which contained the unfinished atomic ray
projector was gone. A neat round hole had been drilled in the metal door
of the safe.

The view-phone bell was ringing. Shelby stumbled to the instrument and
moved its switches. The view-plate did not work but he heard a faint
voice which he recognized as Jan's. "Is that you, Austin?" it said.
"Can't you help me? Something is out there. It has me cornered in my
room. It has killed old Rufus. The house police--" There the connection
snapped.

A wild surge of anger quickened the engineer's weakly beating heart. He
tried to reach the door, and then he felt a stinging sensation in the
back of his neck. A needle-dart charged with a sleep-producing drug had
struck him. He slumped to the floor.

A moment later a thing of metal and fabric, fitted with drills and
delicate thread-like tentacles, and formed like a giant Sadu moth of
Mars, darted out from behind a curtain where it had been hiding. It flew
up through the air-tube which had been its means of entrance to the
room. On the roof it met a black nightmare, and by means of signs traced
in the air with an intelligence that was paradoxically human, it
directed the monster to Shelby's apartment below.

       *       *       *       *       *

The first sensation which bore itself in upon Shelby's consciousness
when he was regaining his senses was a terrific throbbing pain in his
head. He opened his rheum-plastered eyelids and looked about him. He was
lying in a bunk within a small dim-lit compartment. Polished duralumin
walls gleamed all about. At the center of his prison was a table, and
beyond, built into the opposite wall, was another bunk. There was a
black blob of something sprawling on the mattress, but he could not see
clearly what it was. The illumination globe in the ceiling was not
burning, and only a faint glow filtered through the curtained, circular
window. A muffled purring vibration told Shelby that he was aboard a
speeding space ship.

Aroused evidently by the stirring of its charge, the thing in the
opposite berth arose and strode leisurely toward the Earthian. The metal
of its harness tinkled, and sharp points of light flashed against its
ebony body, like gems sewn into a sable curtain that is being swayed by
a vagrant draft of air.

The Earthman recognized the creature immediately as his recent pursuer.
It had pressed the light switch now, and the illumination globe glowed
softly. Then the thing bent over Shelby, and with a gentleness that was
surprising, it rolled him over and examined his bandaged wound briefly.

The young man conquered his revulsion sufficiently to look up into the
monster's face. He thought that it was odd that the sight of it did not
terrify him. No, really it was not more hideous than the visages of
insects he had seen through a microscope. He studied the hard chitinous
visors that blinked over the monster's eyes--the hollow where its nose
should have been; and he searched for some hint that there was a human
personality within that knotted carcass but found none. The lipless
mouth and the blankly staring eyes were without any expression that he
could interpret.

Two things struck Shelby as being peculiar--the fact that the monster
did not seem to breathe, and the icy coldness of its hands.

The thing walked to the door, unlocked it, and left the room. The
engineer heard a grating of the key being turned when the door had been
shut.

Taking advantage of the opportunity to move about without being
observed, he jumped out of bed and hurried to the window. It was then
that he noticed that there was a metal band about his right ankle. A
long light chain led from it to an eyelet in the wall. Truly he _was_ a
prisoner!

A single glance through the porthole confirmed what he had known was
true--the black sky and the unwinking stars of space.

There was a narrow walk beneath the window, running the full length of
the flier's hull. The railing of woven wire cast a checkered shadow on
the walk. Somewhere toward the stern a blazing sun was shining, but
Shelby could not see it.

His first thoughts concerned some means of spoiling the plans of Selba's
band. He guessed, of course, that they were responsible for his present
position, and he realized that it was likely that the zero hour of their
attack upon the planets was not far off. Could he escape?--a practical
impossibility.

Nevertheless he looked longingly at the emergency space-boat hugging
close to the hull of its mother ship, and fitted so admirably into her
streamlining. If he could get to the entrance of that boat--it was in
some other room farther toward the bow--he could give his captors a run
for their money and perhaps reach Earth. And if he did? Shelby had great
confidence in the Atomic Ray. He removed the top from the button where
he had secreted the pink crystal. It was still there.

But how could he get into the space-boat? Plainly it could not be
accomplished now. Perhaps soon--in a few hours maybe, an opportunity
would present itself. And there were other things he might do. A moment
in the engine room, and he could blow the ship to atoms, and with it,
most of the ringleaders of the Selba crowd. Stoically Shelby realized
that he too would be destroyed, but if he could serve his world, he
would not hesitate to make the move.

Bent on getting as well acquainted with his present environment as he
could, the Earthman proceeded to examine minutely everything that was
within the range of his senses. He tested the strength of his chain, and
began to fumble over each link, without having any definite idea of what
value the knowledge gleaned from such a procedure would be to him.

He had reached about the tenth link when he heard a sound above the purr
of rocket motors--voices. There were two of them. One was a man's; the
other was soft and feminine. Shelby knew it at once--Janice Darell's! So
she too was aboard the space flier! He realized it with a pang of
apprehension. In vain the Earthman tried to catch the words they were
saying, but beyond detecting the chilly tone in the girl's voice, he
could get no idea of what they were talking about. Apparently they were
in the room next to his.

He heard footsteps in the hall outside, and returned quickly to his
bunk. Three people entered the room. The first was the black monster.
Shelby gave a gasp when he saw who followed it--Jan. She looked tired
and worn but in her face there was no hint of fear. She smiled wanly at
Shelby. There was another behind her. It was Hekalu Selba--the man the
Earthian thought he had killed! For once Shelby was really dumbfounded.
He uttered the Martian's name without thinking.

The noble grinned in Satanic amusement. "It is I, none other, my
friend," he said. "Aren't you glad to see me? You look as though you
were being visited by a ghost."

The Martian chuckled. "But thanks to a breast armor I still belong to
this plane of existence. I admit though that you gave me a great scare
when you nearly, but not quite, escaped. My four bombing fliers supplied
an adequate diversion for the Municipal Patrol, didn't they? And my Sadu
moth, radio controlled automaton--it functioned perfectly!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Shelby rose from the bunk and sauntered toward his captor. Hekalu made
no move to stop him. "Now that you have Miss Darell and me nicely
trapped, what do you intend to do?" Shelby inquired coldly.

The Martian laughed. "You have a very inquisitive nature, Mr. Shelby,"
he said. "What do you expect me to do? Continue with my plans which you
so almost successfully spoiled, my friend." Here Hekki's voice became
suddenly excited and husky; his lips curled and his eyes took on the
fanatical look of a megalomaniac who sees within his grasp his dream of
power.

"Very soon," he lisped, "we strike. Mars first, then your planet. I
shall be great--greater than all the combined rulers of the millenniums
gone by, and Janice here, will share my greatness." The slender arm of
Selba stole around the waist of the girl beside him. She did not try to
draw away. "That last little idea maddens you, doesn't it, Mr. Shelby?"
he added with a sneer.

Shelby felt a flush of heat in his cheeks. What happened to Jan that she
should permit the noble to be so familiar with her? Had she been dazzled
by his wealth and his promises of what stupendous things the future
would bring? For a fraction of a second something seemed to let go in
the Earthman's mind, and then he saw the fleeting look in the girl's
eyes. He checked the impulse that had urged him to send a fist crashing
into the face of the smirking noble. Certainly such an act of violence
could accomplish no good.

Shelby looked at the black monster. It was standing beside the table,
and leaned forward, so that its knuckles rested ape-like upon the floor.
It was gazing narrowly at the Martian, and its mouth opened and closed
nervously. There was a faint something in its almost blank face which
suggested to the Earthman that the bond of friendship between the Prince
of Selba and this weird devil of the void was none too strong.

Hekalu withdrew his arm from about the girl. He nodded toward the
bejeweled nightmare. "I had almost forgotten my lieutenant here, Mr.
Shelby," he said. "He is the ruler of the empire from which I am
recruiting my forces--my chief ally. Since his people do not employ a
language of sounds, he has no vocal name; but for the sake of
convenience I have christened him Alkebar, which means 'The Unknown.' He
was my companion on my recent trip to Earth, for he wanted very much to
see what a beautiful place is your world." There was a sinister hint in
these last words.

Hekki made a few quick signs to Alkebar with his fingers, and then
turned to the girl. "I must ask you two to leave us now, Jan," he said.
"Mr. Shelby and I have an important matter to discuss."

Alkebar grasped Janice's arm with a horny paw, and hurried her through
the door. But nevertheless Shelby caught a fleeting glimpse of her face
as her lips formed, but did not utter, the word--"Wait." Hekki did not
see.

The Earthman turned upon the Martian. "I am going to usurp your assumed
right to start this little private conversation, Akar Hekalu," he told
him. "There is only one thing I have to say. You are a noble, the son of
a long line of nobles who righted wrongs and avenged insults on the
field of honor. You have wronged me, no you have outraged me. Therefore
I challenge you to combat. Choose your weapons. No place will suit me
better than this room; no time better than now." But if Austin had
expected to nettle Hekalu into a mood for fighting, he was disappointed.

The Martian was smiling mockingly. "Life is sweet," he said, "sweeter to
me than it has ever been before. I do not wish to die--not even by your
hands. And you--you have certain knowledge and information which is
valuable to me. You must live. I was going to talk to you about what you
know. That weapon of yours--we are working on a projector. But something
is evidently missing--a tiny element."

"What you have learned about the Atomic Ray," Shelby cut in, "you
learned through your own efforts. If you can steal the remainder of the
necessary information from my brain, you are welcome. Otherwise, I
urgently invite you to go to the devil."

Hekki's face assumed a look of infinite though make-believe sadness. It
was a trick such as a designing woman might use to attract some
desirable male.

"I am sorry to hear you talk so, Mr. Shelby," he said. "But as you
suggest, I believe that there are ways of stealing knowledge even from
your mind. For instance, in an old vault beneath my palace at Taboor, I
once found a sealed vat containing a certain fluid. The Ancient Ones
were wise, for when they desired any man to talk, they thrust his arms
or his legs, or perchance his whole body into the fluid. Very slowly,
and with some discomfort, it ate away the tissue of his nerves. I must
leave you now, my friend. Think well, and may the gods that rule the
universe guide you on the right course."

He opened the door. Shelby caught a glimpse of a long hall, and at the
far end, the bewildering maze of control-room equipment. The panel
closed.




CHAPTER V

The Race Through Space


Immediately the Earthman set himself to the task of examining everything
in his prison. But as he had expected, there was little or nothing to
discover. The walls which his tether permitted him to reach were all
perfectly smooth and solid. He realized with a sheepish grin that it had
been foolish of him to even dare to hope that they would be otherwise.
The chain fastened to the fetter was quite adequate to hold him. The
window, even if it might have been used as an avenue of escape, was
securely fastened with bolts, so that it would have taken a man equipped
with a heavy set of wrenches, an hour to remove it. To shatter the
flexible pane was next to an impossibility. The table was firmly welded
to the floor. Beyond the table, Shelby could not go, for the chain
prevented him. But he was quite sure that there was nothing movable in
the entire room massive enough to be used as a tool or weapon.

He slumped down on his bunk, and let one hand rest on a small power-pipe
which ran along the wall and up to the illumination globe above. For a
minute dejection almost got a firm grip on him. But he fought it off.
This was no time to give up. Why, the struggle hadn't even started yet!

Shelby felt a faint vibration of the power-pipe under his hand. For a
considerable time the impressions had been coming to him, but they had
scarcely penetrated into his consciousness. They seemed no more
significant than the hundred and one little noises and disturbances that
go with the running of any space ship. Presently however, the regular
sequence of the pulsations attracted his attention. Something made him
think of the almost obsolete Morse code. Then the realization came to
him. Someone in another room on he ship was tapping on the
power-pipe--signaling--signaling him! He spelled the word
out--A-u-s-t-i-n, repeated over and over again.

His first thought was of Jan. It must be she who was calling him for
there was no one else.

Quickly, with his heavy signet ring, he tapped out an answer: "It is I,
Jan, A. S. shoot--"

With tensed muscles, and with fingers firmly clutching the power-pipe
that he might not miss a single signal, Shelby crouched, receiving the
message. Somehow there was an urgency, an insistence, an appeal about
those hurried pulsations that no human voice could have conveyed. It was
fantastically like communicating with one who is buried alive.

"We must escape not later than five hours from now," the tapping
spelled. "You have been unconscious for a long time--drugged. In five
hours we land on Mars. Then escape will be impossible.

"Hekki has told me much, and I have seen much. The horrors that are
Selba's henchmen--three times some of them came to the ship, once in a
band of over a hundred. Hekki is worried. He has not troubled me yet.
Too busy I suppose. I have tried to make believe that I agree to his
plans. I thought I could control him that way. But he has been taking
the Elar drug.

"We must escape, Austin. We must! Can't you think of a way? I will help!
If they get you to the concentration base in the Taraal they will
torture you. And we must remember our homeland!"

The hurrying vibrations ceased, and then, almost before he knew what he
was doing, Shelby was tapping out an answer promising the impossible.

"Never fear, dearest," he signaled. "Just let me think for a few
minutes." A moment later this phrase almost made him laugh. The sap hero
of a comedy which had recently been broadcast over the radio-view had
said almost these exact words. Think? Of what? Escape within five hours?
How? But Jan's appeal sent in such an odd way had an almost magical
effect on him, and made his brain work harder almost than ever before.
And then the ghost of an idea came. There was a chance that it would
work. He signaled to Jan, and then for half an hour, they put their
heads together--planning.

Somewhat nervous, Shelby walked to the door and hammered loudly upon it.
A thin-faced slave whose hide was burned by desert suns to the color of
mahogany, appeared almost immediately.

Shelby answered his inquiring look briefly: "I would speak to your
master," he said in Pagari--"right away." The slave nodded and reclosed
the door.

In excited impatience the Earthman waited. Now and then he tapped short
messages of encouragement to Jan. Would Hekalu never come? The strain of
suspense was not exactly pleasant. Finally, unable to contain himself
any longer, he rose from the bunk where he had been reclining in
readiness for the first move of the coup he was planning, and began to
pace the floor.

He chanced to glance out of the window. On the railed walk beyond, a man
clad in space armor was bending over a small portable case which was
supported on a tripod. Shelby surmised correctly that this man was
Hekalu Selba.

Beside him, paying close attention to whatever the Martian was doing,
stood the black Alkebar. The Earthman frowned in puzzlement, almost in
awe. For Hekki's weird companion wore nothing that would be of the least
help in protecting him from interplanetary cold and lack of air
pressure. Not even an oxygen helmet! And yet, as the monster examined
interestedly, every dial and switch that Hekalu touched, he showed not
the slightest hint of discomfort. The airless emptiness of space seemed
home to him. How could such things be? A strange thrill tingled and
vibrated along Shelby's spine when he realized how alien was Alkebar.
There was no kinship between him and the creatures of either Earth or
Mars.

Presently Hekki looked up, and as though moved by some intuitive
realization that he was being watched, turned awkwardly in his
cumbersome attire, and glanced along the row of portholes in the side of
the vessel. He saw the Earthman and smiled at him. Shelby felt that it
was the kind of smile which a tolerant father might show to his youngest
son. Hekalu waved his hand, and his lips, behind the glazed front of the
helmet, formed several words which Shelby could not interpret. Then the
Martian returned his attention to his apparatus.

       *       *       *       *       *

When Selba entered his prisoner's room some moments later, he found him
lounging on the bunk.

The Martian looked enquiringly at Shelby. "You have reached some
conclusion, my friend?" he asked.

Without changing his position on the bunk the young man nodded. There
was an expression of dejection and sullen resignation on his face which
he was trying hard, above the intense excitement which possessed him, to
make realistic. Still acting the part he spoke: "Yes, Akar Hekalu," he
said between teeth that were apparently gritted with rage, "I have
decided to reveal to you the secret of the Atomic Ray."

A triumphant gleam came into the Martian's eyes. "Ah, my friend," he
said, "you at last see the light. I knew that you would. But what has
been the cause for this sudden change in attitude? The torture chamber,
perhaps?" There was an undercurrent of suspicion in Hekalu's voice.

Shelby turned his head sullenly away, feigning shame. He said nothing. A
minute passed during which time Hekalu stared at his captive, a sardonic
smirk of contempt curling his thin coral lips.

Finally he said, "I will have Koo Faya bring you writing materials, and
you will describe in writing every detail of the manufacture of the
missing element."

"No," replied Shelby, turning his face toward the Martian, "I haven't
the ability to do that. It will be necessary for you to take me to the
laboratory of the ship where I can demonstrate the process to you. It is
much too delicate and complicated."

The noble's eyes wavered slightly. "Once," he said, "you tried to trick
me, but I warn you that I am on guard now so do not attempt it again."

He signed to Alkebar who had been standing silently beside the open
door. The giant drew a key from a pouch at his side, and kneeling,
unlocked the fetter fastened about Shelby's ankle. It rattled to the
floor. And at the same time the Earthian, leaning back on the bunk with
arms stretching over his head, tapped sharply three times with his
signet ring on the power-pipe. It seemed to be only an unconscious
gesture--nervousness perhaps.

Immediately there was a terrific crash from down the passage way,
followed by an agonized scream. Another crash. More screams.

Hekalu started, and then making a hurried gesture to Alkebar which
indicated that he was to guard the inventor of the Atomic Ray, he drew
his automatic and dashed down the corridor to investigate the
disturbance. The Earthman however, was in no mood to be guarded. No
longer shackled, he leaped to his feet and over to the center of the
room. The great voiceless beast from the stars stood before the doorway
with his long arms outstretched. He was not trying to capture the
Earthman--only seeking to block his path.

But Shelby had no time to waste. Gathering himself together, he hurtled
straight for the ankles of his opponent. The fact that the artificial
gravity of the ship was of the same strength as that of Mars--only a
trifle more than one-third that of Earth--added to the effectiveness of
his plunge. The mighty-muscled Alkebar, puzzled by the unheard-of
tactics of his agile though vastly weaker foe, suddenly found himself in
a sprawling heap on the floor. Shelby leaped over him through the door,
slammed it, and raced precipitately down the corridor.

In the meantime Hekalu Selba had reached Janice Darell's room, but when
he had unlocked it and had thrust his head inside to see what the matter
was, a heavy urn, deftly aimed, had crashed full into his face. Shelby
saw him sprawling in the passage badly dazed, and a split second later
Jan dashed from her cabin. She looked around, and when she saw Shelby
coming swiftly toward her she flashed him a quick smile of triumph.

But Alkebar had wrenched the portal of the Earthman's recent prison
open, and was in hot pursuit. He was tugging frantically at the pistol
in his belt.

"Run, Jan, quick!--To the control room!" Austin shouted.

He caught up Hekki's automatic which had dropped from the Martian's
grasp when he had fallen, and wheeling, fired at the black colossus. The
bullet struck Alkebar's right hand with which he was raising his pistol.
The tough natural armor which covered the monster from head to foot
prevented it from doing any serious damage, but it must have stung
badly, for his weapon clattered to the floor. While he was stooping to
recover it, Shelby hurried forward to catch up with Jan. It was but a
few yards to the control room. If they could get there, overcome whoever
was in charge and barricade themselves in, they could master the ship!

Their luck had been good, but it was not destined to be as good as that.
They caught but a brief glimpse of the bewildering array of switches,
dials and levers, that constituted the brain-center of the craft.
Standing on guard before his instrument panels was the mahogany-colored
slave Koo Faya. He was half crouching, at bay. There was a murderous
light in his eyes, and he held leveled in his hands a light machine
gun. Shelby's automatic was leveled too, and he pressed his trigger an
instant before the Martian. Four bullets whizzed into the control room,
splattering close about the thin mummy-like body of Koo Faya. A glass
globe that glowed redly on the top of a complicated mechanism, was
struck and burst with a popping sound. A rose-colored vapor floated
ceiling-ward.

       *       *       *       *       *

Simultaneously Koo Faya's weapon began to whir. Then, even as Shelby
jerked Jan back out of danger, the wild shriek of an alarm siren mingled
with the discordant clashing jangle of ungoverned machinery running
amuck, rang through the ship, and the huge metal cigar pitched and
careened like a frightened thing.

Alkebar, having recovered his pistol, was staggering down the passage
shooting rapidly. But owing to the crazy motion of the space flier his
missiles were momentarily not taking effect.

Austin and Jan knew that Koo Faya was leaping to a position where he
could shoot his poisoned darts at them again. What now? Cornered? No!
Janice Darell wrenched open a door in the side of the passage and shoved
Shelby into the tiny room beyond.

In the opposite wall of the closet was a round dark opening. "The
emergency flier," Jan shouted. "Into it!"

As quickly as they could they climbed through into the submarine-like
interior beyond. Fighting to keep themselves erect, they slammed the
heavy duralumin portal to and fastened it. Alkebar was already groping
on the opposite side. But he was too late.

Shelby leaped to the control panel and cut the electric current from the
magnets that held the emergency flier anchored to its mother ship. It
floated, free from the careening hulk. Its rocket motors roared into
life.

The occupants of the tiny craft looked back at the _Selba_. It had
ceased its mad motions now, and was hanging quietly in space. Evidently
Koo Faya had succeeded in righting matters to some slight extent at
least. Would he be able to patch things up entirely? The red globe could
be replaced in half an hour. It would be that length of time at least
before the _Selba_ could engage in pursuit.

But the arm of a space ship, equipped with weapons commonly used in the
void, is long. Hence Austin Shelby considered it his first duty to put
as much distance between his craft and Hekalu's ship as possible.

Still four million miles away, Mars glowed--a tiny red disc; and he
headed toward her giving the flier full freedom to do its best. The
fiery vapors fairly tore from the rocket nozzles.

With one hand in readiness on the control lever, which resembled in
appearance and operation the joystick of an airplane, and his feet on
the bar used for steering in a lateral plane, he kept his eyes fixed on
the receding bulk behind. Jan had handed him one of the two pairs of
binoculars which she had just found in the supply compartment.

Austin knew what to expect from the direction of the _Selba_, and it
came well within schedule. A flash of green fire spurted from the
foredeck of the ship. It showed up with startling vividness against the
jeweled sable of the void.

Abruptly Shelby drew the control lever back. In response to his movement
the rocket nozzles, now deflected from alignment with the central axis
of the craft, sent it into a steep climb. The terrific angular
acceleration seemed intent on forcing the two fugitives straight through
the metal floor. It drew the blood from their faces and made them grow
pale and giddy. But they escaped being struck by the torpedo.

It exploded a hundred yards beneath the flier's keel. Fragments of it
banged against the hull. In rapid succession other flashes darted from
the _Selba_, which had dwindled to a silvery speck far to the rear. But
still those missiles, directed by incredibly delicate sighting
mechanisms, and hurled at almost the speed of light, continued to score
remarkably close to their target.

If it had not been such an elusive target they most certainly would have
blasted it to fragments. But Shelby, skilled as were most of the men of
his time, in the handling of small space craft, was able to endow his
flier with much of the agility of an alarmed dragon fly. Darting,
weaving, zigzagging, yet always keeping its general course fixed toward
Mars, it careened away. Always it was ringed by an aura of green
flashes.

However, good fortune is seldom perfect. The tempered duralumin plates
of the flier managed to withstand the force of all of the torpedo
fragments which showered them--with one exception. One dart from
Hekalu's ship exploded barely fifty feet to the right of the fugitive
craft, and a flying chunk of steel sent it pitching and tumbling through
the ether.

When the two bruised occupants had regained their equilibrium they heard
a faint hissing above the roar of rockets. They knew that there was but
slight chance that the _Selba_ could do them any further harm, for
though the torpedoes continued to come, the distance between the two
vessels was now so great that a damaging shot was almost an
impossibility. Nevertheless, the present situation was serious enough. A
leak!

Fixing the nose of the flier toward the Red Planet, and locking the
controls, Shelby left the pilot's seat to determine the extent of the
damage, while Jan searched the supply compartment for something with
which to repair it. There was a deep dent in one of the ceiling plates
and a thin wriggly crack through the center of it--not an easy job to
patch that out in space under the best of circumstances.

The young man whistled when he saw how near they had come to a hideous
death. Several times he had seen the bodies of men who had been suddenly
exposed to the pressureless airless cold of the outer void--hideous
bloated things through whose skin the livid blood had forced its way.

"Any luck, Jan," he asked, looking back at his companion. "Did you find
some cement?"

She shook her head.




CHAPTER VI

The Space Men Attack


First stepping to the oxygen supply valve and opening it a trifle wider,
Shelby hastened to assist the girl in her quest. Their ears were
ringing. The air pressure within the hull was dropping rapidly.
Diligently they ransacked every nook and corner, but found nothing more
valuable than a can of thick grease. Shelby smeared some of it over the
crevice; it helped but did not by any means check the flow of the
escaping air entirely.

"It's a race with time now, Jan," he said quietly.

She looked at him. Her face was a trifle pale, but her lips and eyes
were smiling. "Are we on our way to Mars, Captain?" she enquired.

He nodded. "We are, Admiral. The fuel tanks are full and if our air
lasts we'll get there."

"And when we do," she put in, "the best of luck to Hekki and his
friends!"

A vision swept through Shelby's mind--batteries of fantastic machines
whose maws spewed flames of faint lavender fire--blinding flashes of
light and world-rocking explosions: a hideous thing to dream of--hideous
yet glorious, for the civilizations and freedom of two worlds depended
upon it. To the Red Planet--they _must_ make it!

Janice Darell had placed her hand lightly on Shelby's arm. Her
expression was serious, almost hard. "Austin," she said, "tell me
truthfully, can we really reach Mars? It is likely that we shall get
there before we go out?"

"Certainly, darling," he replied, putting as much assurance into the
words and expression as was possible. "Why do you ask?"

There was something that suggested doubt, perhaps even displeasure in
her answer: "We have a duty to perform, Austin--a duty infinitely bigger
than our own petty existences. You have not seen what I have seen--small
scouting patrols that came to the _Selba_ riding strange round things
that must have been machines of some kind. One look at those henchmen of
Alkebar, their great black bodies, their quick nervous movements--like
eager panthers, their wicked-looking weapons which they carried with
such an air of easy assurance, and you would have known what they hoped
to do. Most of these devils are within the orbit of Mars for the first
time. Certainly Hekki has told you something about them?"

Shelby nodded. "Very little; but I have noticed a few of Alkebar's
remarkable peculiarities," he said.

"Well," she continued, "if we can't get to Taboor, there is one thing we
can do--destroy the _Selba_, and with it Hekki and Alkebar."

"Destroy the _Selba_!" Shelby exploded, "with what? Those toy machine
guns on the nose of this bus? The bullets wouldn't even make noticeable
scratches in the hide of that tough old girl."

"Not with the machine guns," Jan said slowly, "with this flier! A little
luck and it would work."

The idea flashed through Shelby's brain. Ram the _Selba_ at high speed!
Absolutely certain self-murder! A wave of tremendous admiration for the
girl came over him. She had something more in her favor than mere beauty
and intelligence.

"Your idea is a pretty good one, Jan," he told her. "But rest assured
that unless you can overpower me, it will never be put into execution.
However, I'll tell you the truth: we have about a fifty-fifty chance of
reaching the Red Planet alive."

And so they tore on their way across the void while they watched the
dial on the oxygen tank. They were racing with a tiny needle that crept
ever nearer to the zero point that was its goal.

By allowing the pressure within the flier to drop to the lowest point
that they could endure, they managed to conserve considerable oxygen,
for then the rate of escape from the crevice the torpedo fragment had
made was naturally not so rapid.

Frequently they examined the sky behind them, expecting momentarily to
discover the tiny speck of flitting silver that would be the _Selba_.
But if the ship was pursuing them it had not yet come close enough to be
seen.

However, there was another, and perhaps greater menace which kept their
eyes turning this way and that, searching for signs of danger. Clusters
of dully-glowing specks in any quarter of the heavens would be the first
indications of its presence. They would grow larger, come hurtling on
like racing meteors in the sun's glow. Only there would be an odd wobbly
motion about their darting flight. Shelby tested the trips of the two
machine guns. Spurts of green flame plumed out of the muzzles.

He had set the radio transmitter in operation, and was sending
occasional signals for assistance. But he knew that this was practically
a useless move. Hekalu had taken them far off the beaten track, and they
were still half a million miles from the Terrestro-Martian traffic lane.
The range of the transmitter of this craft was only ten thousand miles.
Even if they had been much nearer the chances of their signals being
picked up were slight.

The Martian disc was growing larger. It had become an ochre sphere
delicately ringed and mottled with greens and browns like a cloudy opal.
The flier was fairly eating up the distance.

Shelby had just said: "I believe we're going to make it, Jan," and then
the signs which they had hoped would not appear came. Ahead of them and
a little to their right, a vague cluster of specks glimmered into view.
It wavered like a wisp of luminous smoke buffeted by a light breeze.
This was the one thing that distinguished it from a meteor cluster.

       *       *       *       *       *

Rapidly the individual points of light grew, becoming tiny stars that
glowed by the reflected light of the sun. Within five minutes there was
no longer any chance of mistaking their identity, for their flat
disc-like shapes and the half-human forms of the things that rode them
were already visible through the binoculars. They were approaching at
terrific velocity. Both Jan and Austin knew them to be subjects of
Alkebar. There was no mistaking their motive. Doubtless orders had been
flashed to them from the disabled _Selba_.

Realizing that these fleet space riders could easily catch up with his
flier if they so chose, Shelby made no attempt to elude them. Instead he
clung doggedly to the straight course toward Mars.

The twin machine guns, responding obediently to their directing
mechanism, swung on their swivel toward the hurtling foes. Shelby peered
into the eye-piece of the "sighter," a complicated arrangement of
mirrors and lenses which enabled the pilot to always look directly
through the ring-sights regardless of what direction the gun barrels
were pointing. He pressed the trips, and soundlessly, out in the vacuum
of space, the guns went into action. Flickering green flames of
detonating radio-active explosive darted from their muzzles.

Almost immediately there were answering flashes among the approaching
shapes, for the high-calibre bullets were also loaded with explosive.
One projectile took effect--another! Emerald flares of light, and
nothing remained of two bold space men and their queer disc-like
vehicles but torn fragments of flesh and metal.

The Space Men were very close now. Jan and Shelby could see the light
flashing on their jeweled harnesses and on the weapons which they
flourished defiantly. There must have been almost five hundred in the
party. Somehow their wild charge was vaguely reminiscent of a band of
fierce Bedouin marauders, racing madly across the desert, bent on
pillage. Only it was the Arabs who suffered by this comparison, for the
desert of these mysterious Space Men was the whole of interstellar
emptiness; and their forms and those of the things they rode, were the
forms of the forces of Iblees himself.

Apparently these henchmen of Alkebar had some object in view other than
the mere destruction of the flier, for they made no move to use their
weapons. They were pulling upon levers on their vehicles, checking their
headlong flight.

Now they were coursing with the little craft, swarming about it, edging
nearer, at the same time taking care to keep out of range of Shelby's
guns.

There was a scraping against the hull and a light jolt as a talon
secured a hold on an eyelet ring. A black bulk dropped down on the nose
of the craft. A pair of hands gripped the barrels of the machine guns,
and with an easy tug, tore them from their mountings. There were
shifting scratching sounds coming through the flier's light shell--heavy
bodies moving about, and then a sudden ripping vibration. The control
lever felt loose in Shelby's hand. He could no longer guide the vessel.
And there was nothing either he or Jan could do except wait. The rocket
motors still purred evenly.

"I guess they've got us this time, Jan," the young man said to his
companion. "I wonder what they are going to do with us?" He spoke as
casually as though this latest unfavorable turn of fortune was no more
serious than the loss of a game of chess.

Janice Darell was equally cool. "Next time we win," she laughed. It is
odd how human beings so often react to strange and terrifying
situations. "I'm always ready, you see. Here I was crouching behind you
throughout the fight with this perfectly useless pistol in my hand,
hoping foolishly that I might be able to use it. That's loyalty."

They fell to studying the two monsters which rested on the nose of the
craft in front of the pilot's observation window, where the guns had
been. The Space Man was crouching out there trying to peer in at them.
He was very much like Alkebar--only not so large, and his equipment and
adornment did not boast so many jewels.

Shelby felt a peculiar sense of the unreality of the creature. He looked
into its face and saw its eyes. Beside the left orb was a mottled area
that must have been a scar. It seemed as concrete as anything he had
ever seen, and yet for the second time, he told himself that such a
creature wasn't possible!

Time honored tradition had said: "Life can exist only where there is
oxygen, water and warmth." And all three of the requisites were lacking
in the void. Shelby realized that tradition might be wrong, but the
question still remained: How did these creatures of space live? Whence
came the energy that kept their bodies functioning? If not from the
combustion of food with oxygen, then where? If there were no moisture in
their bodies, and there certainly couldn't be, for it would have been
frozen in an instant and diffused through sublimation, how could vital
fluids flow through their veins? He put these questions to Jan, but she
shook her head.

"Hekki informed me that these people inhabited a region somewhere beyond
Mars, but he did not tell how it was that they could live in space," she
said. "It might be that they have had a development similar to
terrestrial insects with the skeleton of armor enclosing their flesh."

The vehicles of the Space Men were even greater puzzles. How did they
fly out here where the rocket was the only human invention that could
move? Many of the vehicles were visible now through the flier's windows.
They were disc shaped platforms of a strange lusterless metal. In the
center of the top was an opening in which the Space Men sat. Projecting
from the discs were a series of levers, permitting evidently simple
control. But no hint of their principle of operation was given. They
emitted no rocket jets; no beams projected from them.

Austin realized that there were many mysteries of the universe with
which he was not acquainted; this was certainly one.

       *       *       *       *       *

The sound of bodies moving about on the outer shell of the flier was
still audible. Presently there was a sharp explosion somewhere toward
the stern. The rockets immediately fell silent. The fugitives saw that
some of the Space Men were now busying themselves with long metal
cables. Deftly and expertly they were looping them through the eyelet
rings set at frequent intervals along the sides of the flier.

The other ends of the cables they fastened firmly to similar rings on
their vehicles. They finished the job with all the efficiency of trained
military engineers. Then, with the small interplanetary vessel in tow,
the Space Men began to move off toward Mars, rapidly gaining momentum
until their speed must have considerably exceeded that which most space
craft could equal. They deflected their course somewhat from the direct
path to the Red Planet, probably to avoid a meeting with any wandering
ship.

Throughout the fantastic voyage Shelby and Janice Darell found little to
do but stare dumbfounded at their weird captors and to watch the rapidly
dropping needle of their oxygen supply-gauge. But as it proved, there
was little danger of suffocation, for the Space Men were making good
time.

And so, after two hours of flying they came to Mars--not to Taboor
which the fugitives had previously hoped to reach, but to a deep valley
in the desert of the Taraal. The strange caravan circled around to the
night side of the planet, and then, slowly and carefully, but with a
hint that they understood their work well, they proceeded to lower the
disabled craft through the atmosphere to the ground below.

The door of the flier was torn open like a paper thing, and a black
giant fully as huge and burly as Alkebar himself hustled the adventurers
roughly out into the open.

The pock-marked face of Loo, the Martian name for their nearer moon, was
in the sky, and by its light they could see hundreds of Space Men
crowding about them. Plainly this Martian colony was fairly well
peopled, for there were many more than the five hundred who captured
them. The attitude of the onlookers was one of casual curiosity. For the
moment at least they were not showing the more brutal side of their
characters.

The fugitives were given but a moment to look about, while their jailer
apparently carried on a silent conversation with one of his lieutenants.

They saw the sandy floor of the huge rectangular enclosure dotted with
strange mounds which must have been some kind of shelter, the encircling
walls crowned by square towers at regular intervals. Those walls were
amber-colored in the moonlight, and cast dense shadows that shifted
visibly as Loo raced in its meteoric course toward the east. Here and
there before the mounds huge vague shapes squatted. At the center of the
enclosure a tall spire of silvery girders rose, supporting at its summit
a cone of a dull black substance. It looked like the creation of either
Earthmen or Martians.

Beyond the wall the rounded summits of desert hills, over which in ages
past, a restless ocean had poured and flowed, were visible. In spite of
their position the two young Earthians could not help but marvel at the
silent grandeur of this exotic scenery. A light though chilly desert
wind blew refreshingly against their faces.

The black giant had kept a hand on each of his prisoners during his
brief conference, and now, none too gently, he guided them to the
entrance of one of the mound dwellings. The Space Man ushered his
charges into a corridor, and then, fumbling with a curious lock he
opened a heavy door and shoved them into the dim-lit room beyond. With a
rattling clink the great stone panel closed behind them.

A lump of self-luminous rock set in the stone ceiling gave a faint
illumination to the bare interior. There was no furniture--only the
sand-covered floor and rough rocky walls. On the floor a Space Man,
larger and more magnificently-muscled by far than any they had yet seen,
sprawled. He was either unconscious or dead; they could not tell which.
There were hideous welts and gashes and half-healed scars all over his
body. The gashes were caked with a viscid purplish substance.

With the coming of the sudden Martian dawn which flashed through a
narrow embrasure high in the wall, the jailer returned. His first act
was to thrust the needle of what appeared to be a form of hypodermic
syringe into the arm of the unconscious Space Man. Then he led his
Earthian captives out into the open.

Neither Jan nor Austin were surprised when they saw the _Selba_
squatting near the base of the spire. Several Space Men, directed by the
slave Koo Faya, moved about the ship, working the fueling pump.

Walking down the gangplank which led up to the entrance of the vessel
was Alkebar, and beside him, Hekalu himself. The latter sauntered
leisurely toward his captives, and the Chieftain moved off toward a
group of Space Men standing some distance away.




CHAPTER VII

Ankova's Story


The Martian made a brief nervous sign to the jailer. "Gently, Rega," he
said. The Space Man relaxed his painful grip on his prisoners. The noble
surveyed them smiling. Defiantly, half contemptuously, Shelby was
smiling back.

Finally, with a mocking casual air, Hekki spoke: "There is a very
ancient saying on your planet," he said, "to the effect that bad pennies
always return." The corners of his mouth twitched with sardonic
amusement. His manner grew more serious, yet still there was an
undercurrent of sarcasm: "Miss Darell and Mr. Shelby, I want to
compliment you on your remarkable cleverness and daring. Words cannot
express my admiration for you. You have every right to be proud of
yourselves."

Shelby nodded. "We are," he told him drily. "Is there anything more on
your mind?" He turned away with an expression of bored contemptuous
indifference.

"I have little to say except that we are about to continue our recently
interrupted journey tonight, Mr. Shelby," said the Martian.

He saw the Earthman and the girl casting interested glances at the disc
vehicles that surrounded them everywhere.

"You like my people?" Hekki inquired. "You find them entertaining?
Perhaps you have discovered things in their habits which you cannot
understand. Shall I give you explanations?" For the moment at least
there was a serious earnest ring in Hekalu's voice.

"Flag of truce, Jan. This should be interesting," Shelby said. His eyes
were full of eagerness as he turned back toward the Martian. "How do
they live out there?" he cried. "There isn't any air or water, and it's
almost as cold as it can get anywhere. Why, the thing is utterly
impossible according to the laws of common sense!"

Immediately all of Hekalu's lazy air of careless mockery was gone, and
the dynamic aura of the tireless experimenter and inventor that had
hidden beneath it showed out clear. His voice was husky with suppressed
excitement when he spoke:

"I too was dumbfounded when, some five Earth years ago, I first ran
across the Space Men out there. (He waved his hand toward the west away
from the sun.) But after I had studied them for a time, I knew that
there was really nothing very remarkable or impossible about the nature
of their living. It is actually quite similar to our own.

"Why do we need air? Simply because by the chemical combination of
oxygen with food we obtain the energy necessary to make our brains to
think, our limbs to move, and our hearts to beat. Energy is life. But
doesn't it occur to you that this vital thing might be obtained in some
other manner? The Space Men do. Their principal food is the radio-active
element, atomic number 109, as yet undiscovered on the planets. It is a
purplish liquid that is fairly abundant on a number of the planetoids.
Daily, like radium, it gives off vast quantities of energy; and when in
the systems of the Space Men it supplies them with power more
efficiently than food and oxygen ever could do for us.

"Why can't we survive the intense cold of space? The answer is a simple
one. The protoplasm of all forms of living things that we know of,
including the Space Men themselves, is a colloidal jelly the principal
portion of which is, and must be, a liquid. Cells must be bathed and
nourished, and impurities washed away. Without liquids there seems to be
no likelihood that there would be any life, unless in some manner a gas
could perform this fluid function. Solids would remain forever dead and
motionless.

"If anything happens to chill even slightly the protoplasm of any of the
higher forms of planetary life, the body fluid becomes sluggish and
death may result. No mammals or birds that we know of can live actively
with their body temperatures at all approaching the freezing point of
water. However, in the polar seas of both planets there are creatures
whose systems function quite normally with their blood temperatures just
above this point. But beyond this deadline, zero degrees Centigrade, or
a little lower or higher, depending on the actual congealing point of
the water in their bodies, even they cannot go, for there, the cold
limit of Terrestro-Martian life has been reached.

"Why couldn't these polar fish survive the cold of space? Simply because
the protoplasm of their tissues, based on water, would instantly become
solid, and in solids as I have said, there can be no real life except
perhaps in the form of suspended animation.

"The Space Men face no such danger, for first, their bodies are
protected by this heat-resisting outer covering; and second, the liquid
in their veins freezes only at absolute zero, and since it is
radio-active--producing heat from within itself--it cannot get that cold
even in the void. And that, friends, is the whole stupendous, simple
explanation."

"And how do the Space Men's vehicles move?" asked Jan.

Hekki shook his head. "Except that a strange propulsive ray is involved,
I know very little about it. I have not yet discovered how the Space Men
manage to produce the ray. The works of Nature ever surpass the works of
man.

"And that is all I have time for now, my friends. Breakfast is ready
aboard ship. Enjoy my hospitality to the fullest!" Hekki's mask of
smiling sardonic cruelty had dropped again. He waved something to Sega.

       *       *       *       *       *

Janice, sensing that she was about to be separated from her lover, threw
herself into his arms. The series of things she had gone through in the
past twenty-four hours had frayed her nerves almost to the breaking
point.

"Don't let them take me away from you, Austin. Don't let them! Oh,
Hekki, please!"

Hekalu's face reddened, and then Sega tore the two apart. Shelby
struggled but it was useless. Sega's huge muscles were quite equal to
the task of mastering a dozen of the best fighting men of Earth.

He dragged his captives aboard the _Selba_, and guided by the
inscrutable Koo Faya, locked them in chambers from which escape would
now be definitely impossible. Jan was thrust into the room she had
occupied before, but Shelby was put into a chamber somewhat larger than
his original prison.

An almost ungovernable fury had taken possession of the young Earthman.
If for only a moment he could get his hand on the smooth Hekalu! His
fingers clutched and unclutched spasmodically as he hurriedly paced the
room. When presently, he found himself hammering on the walls with the
frenzy of a trapped gorilla, a realization of where he was headed came
to him. "Stop where you are, you fool!" he muttered to himself.

He went to the table where an appetizing breakfast was set out. He ate a
little and then waited a while. He wanted to make sure that the food was
not drugged. Half an hour passed and he felt no ill effects. He ate the
rest of his breakfast. Then he made several attempts to signal Jan by
tapping on the walls, but he was quite sure that to get a message to her
in this way was now out of the question.

For a long time he gazed out into the sunlit valley floor from his
window. Preparations of some kind were under way. It looked as though
the entire population, which must have numbered close to fifteen hundred
Space Men all told, was getting ready to move away _en masse_. Scores of
the strange black people were hurrying about, lugging loads of weapons
and hundreds of large cylindrical objects into four immense box-like
things of dull metal. Several vehicles, resembling machines of the Space
Men, but many times larger, were clustered together in a group.

It must have been several hours after Shelby had been taken into the
space ship that two of Alkebar's people came to his room, carrying
between them the unconscious form of the Space Man who had been Jan's
and his fellow prisoner during the night of their arrival on Mars. They
threw the limp giant down carelessly on one of the bunks, and without a
glance at him or the Earthman, they stamped out.

Shelby would have liked to examine his cell mate more closely, but owing
to the chain which had again been fastened to his ankle, it was
impossible to get nearer to him than four yards. Who was this creature?
His gorgeously bejeweled harness and his huge size seemed to indicate
that he had been a leader of some kind. Shelby had noticed that all
Space Men who had a right to command, were somewhat larger than their
fellows.

All through the long Martian day Shelby paced the length of his tether,
pausing occasionally to look out of the window and to think. By
nightfall he was in a state bordering upon complete dejection. Not that
he was weak; Shelby could face trying situations shoulder to shoulder
with the stubbornest and cleverest men that Earth or Mars could produce.
But he was human and had his limitations. Recapture after a glowing
promise of freedom and safety for his people, his love, and himself had
almost crushed him.

Only half interestedly he wondered when Hekalu Selba would strike. He
knew that it would be very soon. In vain he tried to tell himself that
he had no real proof of the Martian's power, but always a vision of
those black horrors swooping down like living thunderbolts upon Taboor
or New York or Chicago made him realize how futile would be any
resistance that the planets could offer.

Even if there were but fifteen hundred Space Men, and Shelby was certain
as actual knowledge that there were many more, and even if they must
fight with their bare hands, still they would be a formidable menace.
Within an hour's time they could strike in a dozen different places on
the surface of a planet. Shelby did not know that already there were
forces of Fate in action which neither he nor Hekalu Selba himself had
been able to foresee--forces however, which boded no good for the
worlds.

Koo Faya brought the Earthman his noonday and evening meal. With each
came a note from Hekalu, both exactly alike: "Remember the Atomic Ray."
Doubtless the Martian sought by endless repetition of this message to
undermine his captive's nerves to a point where he would divulge the
secret.

At dusk there was the sound of activity aboard the _Selba_--muffled
shouts and the drone of generators being tuned up. Then the slow rocking
and swaying of the vessel which told that her levitator plates were in
action, raising her off the ground, through the atmosphere and out into
the void.

Shelby looked out of the window, saw that the stars were growing
brighter and the sky blacker. A searchlight was playing from somewhere
on the ship, for in the shadow of the planet it was very dark. The beams
swung back and forth stabbing through the swarms of Space Men who flew
in a cluster about the _Selba_. The lights lingered for several instants
on the forms of four great metal cubes that were being lifted up through
the gaseous envelope of Mars by a number of the larger discs the
Earthman had seen resting beside them in the valley that day.

Shelby threw himself upon his bunk. He gave one quick glance at the blob
of darkness on the other bunk at the farther end of the room, wondered
vaguely who or what the creature could be, and then, mentally and
physically exhausted, went quickly to sleep.

       *       *       *       *       *

When he awoke Shelby spent many minutes staring at his fellow prisoner.
There were indications that his consciousness was returning for he
stirred frequently. Presently he who had been the Earthman's and the
mysterious one's jailer in the hut the night before, came, bearing a
bowl filled with a purplish radio-active liquid which served the Space
Men as food. He also carried a hypodermic syringe and a small glass
container partially filled with a clear fluid.

These last two articles he placed upon the table, while he carried the
bowl over to his charge. He shook the lacerated and bejeweled Space Man
roughly and when he had aroused him to a sluggish half-consciousness,
held the bowl of liquid food to his lips. Mechanically the prisoner
drank.

Shelby looked at the tiny vial on the table and then at the back of the
jailer. Close beside the vial stood a glass partially filled with water.
The Earthman had drawn a drink from the tap shortly before going to
bed, and had left the tumbler standing there.

The idea that had now entered his head had no real purpose. He
recognized it as no more than a practical joke, plain and simple; but
the idea was clamoring for attention. He would pour out the drug, which
was almost certainly meant to keep the giant captive senseless, and
replace it with harmless water. The jailer would not see for he was very
busy. A little noise, the rattling of the chain or the tinkling of the
glass as it was set down, would not matter, for though the Space Men may
have possessed a very delicate touch sense capable of detecting faint
vibrations in solid objects about them, Shelby knew by now that they had
no real organs of hearing.

And so, quickly the deed was done, and quickly he returned to his bed
feigning sleep.

It was a long time after the jailer had departed before Shelby's trick
bore fruit. The huge prisoner rose to a sitting posture and looked
about, a trifle dazedly at first. He surveyed his wounds, felt over
himself tentatively, and then glanced at Shelby. The Earthman saw that
the fogginess was clearing from his big eyes. There was a questioning
expression in them.

Shelby thought that there was a slight chance that the colossus might be
able to read his lips even though he could not hear. "Who are you?" he
questioned in Pagari.

Apparently the creature understood, for immediately he turned, and with
his forefinger slowly traced out on the wall behind him in the planetary
symbols: "Friend of enemies of Black Emperor and of Man from Fourth
World."

Shelby was taken aback by the Space Man's startling knowledge of things
of which he should know nothing. "That makes me your friend," he wrote,
smiling.

The giant nodded, and for almost a minute stared fixedly at the
Earthman. There was a strange appeal in his eyes. Finally he turned, and
laboriously he traced a quaintly worded message on the wall: "Think hard
to know what I go say," he wrote.

Shelby had heard a good deal about telepathy and thought transference,
depending on etheric vibrations of some kind, supposedly originating in
the mind of one individual, and capable of being detected and
interpreted by the mind of another. Several savants of Earth and Mars
claimed to be adept with it, but owing to the fact that to master the
art required a long period of intensive practice, it had not come into
general use.

Could it be that this savage of the void was claiming knowledge of it?
Sensing the meaning back of the odd words, the Earthman bent every fibre
of his will to the task of concentrating on the idea of communication.
He gazed fixedly at the eyes of the black mystic, and presently felt a
slight tingling about his temples, and then, within his brain it seemed
that a tiny voice speaking with a queer wording and a peculiar accent,
came to life. It was odd to look at that blank impassive face and hear
those words!

"I know you to be friend of mine," the voice said. "I read it in brains.
You free me from sleep. But where are we? What Fourth World Man do? What
for you here?"

Briefly Shelby outlined the events of the past few days, starting with
his meeting with Hekalu. However, he was careful not to make any mention
of the Atomic Ray. Then, partially through curiosity, and partially in
the hope that the information might be helpful, he mentally asked his
companion to tell him more about the Space Men's relations with the
Martian.

"Everything maybe all right," said the giant. "Maybe everybody happy at
last. Who know? But I tell you. We Star People--my people Star People.
For a long time, oh, for very long time, we wander out there in empty
places. One million year, two million year, who know? We free. Maybe
find little planet--we camp there--soon go away. We fight, we hunt. Oh,
there very many of us! Like sand in sky!

"One day some of us find your sun. We land on little world. Stay long.
Man from Fourth World come in ship. We frightened, but he make friends.
Bring us gifts. We give jewels and things we make. He learn our sign
language--talk with us--tell about his world. Go away but soon come
back. Bring more gifts--want more jewels and things. He take some of us
with him to empty desert where nobody live. Tell us to bring jewels
there to trade, but always be careful no one see!

"He make friends with Black Emperor. They plan. Gather big army. But
many not like Black Emperor and Fourth World Man. My father, big noble,
not like them; I not like them. They never good to us--make our people
work hard, and take away our animals.

"Civil war soon--my father lead many little tribes, but Black Emperor
and Man from Fourth World win. Have many strange weapons. Make peace for
big conquest war, and I am hostage on Fourth Planet.

"Mars man good to me at first. I learn languages--both Pagari and Earth
language. I learn to throw thoughts. My father learned from Mars slave.
Then bad things happen. Fourth World Man not like me to throw thoughts
to my father so far away. He give me sleep drug. When my father lead
revolt again, Mars Man torture me. Now, as you say, he take me back to
place where army is, on two little worlds."

A gleam of hope came into Austin Shelby's eyes, but it passed quickly.
His lips curled bitterly. It was not well to base one's hope on the
assertion of an unknown savage that he could hurl his thoughts across
millions of miles of space.

"By what name are you known, Man of the Void?" he asked.

The voice in his brain spoke again: "Mars Man call me Ankova." Here the
giant made a darting gesture with his hand. "Mean same as so in my sign
language--Darting Meteor."

"I see. Can you communicate with your father now, Ankova?--get help?"

The Space Man nodded. "My brain clear now," he said. "Sleep drug not
bother me any more. I talk right away."




CHAPTER VIII

The Battle in Space


He lay back on the bunk and for several minutes stared fixedly up at
nothing. The performance was reminiscent of the seance of an ancient
spirit meeting. He sat up, and again his big eyes fastened themselves
upon Shelby, and the uncanny voice spoke in the Earthman's brain:

"I get father. He on scouting expedition--very close. He bring five
thousand men to rescue you and me. They get here maybe three, four
hours. My father--his army same weapons as Black Emperor's. Flash,
flash--all gone--everything gone."

There was the sound of movement beyond the door. Shelby waved his hand
in a quick downward gesture which Ankova interpreted correctly. He
slumped limply upon the bedding in a very excellent counterfeit of
unconsciousness. And then Hekalu Selba entered. His face was white as
chalk, and yet there was nothing in it that hinted even of a trace of
fear--only icy calm. Behind him was Sega.

"Mr. Shelby," the Martian said with slow cool deliberation, "think well.
Either you will reveal the secret of the Atomic Ray immediately or I
shall have you immersed in the juice of the flame flowers."

Austin Shelby met Hekalu's chilly stare with a taunting smile. He sensed
in the Martian's manner that his plans had met with some serious danger.

"Though I am your prisoner," he told him, "I believe that I can defy
you. In the first place I do not fear the tortures that you might
inflict upon me." Here he took a tiny glass capsule from his sleeve
pocket and placed it in his mouth. "I do not mean by that that I am
super-human, that I can endure any pain. But should the torture become
unbearable I would crunch the poison vial which I have carried since I
joined the Sekor fraternity back on Mars, between my teeth and bring
death. That, I am not afraid of. Besides, I could give you the formulas
for almost any number of unknown compounds, any one of which might be
the missing crystal for all you might know. It would be several hours
before you would discover that I had not given you the right one."

The Martian's face grew even whiter and harder at these words. Thoughts
and plans flashed through his mind. Should he tell the Earthman what had
happened--that Alkebar, the Black Emperor, had secretly slipped through
the air lock into space?--that he was certainly intent upon conquering
the planets alone? It would not be hard to convince the Earthman that
the savage Alkebar would be an infinitely more terrible and ruthless
master than any human being ever could be. Perhaps he could win Shelby
to his side for as long as he needed him. He was wavering, and then,
with the sudden rush of inspiration a better idea came.

"I have told you many times that you are clever, my friend," he said
with some slight show of his old careless air. "Again I compliment you.
But listen carefully: suppose I took the girl--put her in the gentle
embrace of the juice of the flame flowers--told you to produce a formula
that would work before I released her?"

The effect on the Earthman was electrical, but it was not quite what
Hekalu Selba had expected. The blood red haze of murder rushed before
Austin Shelby's eyes, and with movements more suggestive of a wounded
panther than a human being he leaped from the bunk and tore for the
Martian with flailing fists. He gave no thought to the idea that what
Hekki had said might be only a histrionic gesture.

"Oh, God!" he shrieked raspingly, "You Devil! You unutterable stinking,
rotten fiend!" But it was a wild useless move. Hekalu was lightening
quick and sure with the pistol. He inflicted death, or merely produced a
disabling wound almost at will. And so it was that Shelby sprawled
senseless on the floor with a nasty though not very dangerous bullet
wound across the side of his head.

Sega and the Martian were bending over him, and then again the
unexpected happened. An ebony form whose great hands and incredible
muscles seemed quite equal to the task of tearing a gorilla limb from
limb, arose from the other bunk and towered over the Prince of Selba and
his Space Man companion.

The former, hearing a slight sound, turned, and realizing his peril
fired two shots at the mountainous monster. Then he darted agilely for
the door. He gave one quick backward look--saw the hand of Ankova
descending with trip-hammer force upon the skull of Sega, and then
slammed the stout portal behind him.

Sega had been unfortunate, but now all his troubles were over for his
neck was broken. Ankova transferred to his own belt the weapons of the
corpse--his heavy pistol--his case of atomic grenades--his bejeweled war
club. Then he devoted his attention to Shelby.

Gently he carried him to the bunk and made awkward attempts to bandage
his head with strips torn from the bedding. Satisfied at last with the
crude but effective results of his efforts, he strode to the window.

For a long time he stood there, staring. But he saw nothing that
interested him. The ether all about was crowded with Space Men coursing
with the _Selba_. Except for a gentle swaying shifting movement they
seemed to hang perfectly motionless in the void, and yet their speed was
many miles a second.

The fantastic cavalcade aroused no wonder in the mind of Ankova, for to
him they were as prosaic and commonplace as the grass under the feet of
any Earthian. He cocked his head on one side as though listening.
Perhaps at that moment something was coming to him from across the
endless regions of the etheric desert--something which only his
incredibly refined telepathic sense could detect.

       *       *       *       *       *

His unshod feet sensed the faint vibration in the metal floor. Someone
was approaching the room. First taking the precaution of tearing
Shelby's chain from the wall, he turned and waited before the door with
ready war club. He did not wait long for it banged open almost
immediately. A Space Man appeared. Behind him were others.

Ankova did not ask their mission for he saw that they wore the insignia
that meant loyalty to the man from the Fourth World. Instead he leaped
in to close quarters. His whirring war club, toothed with sharp spikes,
ripped and tore at the head and shoulders of the unfortunate warrior.
Falteringly, the creature tried to parry the blows with his own weapon;
but it was useless. Before he was able to attain his fighting stride he
was down, the purple radio-active liquid that flowed in his veins in
lieu of blood, dyeing the threshold. His lips curled in a grimace of
agony, but he made no sound--mute he had lived and he died in the same
manner.

Ankova stepped over the prostrate form and engaged the one who had stood
behind him. The second Space Man fared little better. He made but a
brief and unsuccessful defense and then he too went down. And so Ankova,
who before his capture had won fame among the tribes of the Star People
as one of the mightiest fighters that their race had ever produced,
battled on in the narrow passage until the seven Space Men whom Hekalu
had sent to put him and Austin Shelby under restraint were either dying
or dead.

The victor glanced down the corridor--saw at the farther end a small
portion of the control room's interior. Koo Faya, the Martian, was
there, working with demoniac haste over switches and dials.

Ankova drew his pistol, started to aim at the slave, and then thought
better of it. There was a tenseness within the hull of the
_Selba_--something which made a deep impression on Ankova's keen
intuition. His muscles tautened and a tingling sensation rippled over
his ebony hide. The vibrations of the rocket motors were more noticeable
than usual. Evidently the ship was tearing along at the greatest speed
it could attain. And it swayed unnaturally.

Ankova knew the layout of the _Selba_ well, for he had traveled in it
often. And now he sensed quite clearly what was happening. He hurried to
a supply room and selected a space armor from a rack. His Earthman
friend might need it. Then he dashed back to the room In which he and
Shelby had been imprisoned.

A glance out of the window confirmed his suspicions as to what was going
on. The force of Space Men which was acting as an escort for the _Selba_
had arranged itself in a sort of spherical protecting network around the
craft. Another and superior force was attempting savagely to pierce this
formation. The foes of Hekalu's henchmen would draw themselves into
cone-shaped groups and rush the defenders, and the latter would swarm
over the cones like angry and determined hornets. A hot fight was in
progress out there. The ether was lit with green flashes of light, and
fragments of the bodies of Space Men and their vehicles already strewed
the void. In this running battle the _Selba_ was not idle. Her torpedoes
were exploding among the attackers with blinding glares of light.

Ankova wondered who the would-be destroyers of the _Selba_ were. Clearly
they were not the forces of his father, for they had not yet had time to
arrive. Some stray tribe perhaps. He wished that he might see their
insignia, but owing to their distance from the ship and their eccentric
movements, this was impossible. He did not know that they were the
minions of Alkebar who had turned enemy to Hekalu but a few hours
before.

The Space Man realized that for the time being he was safe enough, but
he took the precaution of planning for escape from the ship should it
become necessary. He eyed the heavily glazed porthole. A few deft blows
with his war club would shatter that. Beyond, there were a few discs
without Space Men circling about. With luck it would be possible to
capture one. First he barricaded the door with metal bars torn from the
bunks, and then put the space armor on the still senseless Earthman.
Then there was nothing to do but wait.

The battle was going against the defenders. Shattering concussions of
atomic projectiles banging against the _Selba's_ hull made the hurtling
vessel pitch and roll frightfully. The thunder of shells waxed and
waned.

It must have been over two hours later that a huge torpedo set in motion
by the forces of the Black Emperor, struck the ship. The explosion
rolled her completely over, and tore a jagged though not disabling hole
in her side. The air puffed out from the control room compartment, but
the men who labored so feverishly there, were clad in heavy space armor,
and aside from being badly bruised they were unhurt.

The torpedo was the last gesture of the Alkebarians. Ankova saw a cloud
of luminous specks approaching from the void at terrific velocity. They
grew rapidly brighter. A blue and an orange star shot up from their
midst--the identification signal of Telaba, Ankova's father. That signal
was quite enough for the Black Emperor's men. Without waiting to argue
they turned and fled. So quickly did they go that Telaba's warriors were
unable to identify them.

       *       *       *       *       *

The rebel tribesmen were checking their speed now, preparing to fight.
But still they came on apparently like hurtling comets. They swept the
remnants of Hekalu Selba's loyalists before them in one terrific charge,
and then they were swarming over the _Selba_ and through the rent in her
side. There was a brief flurry of pistol shots from the crew before they
were captured and bound.

In a prison compartment aft, Austin Shelby had regained his senses
sufficiently to have a vague idea of what was going on around him.
Ankova was supporting him, and he was staggering toward the door. His
mind took up a train of thought from where it had left off. He was
calling for Jan and cursing Hekalu. Cased as his head was, in an oxygen
helmet, his shrieking voice was magnified a dozen times, and assumed a
weird vaulted quality that startled him back to sensibility.

Ankova read his thoughts, and by telepathy replied to him: "Your lady? I
forget. But we find her. She all right--sure!"

The Space Man removed the barricade and opened the door. The sudden
outrush of air from the room almost toppled Shelby from his feet. And
then the Earthman heard a familiar voice in the head-phones of the radio
with which his helmet was equipped: "I'm in X7, Austin. Let me out if
you can."

"Janice!" he cried, and with new vigor hurried to the door of the room
she had mentioned.

Ankova smashed the lock with his war club and the portal flew open. Jan
was standing there encased in space armor. She was trying hard to smile.

"You're safe, darling!" Shelby cried, "And I thought that that fiend was
going to hurt you!"

"My luck," she said. "Koo Faya was thoughtful enough to bring this space
armor, otherwise, I wouldn't have been fit to look at any more." She
pointed to a shattered window. "And you--heaven's how you can yell--and
swear! I am ashamed of you!"

Her eyes widened when she looked at Ankova, but Shelby reassured her.
"This is Ankova, and he is our friend--big shot, too," he said. "And
Jan, I guess we're free now--really free."

Ugly Space Men, some of them gashed and wounded, crowded about as though
bent on destroying the two feeble Earthians. But with imperious gestures
Ankova waved them back. He conversed by signs with these warriors of his
father, and then took Janice Darell and Austin each by the arm.

"Big surprise," he told them. "Come."

He led them to the control room. And there, in the grip of a black
colossus was Hekalu Selba--captive. The Martian nodded perfunctorily to
the girl and then turned his level gaze toward the man. His face showed
no hint of anger, and it seemed that a shadow of a smile twinkled about
his lips.

"Here we have a contrast, Mr. Shelby," he said quietly, "triumph and
disaster staring at each other!"

Shelby told him that he should be wreaking vengeance on the noble for
the numerous wrongs he had done him, but the calm unflinching attitude
of the Prince of Selba made him almost like the captive.

Shelby waved the Martian's captors back and he stood free. "There is no
contrast now, Akar Hekalu, for an outsider could not tell which was
which!"

As Hekki's jailer led him away, Shelby, assisted by Janice Darell,
busied himself with the ship's controls.

And so the battered _Selba_ escorted by five thousand Space Men set out
for a certain minor planet where were amassed the forces of Telaba,
insubordinate vassal of the Black Emperor. And on another planet was
Alkebar, the Black Emperor himself, ready to hurl his shock troops, a
horde five million strong, at the planets.




CHAPTER IX

The Revolt of Alkebar


The light of a shrunken sun shone down coldly and ineffectually upon a
jagged and distorted landscape. Along the horizon, which was strangely
abrupt, twisted gray hills loomed up with harsh clearness against a
black starlit sky. There was no atmosphere to soften their lines, nor
to dull the needle-like points of deepest sable that were their shadows.

In the foreground, which was a fairly level plain, were hundreds of
hemispherical shelters hastily built from loose fragments of rock. A
vast horde of Space Men hemmed them in. The sunlight glistened on the
ebony hides of the warriors and on their polished accouterments and
weapons. Some of these rebels of the void were greedily drinking the
purple radio-active liquid which meant life and strength to them, and
attendants were hurrying about carrying large canisters of the food to
each unit of Telaba's army. Most of the men crouched expectantly beside
their discs, waiting.

In a small metal building, which the Man from the Fourth World had
recently had constructed for his own use, four people were gathered. Two
were Space Men, and two belonged to the green planet called Earth. One
of the Space Men was talking, not with his mouth for he had no vocal
cords, but by means of fine mental vibrations which caused a feeble
high-pitched voice to speak within the minds of the Earthians.

"I owe you great debt of gratitude, Mr. Shelbee--you help to save my son
from Alkebar and Fourth World Man. Telaba do not forget this. I do what
I can. But that is little. Black Emperor start to smash Earth and Mars
soon. Perhaps right now. Perhaps in hour. Who know? Spy send signal any
time now. We outnumbered ten to one. Alkebar crush us, wipe us out like
that!" He slapped his palms sharply together. "But we do what we can,
Earthman."

Shelby took Telaba's cold hand for a brief hearty handshake. "Thanks,
Telaba," he said simply. "Jan and I certainly appreciate what you are
going to do for us and our people, and I know that if we are successful,
the worlds shall be mighty grateful too. They have ways of showing their
gratitude. But don't be so sure that we are going to fail. We have the
_Selba_, you know, and a new weapon that has never before been used.

"Hekalu was good enough to construct an immense projector for us. Except
for the resoldering of a few wires, and the insertion of a tiny but
important crystal which I happen to be carrying with me, it was complete
and ready for operation.

"The ship is fueled and ready for action at any moment. When the word
comes and we set out, annoy the forces of Alkebar, but do not engage or
mix with them any more than you have to. I'll be somewhere around, ready
and glad to spray them."

"What do you mean, 'I'?" Jan put in. "It's 'we,' because I am going
along!"

Shelby knew that the undertaking he had in mind was but an ace from
certain death; but he did not argue with the girl. Her cool wit and
nerve would be very helpful, and besides there was little choice, for
death was grimly in pursuit of all of them.

"Right you are, soldier," he said laughingly. "My mistake!"

A red light bulb flashed on the wall, and then, without waiting for
permission, a Space Man rushed into the room, his arms waving wildly,
forming frantic signs of the Star People's deaf mute language. Bent in a
half crouch, his great arms flexed, Ankova translated for the benefit of
the Earthians:

"Fourth World Man escape--in _Selba_. We are betrayed--someone help him.
He out of sight already. Going to help Black Emperor. And now red star
burns in space--spy's warning--Alkebar forces start!"

Telaba rushed to a big lever and pulled it. Immediately a huge trip
hammer began to pound ponderously on a metal plate set in the ground
outside the building--sending vibrating pulsations out through the crust
of the planetoid--the alarm signal which would be sensed by everyone of
Telaba's men, telling them to be ready for instant action.

The four looked at one another. Each knew what this last move of the
Prince of Selba meant, but no one thought for a moment of giving up the
fight.

"It won't do any good to pursue the Martian," Shelby cried. "That ray
projector of his--he'd blast us out of existence. All we can do is try
to hinder Alkebar's invasion--seek to delay him. If I could only somehow
get through to Mars with the secret of the Atomic Ray! Telaba, haven't
you a ship capable of carrying a large enough oxygen supply to last me
for the journey?"

"Never mind!" Ankova cut in. "I go! Many times I been to Mars. Give me
plans. I go right away. I get them to fight."

Shelby drew from his sleeve pocket the black case containing information
concerning the Atomic Ray which he had recovered from Hekalu Selba at
the time of the Martian's capture. He opened it, and with his stylus
added a brief message to the mass of notes inside, and wrote down the
formula for a certain complex chemical compound. Then he handed the case
to the Space Man.

"Take it to Alman Mak in the Checkald of Taboor if you can, Ankova. Good
luck."

The son of the rebel chief hurried from the room with the missive in his
hand. Shelby knew in his heart that to attempt to get Earth and Mars
into action in time was a useless gesture, but he could not suppress a
thrill of admiration for this wild son of the void. There was hard
mettle in Ankova's makeup, hard and true. And most of them were like
that--most of Telaba's men anyway.

"You two come with me," Telaba was saying. "We fight together. Put on
space suits." He was tapping an instrument resembling a telegraph key.
In unison with his movements the heavy signaling hammer sounded out
orders and commands to his forces.

       *       *       *       *       *

When the Earthians had eased themselves into their heavy protecting
attire, Telaba led the way down a spiral stair and through an air lock,
out into the open. Here everything was grim silent activity. Group after
group of mounted Space Men poured skyward. Telaba's army was a mighty
thing; with luck it might have beat down the resistance of either one of
the two planets. But when compared with Alkebar's colossal horde, it
paled into pitiful insignificance.

Nearby, a space disc, which must have measured fully two hundred feet in
diameter, rested. The three mounted the light ladder which led to the
interior.

In the metal walls were mounted two heat-ray projectors of Martian
design, as well as several torpedo catapults and machine guns. Two Space
Men were inspecting them.

Telaba signaled to the driver who knelt with lever in hand. The great
disc trembled and the propelling force which no human being had yet
learned how to produce, sent it and its burden hurtling toward the
stars. The minions of the rebel chief circled and swirled about their
commander's ship in wild soundless salute.

Telaba was operating the signaling mechanism which fired lights of
various colors up through the roof of the armored coach, and in reply to
his flashing commands, his horde formed a monster cone which shot with
ever increasing speed through the void.

A sickening giddiness came over the two Earthians, for there were no
devices to produce artificial gravity here. It was the space nausea
which had made early interplanetary travel such a nightmare. The Star
People, born where gravity is almost unknown, were of course not
affected in the least.

Clinging to stanchions and hand grips to keep themselves from floating
free, Janice Darell and Austin crept about the floor examining the
weapons and scanning space ahead for signs of the enemy. They disliked
to admit to each other that they were very sick; but if they thought
that it was possible to forget the retching pains in their stomachs by
diligent devotion to other things, they were mistaken.

Their suffering continued until Jan remembered that the force of this
almost forgotten malady could be reduced by lessening the amount of
oxygen taken into the lungs. A few turns of the intake valves of their
helmets accomplished this, and they soon felt much better.

It was a long time before there were any indications of the near
presence of the enemy. Ahead, two asteroids glowed, a dull red. One was
quite close; the other farther away. It was Shelby, peering steadily
through his binoculars, who first discovered the glowing cloud, thin and
faint like the nebulous substance of the Milky Way, pouring up like
ghosts' hair from the rounded pate of the nearer asteroid. He knew that
it was made up of countless points of light, too small to be detected
individually. Not long afterward Telaba discovered a similar cloud
coming from the second of the minor planets.

The rebel chief's greatest advantage, if he had any at all, was that of
surprise. Because of its comparatively small size his force had probably
not yet been discovered by the enemy.

Coolly he flashed the order for long-range bombardment formation.
Instantly the army spread out, forming a thin rectangle whose broadest
surface was perpendicular to the line of firing between the opposing
hordes.

A second or two later the first rocket torpedoes of the rebels went,
spewing fire, toward their goal. In a steady swarm others followed them.
The missiles were not radio controlled and fitted with tiny television
apparatus as were a few of the torpedoes employed by the Interplanetary
Traffic Lane Patrol, but since the approximate range was known, it was
easy to set the time fuses so that the atomic charges would explode in
the midst of the densely-packed enemy.

Without asking anyone's permission, the Earthians had appropriated a
pair of catapults and were working them like demons. As fast as they
could cram the ten-pound rockets into the breeches of the tubes, the
projectiles streaked out in flashes of green flame toward the nearest of
the nebulous clouds.

Shelby was sweating furiously from the exertion, and the moisture
absorption apparatus of his space armor was putting in some tough
service.

Occasionally he glanced at Janice working beside him. Her face, visible
through the glazed front of her helmet, was white and set--almost hard.
And there was boundless determination in the firm curve of her little
rounded chin. He liked her attitude, but it was better to take it easy
until the real fighting began.

"Slow up a bit, soldier," he remarked into his transmitter. "Powder your
nose!"

Her face brightened as she turned toward him. "I wish I could powder my
nose," she said, pouting. "Only I can't reach it!"

"Too bad. These space suits rob a girl of so many of her exquisite
little tricks."

"Well," she put in, "I can still cover up my yawns with my hand if I
find this pastime too much of a bore." They both chuckled at this little
joke.

Janice took the last missile from the case she had been emptying and
rammed it home. She jerked the lanyard, and with a thudding jolt the
torpedo was on its way. Then she paused to scan the horde of Alkebar
through an observation port. "Hurrah," she cried, "we're scoring!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Without discontinuing his hurried feeding of his smoldering piece,
Shelby looked up. The cloud had grown considerably in the few moments of
action. It had cleared the asteroid now, and the other nebulous spot
that marked the position of the Black Emperor's second army, was coming
up to merge with it. In the midst of the first cloud, hundreds of minute
specks of light were flashing--the atomic torpedoes were exploding. The
sight reminded Shelby of what he had so often seen through the lens of a
spintharoscope.

Alkebar's army continued to increase rapidly in apparent size. It looked
like a monster amoeba. But now the amoeba was beginning to writhe,
to swell up and grow dimmer. It shot out long sinuous pseudopods that
seemed to grope angrily. Both Earthians sensed that the fight was about
to begin in earnest.

With renewed vigor they fell to the task of loading and discharging the
catapults; and close beside them the two Space Men who acted as gunners,
labored coolly and methodically over their weapons, but with even
greater efficiency, for their training had been long and thorough.

Telaba worked the levers of the signaling mechanism, and a brilliant
purple star visible to all his henchmen shot up over the back of his
beast. They saw it and read its meaning. Spread out to avoid enemy fire!
As one man they obeyed, but they were none too soon. With abrupt
suddenness the maelstrom of silent flashing death was upon them.

It was a pretty sight to the Earthians--those soundless globes of green
flame that glowed dazzling for an infinitesimal instant, on the rich
jewels and polished rifle barrels of the hordesmen coursing close by.
But they were not deceived.

A Space Man vanished, torn to tiny fragments that mixed with the cosmic
dust of the void. A huge disc, bearing a cylindrical battle car, was
hit, and a jagged hole torn in its side. It twisted crazily, turning
over and over. Austin and Jan felt the vibration of shell fragments
banging violently against their own vehicle.

The nearer nebulous cloud had ceased to be a cloud now. It had resolved
itself into a myriad swarm of dim specks which the Earthians knew were
Space Men. Plainly Alkebar's minions were charging rapidly, bent on
wiping Telaba's smaller force out of existence at one blow.

The bombardment doubled, tripled, quadrupled in intensity until it
seemed that all space had turned to fire. Before the withering blast the
army of the rebel chief was speedily being dissolved into drifting
wreckage.

An exploding torpedo ripped several yards of armor from one side of
Telaba's vehicle and reduced one of his black gunners to a mangled pulp
from which the purple fluid spurted.

The force of the concussion turned the great disc completely over.
Battered and blinded by the green glare, which exceeded even the sun of
the void in intensity the Earthians tumbled against their weapons.
Janice Darell started to scream but managed to check it--biting her lips
savagely.

An explosive rifle bullet struck the huge vehicle, and it wavered.

Shelby spoke to Telaba who was clinging firmly to a stanchion with one
hand and operating his signaling machine with the other. "Turn back,
chief," the Earthman advised. "Our only motive is to annoy them and
delay them. To continue this charge can mean nothing but destruction for
our entire force."

Telaba sensed the mental vibrations that went with Shelby's words. "To
turn back cannot do, Earthman," he said. And it seemed to the young
engineer that there was a vibrant note of sadness in his telepathic
voice. "Look! You see all guns and catapults point forward only. Not
swing to rear--same on all gun cars. If run, not possible to shoot at
chasing enemy. Then they get us. That Alkebar's idea so his men must
take offensive or die. He think that make them strong."

"But the riflemen are not so handicapped," Shelby persisted. "We can die
here if necessary, but someone must live to carry on. Order them back!"

The chieftain shook his bulbous head. "To try what you say--useless.
They not desert comrades or king. If I command, they disobey." There was
a finality in his words which neither of the Earthians tried to dispute.

So that was it! Well, there was no sense wasting time talking. Shelby
gripped a machine gun and sent a spray of explosive bullets ripping out
into the ether. Janice did likewise.

As they worked their weapons they spoke rapidly to each other. "You
understood what Telaba said? You know what that means?" Shelby asked.

"Yes. It's about the end of our tape, but that's nothing. We've been
fairly lucky. All we can do now is hope that Ankova wins through to Mars
in time, and fight like--like--"

"Hell!" Shelby's words slipped between clenched teeth, and Jan flashed
him a quick smile even as their tracer streams crossed in the midst of a
group of hurtling Alkebarians who had pressed too close together.

"Anyway, good luck!"

"And the very best of luck to you!"

The opposing forces were very close together now. The first of the
Alkebarians were plainly visible--their long guns flashing--their ebony
arms waving signals which probably passed for shouts of triumph among
their ranks.




CHAPTER X

The Coming of the Atomic Ray


Both armies had cut down their velocity enormously, but still they tore
along at breakneck speed. And they moved like true Cossacks of the void,
directing their machines by deft motions on the mysterious levers. Now
diving, now climbing, now swinging this way and that to avoid the
missiles of their opponents, they tore on. And death was everywhere.

No torpedoes were flying now, but machine guns and rifles were working
terrible havoc. And so the horde of Alkebar closed with the forces of
the rebel chieftain.

The machine which bore Telaba, directed by its skillful driver, dived
and swung and zigzagged like a mad thing; but still the bullets rattled
against the metal armor of the car. Its sides had been repeatedly
struck, yet owing to its tough shell, had not yet been disabled.

Everywhere about it, mounted horrors whirled in an inextricable tangle,
shooting and loading, and dying by the green flashes, their vitals
strewing the ether.

Telaba had deserted his post at the signaling machine, for further
orders were useless. For his rebels at least, it was every man for
himself. He too was operating a machine gun.

The stars spun dizzily about the Earthians, as the machine beneath them
careened in its insane fight. Every time a Space Man wearing a red
circle on his breast crossed their sights, a burst spat from their hot
weapons, frequently with good results.

A group of at least twenty Alkebarians sought to attack from the blind
spot at the rear. But the driver twisted levers with a quick jerk, and
the luckless riflemen found themselves facing four streams of steel.
Those that could, darted out of range and renewed the attack from a
different angle.

Frequently, throughout the battle, Shelby had wondered what had happened
to Hekalu Selba and the Atomic Ray. Why wasn't he on hand to assist his
ally, the Black Emperor? Oh, well, regardless of whether the Martian was
there or not the outcome would evidently be the same--only now it would
be more dragged out.

The Earthian was surprised therefore, when suddenly the efforts of the
enemy to exterminate them, which had been so intense in the brief
moments since they had closed, suddenly lessened. Alkebarians were
darting hastily toward the rear. Their actions did not suggest flight;
it seemed that they were going to meet a new and more terrible enemy.
The rebels could wait.

And the people of the rebel chief for the moment did not pursue--did not
even fire. For they too saw! To the rear, in the center of Alkebar's
horde, came the dazzling flares of explosions. So many and so close
together were they, that they looked like a titanic conflagration of
green flame. Against the light, the silhouettes of confused and
bewildered space riders careened, like frightened pollywogs. The
holocaust moved--swung. It was like a tapered column of fire veiled by a
faint bluish haze.

The Earthians, Telaba, and the two remaining Space Men, forgetful of
everything else, were staring in awed wonder at the phenomenon through
the forward observation bay. It was Shelby who found the first part of
the explanation.

"It's the Atomic Ray!" he almost shrieked. "Freeing the atomic energy in
the materials that make up the bodies of Alkebar's men--literally
causing their flesh and bones to explode! But how--what the devil--!"

"Look!" cried Jan. She pointed far up over their heads to where the cone
of faintly bluish light swung, free from the milling horde. Up and up to
its apex, and there hung what appeared to be a tiny cocoon of burnished
silver.

The girl peered through her binoculars for a long moment. "I see the
name. It is the _Selba_," she said. "Hekalu has made a mistake--he's
attacking the wrong force! Or--or some ally of ours has gained control
of the ship!" she hazarded.

"No time to make guess now," said Telaba. "To fight, much better." He
had returned to the signaling mechanism, and was working it with cool
efficiency, rallying his battered forces.

Like tigers they fell upon the Alkebarians, shattering them out of
existence with a steady storm of rifle bullets. They met with only a
weak resistance for the foe seemed to realize that the fates had played
them false. The blue ray had been their promise, and now, like the sword
of their ancient god of destruction, it was weaving calmly this way and
that, snuffing them into nothingness. The Black Emperor's horde was
dissolving, scattering.

Battalions of terrified Space Men poured past the rebel chieftain's car,
shooting only hurried and ineffective volleys at their enemies, who
pressed fiercely upon them. And never did Jan and Shelby miss a chance
to spray them with searing bursts of machine-gun fire.

There was a lull. The Earthians took the opportunity to look up at the
angel of death that was the _Selba_, far above. Most of Alkebar's huge
army had already perished, or had dispersed in flight into the desert of
space from which it had been recruited. But that the space ship would
presently be engaged in a serious fight was evident.

       *       *       *       *       *

A determined force which must have numbered a hundred thousand, was
hurtling up at it, surrounding the craft with a halo of bursting
torpedoes. At the head of the body of Space Men was a huge beast bearing
on its back a car similar to Telaba's. Veri-colored signal stars spurted
from it. Alkebar himself must be in it directing operations!

Coolly the guiding hand aboard the _Selba_ was swinging his dreadful
weapon this way and that, annihilating the attackers as one might
annihilate a swarm of mosquitoes with a blowtorch. Half of them had
already been reduced to those basic, intangible vibrations which
constitute all substance. It was terrible, it was glorious; but what
could it all mean? Hekalu's ship!

The still formidable remnants of the vengeance squadron was seeking to
close in--to grapple with the vessel. The _Selba_ was trying to dart out
of their way, but the speed of the Space Men, a gift of Nature, was
greater than that of this fastest ship designed by man. Grimly, in the
face of almost certain death, they kept on. A score or so succeeded in
landing on the curving hull, and, like leeches they clung to it. The
Atomic Ray arched angrily, cutting a deep swath through those who still
sought a hold.

And then the gleaming form of the _Selba_ was completely hidden by the
swarm of enraged horrors that poured over it. The Atomic Ray was snuffed
out. The beholders saw the air lock being pried open, and the Space Men
crowding into the interior of the craft. For a second the _Selba_
wobbled crazily, and then her rocket motors ceased to flame.

"What are we waiting for? We have friends up there!" Jan cried.

Telaba flashed his orders, and the entire cavalcade charged toward the
vessel, their guns spewing flame.

It was only a matter of a minute or so before that hurtling torrent of
rebels had swept the Alkebarians from their prey. Those of the Black
Emperor's men who had forced their way into the ship managed to hold the
entrance for a short time, but under the urgings of their intrepid
chief, the zealous rebels shot and hewed their enemies down as though
they had been paper marionettes. The way was clear.

Telaba waved an order to his driver, and the space beast drew up
alongside the _Selba_. Expectantly eager, the Earthians clambered
aboard, followed by the chief.

The ship was a shambles. Its corridors were littered with bodies of
Space Men who wore on their breasts the red circle which signified
loyalty to the Black Emperor. Telaba's followers had done well.

The three made their way to the control room. Intuitively they had
sensed what they would find there, and so, they were not surprised at
what they saw--wreckage and the carcasses of Alkebar's warriors. The
Martian had put up a stiff fight.

Shelby bent over the armored form of Akar Hekalu Selba which was
sprawling on the floor, beside the pilot seat. A gaping hole in the
tough metal plating under his right arm, and a thin trickle of blood,
told clearly what had happened. "They got him," the Earthman muttered.
"But why?"

Jan's eyes had wandered to the narrow desk before the pilot seat. There
were the instruments and devices by means of which the ship was
controlled, and there was the lever which had moved the ray projector in
its mounting just beneath the nose of the craft. A calculating pad and a
stylus were lying on the desk.

Something was written on the pad--a message. She called to Shelby, and
together they read the brief, hastily scrawled note. It was in English:

"To Janice Darell and Austin Shelby, Greeting. Alkebar is breaking into
the ship, and Telaba is coming. You will be with him, I know. From among
my enemies I have chosen my friends. A man must have friends, and
traitors do not serve. Forgive me for stealing your glory, Mr. Shelby. I
shall be grateful. _Sidi Yadi_, Hekalu Selba, Akar."

Shelby looked at Jan and then at Telaba who was standing close beside
them. "So that's it," he said slowly. "Nobody is totally bad."

"Not even Hekki," Jan put in. A hint of a wistful smile flickered about
her lips. "I guess it's the end now," she went on. "A glorious
adventure. Back to Earth!" Her voice had taken on a dreamy exultant
quality.

"The end, Jan?" Austin asked. "Haven't you forgotten something?"

She looked puzzled, and then she laughed a brief gay little laugh which
made roguish dimples twinkle in her cheeks. Even her fantastic attire
could not hide her beauty. "You ridiculous old dumb-bell! Of course it
isn't the end--just the beginning--with you!"

It was a considerable time before Shelby was able to repair the _Selba_
sufficiently so that she could get underway for Mars but the task was
finished at last. Escorted by the rebel chief's fierce hordesmen, they
set out for the Red Planet.

Somehow, snatches of the ancient Bedouin song tinkled in Shelby's mind.
He had read old books. "Across the desert I come to thee, On a stallion
shod with fire...."

That did not quite fit the situation, for Jan was with him. But his
steed, the _Selba_, was truly shod with fire. The rocket nozzles--and
damaged though she was, she behaved like a thoroughbred. And out there
in the void beside the ship--what were those shapes?--bizarre,
impossible, yet real--real.

       *       *       *       *       *


In docks scattered over Earth and Mars, battleships of space and their
crews wait expectantly for an alarm that may never come. Telescopes comb
the sky. Out there the Star People, new arrivals in the solar system,
are shifting, moving about restlessly. But the planets feel secure.
Their fleets could cope with the Space Men, were they a hundred times
more numerous. And once in a while, on the desolate Sahara, or Mohave or
Taraal, shadows come, settling down like flecks of darkness from the
midnight heaven. They are Telaba's and Ankova's people. For a while--a
day perhaps--they stay, bartering their exotic treasures for human
wares. Then silently, mysteriously, they are gone, into the night....

THE END





End of Project Gutenberg's The Revolt of the Star Men, by Raymond Gallun

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE REVOLT OF THE STAR MEN ***

***** This file should be named 41027.txt or 41027.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/1/0/2/41027/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
