The Project Gutenberg EBook of Gods of the North, by Robert E. Howard

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Gods of the North

Author: Robert E. Howard

Release Date: May 8, 2013 [EBook #42664]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GODS OF THE NORTH ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                           GODS OF THE NORTH

                          By ROBERT E. HOWARD


    [Transcriber's Note: Originally published in March 1934 in "The
    Fantasy Fan". This etext was prepared from the reprint in Fantastic
    Universe December 1956. Extensive research did not uncover any
    evidence that the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]

     Publisher's Note: _The publication of this strange story by Robert
     E. Howard, author of the Conan stories, so much a part of the
     Living Library of Fantasy, represents a departure for this
     magazine. Without abandoning our policy of bringing you, month
     after month, the best in NEW Science Fiction and Fantasy, we will,
     from time to time, publish material such as this, hitherto known to
     only a few students of the field! GODS OF THE NORTH was published
     in 1934, in Charles D. Hornig's THE FANTASY FAN, which had a
     circulation of under a hundred! We thank Sam Moskowitz, Editor and
     SF historian, who showed us this story._

       *       *       *       *       *


     She drew away from him, dwindling in the witch-fire of the skies,
     until she was a figure no bigger than a child.


The clangor of the swords had died away, the shouting of the slaughter
was hushed; silence lay on the red-stained snow. The pale bleak sun that
glittered so blindingly from the ice-fields and the snow-covered plains
struck sheens of silver from rent corselet and broken blade, where the
dead lay in heaps. The nerveless hand yet gripped the broken hilt:
helmeted heads, back-drawn in the death throes, tilted red beards and
golden beards grimly upward, as if in last invocation to Ymir the
frost-giant.

Across the red drifts and mail-clad forms, two figures approached one
another. In that utter desolation only they moved. The frosty sky was
over them, the white illimitable plain around them, the dead men at
their feet. Slowly through the corpses they came, as ghosts might come
to a tryst through the shambles of a world.

Their shields were gone, their corselets dinted. Blood smeared their
mail; their swords were red. Their horned helmets showed the marks of
fierce strokes.

One spoke, he whose locks and beard were red as the blood on the sunlit
snow.

"Man of the raven locks," said he, "tell me your name, so that my
brothers in Vanaheim may know who was the last of Wulfhere's band to
fall before the sword of Heimdul."

"This is my answer," replied the black-haired warrior: "Not in Vanaheim,
but in Valhalla will you tell your brothers the name of Amra of
Akbitana."

Heimdul roared and sprang, and his sword swung in a mighty arc. Amra
staggered and his vision was filled with red sparks as the blade
shivered into bits of blue fire on his helmet. But as he reeled he
thrust with all the power of his great shoulders. The sharp point drove
through brass scales and bones and heart, and the red-haired warrior
died at Amra's feet.

Amra stood swaying, trailing his sword, a sudden sick weariness
assailing him. The glare of the sun on the snow cut his eyes like a
knife and the sky seemed shrunken and strangely far. He turned away from
the trampled expanse where yellow-bearded warriors lay locked with
red-haired slayers in the embrace of death. A few steps he took, and the
glare of the snow fields was suddenly dimmed. A rushing wave of
blindness engulfed him, and he sank down into the snow, supporting
himself on one mailed arm, seeking to shake the blindness out of his
eyes as a lion might shake his mane.

A silvery laugh cut through his dizziness, and his sight cleared slowly.
There was a strangeness about all the landscape that he could not place
or define--an unfamiliar tinge to earth and sky. But he did not think
long of this. Before him, swaying like a sapling in the wind, stood a
woman. Her body was like ivory, and save for a veil of gossamer, she was
naked as the day. Her slender bare feet were whiter than the snow they
spurned. She laughed, and her laughter was sweeter than the rippling of
silvery fountains, and poisonous with cruel mockery.

"Who are you?" demanded the warrior.

"What matter?" Her voice was more musical than a silver-stringed harp,
but it was edged with cruelty.

"Call up your men," he growled, grasping his sword. "Though my strength
fail me, yet they shall not take me alive. I see that you are of the
Vanir."

"Have I said so?"

He looked again at her unruly locks, which he had thought to be red. Now
he saw that they were neither red nor yellow, but a glorious compound
of both colors. He gazed spell-bound. Her hair was like elfin-gold,
striking which, the sun dazzled him. Her eyes were neither wholly blue
nor wholly grey, but of shifting colors and dancing lights and clouds of
colors he could not recognize. Her full red lips smiled, and from her
slim feet to the blinding crown of her billowy hair, her ivory body was
as perfect as the dream of a god. Amra's pulse hammered in his temples.

"I can not tell," said he, "whether you are of Vanaheim and mine enemy,
or of Asgard and my friend. Far have I wandered, from Zingara to the Sea
of Vilayet, in Stygia and Kush, and the country of the Hyrkanians; but a
woman like you I have never seen. Your locks blind me with their
brightness. Not even among the fairest daughters of the Aesir have I
seen such hair, by Ymir!"

"Who are you to swear by Ymir?" she mocked. "What know you of the gods
of ice and snow, you who have come up from the south to adventure among
strangers?"

"By the dark gods of my own race!" he cried in anger. "Have I been
backward in the sword-play, stranger or no? This day I have seen four
score warriors fall, and I alone survive the field where Mulfhere's
reavers met the men of Bragi. Tell me, woman, have you caught the flash
of mail across the snow-plains, or seen armed men moving upon the ice?"

"I have seen the hoar-frost glittering in the sun," she answered. "I
have heard the wind whispering across the everlasting snows."

He shook his head.

"Niord should have come up with us before the battle joined. I fear he
and his warriors have been ambushed. Wulfhere lies dead with all his
weapon-men.

"I had thought there was no village within many leagues of this spot,
for the war carried us far, but you can have come no great distance over
these snows, naked as you are. Lead me to your tribe, if you are of
Asgard, for I am faint with the weariness of strife."

"My dwelling place is further than you can walk, Amra of Akbitana!" she
laughed. Spreading wide her arms she swayed before him, her golden head
lolling wantonly, her scintillant eyes shadowed beneath long silken
lashes. "Am I not beautiful, man?"

"Like Dawn running naked on the snows," he muttered, his eyes burning
like those of a wolf.

"Then why do you not rise and follow me? Who is the strong warrior who
falls down before me?" she chanted in maddening mockery. "Lie down and
die in the snow with the other fools, Amra of the black hair. You can
not follow where I would lead."

With an oath the man heaved himself upon his feet, his blue eyes blazing
his dark scarred face convulsed. Rage shook his soul, but desire for the
taunting figure before him hammered at his temples and drove his wild
blood riotously through his veins. Passion fierce as physical agony
flooded his whole being so that earth and sky swam red to his dizzy
gaze, and weariness and faintness were swept from him in madness.

He spoke no word as he drove at her fingers hooked like talons. With a
shriek of laughter she leaped back and ran, laughing at him over her
white shoulder. With a low growl Amra followed. He had forgotten the
fight, forgotten the mailed warriors who lay in their blood, forgotten
Niord's belated reavers. He had thought only for the slender white shape
which seemed to float rather than run before him.

Out across the white blinding plain she led him. The trampled red field
fell out of sight behind him, but still Amra kept on with the silent
tenacity of his race. His mailed feet broke through the frozen crust; he
sank deep in the drifts and forged through them by sheer strength. But
the girl danced across the snow as light as a feather floating across a
pool; her naked feet scarcely left their imprint on the hoar-frost. In
spite of the fire in his veins, the cold bit through the warrior's mail
and furs; but the girl in her gossamer veil ran as lightly and as gaily
as if she danced through the palms and rose gardens of Poitain.

Black curses drooled through the warrior's parched lips. The great veins
swelled and throbbed in his temples, and his teeth gnashed
spasmodically.

"You can not escape me!" he roared. "Lead me into a trap and I'll pile
the heads of your kinsmen at your feet. Hide from me and I'll tear apart
the mountains to find you! I'll follow you to hell and beyond hell!"

Her maddening laughter floated back to him, and foam flew from the
warrior's lips. Further and further into the wastes she led him, till he
saw the wide plains give way to low hills, marching upward in broken
ranges. Far to the north he caught a glimpse of towering mountains, blue
with the distance, or white with the eternal snows. Above these
mountains shone the flaring rays of the borealis. They spread fan-wise
into the sky, frosty blades of cold flaming light, changing in color,
growing and brightening.

Above him the skies glowed and crackled with strange lights and gleams.
The snow shone weirdly, now frosty blue, now icy crimson, now cold
silver. Through a shimmering icy realm of enchantment Amra plunged
doggedly onward, in a crystaline maze where the only reality was the
white body dancing across the glittering snow beyond his reach--ever
beyond his reach.

Yet he did not wonder at the necromantic strangeness of it all, not even
when two gigantic figures rose up to bar his way. The scales of their
mail were white with hoar-frost; their helmets and their axes were
sheathed in ice. Snow sprinkled their locks; in their beards were spikes
of icicles; their eyes were cold as the lights that streamed above them.

"Brothers!" cried the girl, dancing between them. "Look who follows! I
have brought you a man for the feasting! Take his heart that we may lay
it smoking on our father's board!"

The giants answered with roars like the grinding of ice-bergs on a
frozen shore, and heaved up their shining axes as the maddened Akbitanan
hurled himself upon them. A frosty blade flashed before his eyes,
blinding him with its brightness, and he gave back a terrible stroke
that sheared through his foe's thigh. With a groan the victim fell, and
at the instant Amra was dashed into the snow, his left shoulder numb
from the blow of the survivor, from which the warrior's mail had barely
saved his life. Amra saw the remaining giant looming above him like a
colossus carved of ice, etched against the glowing sky. The axe fell, to
sink through the snow and deep into the frozen earth as Amra hurled
himself aside and leaped to his feet. The giant roared and wrenched the
axe-head free, but even as he did so, Amra's sword sang down. The
giant's knees bent and he sank slowly into the snow which turned crimson
with the blood that gushed from his half-severed neck.

Amra wheeled, to see the girl standing a short distance away, staring in
wide-eyed horror, all mockery gone from her face. He cried out fiercely
and the blood-drops flew from his sword as his hand shook in the
intensity of his passion.

"Call the rest of your brothers!" he roared. "Call the dogs! I'll give
their hearts to the wolves!"

With a cry of fright she turned and fled. She did not laugh now, nor
mock him over her shoulder. She ran as for her life, and though he
strained every nerve and thew, until his temples were like to burst and
the snow swam red to his gaze, she drew away from him, dwindling in the
witch-fire of the skies, until she was a figure no bigger than a child,
then a dancing white flame on the snow, then a dim blur in the
distance. But grinding his teeth until the blood started from his gums,
he reeled on, and he saw the blur grow to a dancing white flame, and
then she was running less than a hundred paces ahead of him, and slowly
the space narrowed, foot by foot.

She was running with effort now, her golden locks blowing free; he heard
the quick panting of her breath, and saw a flash of fear in the look she
cast over her alabaster shoulder. The grim endurance of the warrior had
served him well. The speed ebbed from her flashing white legs; she
reeled in her gait. In his untamed soul flamed up the fires of hell she
had fanned so well. With an inhuman roar he closed in on her, just as
she wheeled with a haunting cry and flung out her arms to fend him off.

His sword fell into the snow as he crushed her to him. Her supple body
bent backward as she fought with desperate frenzy in his iron arms. Her
golden hair blew about his face, blinding him with its sheen; the feel
of her slender figure twisting in his mailed arms drove him to blinder
madness. His strong fingers sank deep into her smooth flesh, and that
flesh was cold as ice. It was as if he embraced not a woman of human
flesh and blood, but a woman of flaming ice. She writhed her golden head
aside, striving to avoid the savage kisses that bruised her red lips.

"You are cold as the snows," he mumbled dazedly. "I will warm you with
the fire in my own blood--"

With a desperate wrench she twisted from his arms, leaving her single
gossamer garment in his grasp. She sprang back and faced him, her golden
locks in wild disarray, her white bosom heaving, her beautiful eyes
blazing with terror. For an instant he stood frozen, awed by her
terrible beauty as she posed naked against the snows.

And in that instant she flung her arms toward the lights that glowed in
the skies above her and cried out in a voice that rang in Amra's ears
for ever after:

"_Ymir! Oh, my father, save me!_"

Amra was leaping forward, arms spread to seize her, when with a crack
like the breaking of an ice mountain, the whole skies leaped into icy
fire. The girl's ivory body was suddenly enveloped in a cold blue flame
so blinding that the warrior threw up his hands to shield his eyes. A
fleeting instant, skies and snowy hills were bathed in crackling white
flames, blue darts of icy light, and frozen crimson fires. Then Amra
staggered and cried out. The girl was gone. The glowing snow lay empty
and bare; high above him the witch-lights flashed and played in a
frosty sky gone mad and among the distant blue mountains there sounded a
rolling thunder as of a gigantic war-chariot rushing behind steeds whose
frantic hoofs struck lightning from the snows and echoes from the skies.

Then suddenly the borealis, the snowy hills and the blazing heavens
reeled drunkenly to Amra's sight; thousands of fireballs burst with
showers of sparks, and the sky itself became a titanic wheel which
rained stars as it spun. Under his feet the snowy hills heaved up like a
wave, and the Akbitanan crumpled into the snows to lie motionless.

       *       *       *       *       *

In a cold dark universe, whose sun was extinguished eons ago, Amra felt
the movement of life, alien and un-guessed. An earthquake had him in its
grip and was shaking him to and fro, at the same time chafing his hands
and feet until he yelled in pain and fury and groped for his sword.

"He's coming to, Horsa," grunted a voice. "Haste--we must rub the frost
out of his limbs, if he's ever to wield sword again."

"He won't open his left hand," growled another, his voice indicating
muscular strain. "He's clutching something--"

Amra opened his eyes and stared into the bearded faces that bent over
him. He was surrounded by tall golden-haired warriors in mail and furs.

"Amra! You live!"

"By Crom, Niord," gasped he, "am I alive, or are we all dead and in
Valhalla?"

"We live," grunted the Aesir, busy over Amra's half-frozen feet. "We had
to fight our way through an ambush, else we had come up with you before
the battle was joined. The corpses were scarce cold when we came upon
the field. We did not find you among the dead, so we followed your
spoor. In Ymir's name, Amra, why did you wander off into the wastes of
the north? We have followed your tracks in the snow for hours. Had a
blizzard come up and hidden them, we had never found you, by Ymir!"

"Swear not so often by Ymir," muttered a warrior, glancing at the
distant mountains. "This is his land and the god bides among yonder
mountains, the legends say."

"I followed a woman," Amra answered hazily. "We met Bragi's men in the
plains. I know not how long we fought. I alone lived. I was dizzy and
faint. The land lay like a dream before me. Only now do all things seem
natural and familiar. The woman came and taunted me. She was beautiful
as a frozen flame from hell. When I looked at her I was as one mad, and
forgot all else in the world. I followed her. Did you not find her
tracks. Or the giants in icy mail I slew?"

Niord shook his head.

"We found only your tracks in the snow, Amra."

"Then it may be I was mad," said Amra dazedly. "Yet you yourself are no
more real to me than was the golden haired witch who fled naked across
the snows before me. Yet from my very hands she vanished in icy flame."

"He is delirious," whispered a warrior.

"Not so!" cried an older man, whose eyes were wild and weird. "It was
Atali, the daughter of Ymir, the frost-giant! To fields of the dead she
comes, and shows herself to the dying! Myself when a boy I saw her, when
I lay half-slain on the bloody field of Wolraven. I saw her walk among
the dead in the snows, her naked body gleaming like ivory and her golden
hair like a blinding flame in the moonlight. I lay and howled like a
dying dog because I could not crawl after her. She lures men from
stricken fields into the wastelands to be slain by her brothers, the
ice-giants, who lay men's red hearts smoking on Ymir's board. Amra has
seen Atali, the frost-giant's daughter!"

"Bah!" grunted Horsa. "Old Gorm's mind was turned in his youth by a
sword cut on the head. Amra was delirious with the fury of battle. Look
how his helmet is dinted. Any of those blows might have addled his
brain. It was an hallucination he followed into the wastes. He is from
the south; what does he know of Atali?"

"You speak truth, perhaps," muttered Amra. "It was all strange and
weird--by Crom!"

He broke off, glaring at the object that still dangled from his clenched
left fist; the others gaped silently at the veil he held up--a wisp of
gossamer that was never spun by human distaff.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Gods of the North, by Robert E. Howard

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GODS OF THE NORTH ***

***** This file should be named 42664.txt or 42664.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/2/6/6/42664/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
