The Project Gutenberg EBook of Nightmare Planet, by Murray Leinster

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Nightmare Planet

Author: Murray Leinster

Release Date: June 19, 2013 [EBook #42987]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NIGHTMARE PLANET ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Denny Lien, Mary Meehan and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                       Nightmare Planet

                     _by_ MURRAY LEINSTER

               (_Illustrations by Tom O'Reilly_)

    [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from Science Fiction
    Plus June 1953. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
    the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]

       *       *       *       *       *

    _In science-fiction, as in all categories of fiction, there are
    stories that are so outstanding from the standpoint of
    characterization, concept, and background development that they
    remain popular for decades. Two such stories were Murray Leinster's_
    The Mad Planet _and_ Red Dust. _Originally published in 1923, they
    have been reprinted frequently both here and abroad. They are now
    scheduled for book publication. Especially for this magazine, Murray
    Leinster has written the final story in the series. It is not
    necessary to have read the previous stories to enjoy this one. Once
    again, Burl experiences magnificent adventures against a colorful
    background, but to the whole the author has added philosophical and
    psychological observations that give this story a flavor seldom
    achieved in science-fiction._

    Under his real name of Will Fitzgerald Jenkins, the author has sold
    to _The Saturday Evening Post_, _Colliers'_, _Today's Woman_, in
    fact every important publication in America. He has had over 1200
    stories published, 15 books and 35 science-fiction stories
    anthologized. His writing earned him a listing in _Who's Who in
    America_.

       *       *       *       *       *




The Directory-ship _Tethys_ made the first landing on the planet,
L216^{12}. It was a goodly world, with an ample atmosphere and many
seas, which the nearby sun warmed so lavishly that a perpetual
cloud-bank hid them and all the solid ground from view. It had mountains
and islands and high plateaus. It had day and night and rain. It had an
equable climate, rather on the tropical side. But it possessed no life.

No animals roamed its solid surface. No vegetation grew from its rocks.
Not even bacteria struggled with the stones to turn them into soil. No
living thing, however small, swam in its oceans. It was one of that
disappointing vast majority of otherwise admirable worlds which was
unsuited for colonization solely because it had not been colonized
before. It could be used for biological experiments in a completely
germ-free environment, or ships could land upon it for water and
supplies of air. The water was pure and the air breathable, but it had
no other present utility. Such was the case with an overwhelming number
of Earth-type planets when first discovered in the exploration of the
galaxy. Life simply hadn't started there.

So the ship which first landed upon it made due note for the Galactic
Directory and went away, and no other ship came near the planet for
eight hundred years.

But nearly a millennium later, the Seed-Ship _Orana_ arrived. It landed
and carefully seeded the useless world. It circled endlessly above the
clouds, dribbling out a fine dust comprised of the spores of every
conceivable microorganism that could break down rock to powder and turn
the powder to organic matter. It also seeded with moulds and fungi and
lichens, and everything that could turn powdery primitive soil into
stuff on which higher forms of life could grow. The _Orana_ seeded the
seas with plankton. Then it, too, went away.

Centuries passed. Then the Ecological Preparation Ship _Ludred_ swam to
the planet from space. It was a gigantic ship of highly improbable
construction and purpose. It found the previous seeding successful. Now
there was soil which swarmed with minute living things. There were fungi
which throve monstrously. The seas stank of teeming minuscule
life-forms. There were even some novelties on land, developed by
strictly local conditions. There were, for example, _paramecium_ as big
as grapes, and yeasts had increased in size so that they bore flowers
visible to the naked eye. The life on the planet was not aboriginal,
though. It had all been planted by the seed-ship of centuries before.

The _Ludred_ released insects, it dumped fish into the seas. It
scattered plant-seeds over the continents. It treated the planet to a
sort of Russell's Mixture of living things. The real Russell's Mixture
is that blend of simple elements in the proportions found in suns. This
was a blend of living creatures, of whom some should certainly survive
by consuming the now habituated flora, and others which should survive
by preying on the first. The planet was stocked, in effect, with
everything it could be hoped might live there.

But at the time of the _Ludred's_ visit of course no creature needing
parental care had any chance of survival. Everything had to be able to
care for itself the instant it burst its egg. So there were no birds or
mammals. Trees and plants of divers sorts, and fish and crustaceans and
insects could be planted. Nothing else.

The _Ludred_ swam away through emptiness.

There should have been another planting, centuries later still, but it
was never made. When the Ecological Preparation Service was moved to
Algol IV, a file was upset. The cards in it were picked up and replaced,
but one was missed. So that planet was forgotten. It circled its sun in
emptiness. Cloud-banks covered it from pole to pole. There were hazy
markings in certain places, where high plateaus penetrated the clouds.
But from space the planet was featureless. Seen from afar, it was merely
a round white ball--white from its cloud-banks and nothing else.

But on its surface, in its lowlands it was nightmare.

Especially was it nightmare--after some centuries--for the descendants
of the human beings from the space-liner _Icarus_, wrecked there some
forty-odd generations ago. Naturally, nobody anywhere else thought of
the _Icarus_ any more. It was not even remembered by the descendants of
its human cargo, who now inhabited the planet. The wreckage of the ship
was long since hidden under the seething, furiously striving fungi of
the boil. The human beings on the planet had forgotten not only the ship
but very nearly everything--how they came to this world, the use of
metals, the existence of fire, and even the fact that there was such a
thing as sunlight. They lived in the lowlands, deep under the
cloud-bank, amid surroundings which were riotous, swarming, frenzied
horror. They had become savages. They were less than savages. They had
forgotten their high destiny as men.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration]

Dawn came. Grayness appeared overhead and increased. That was all. The
sky was a blank, colorless pall, merely mottled where the clouds
clustered a little thicker or a little thinner, as clouds do. But the
landscape was variegated enough! Where the little group of people
huddled together, there was a wide valley. Its walls rose up and up into
the very clouds. The people had never climbed those hillsides.

They had not even traditions of what might lie above them, and their
lives had been much too occupied to allow of speculations on cosmology.
By day they were utterly absorbed in two problems which filled every
waking minute. One was the securing of food to eat, under the conditions
of the second problem, which was that of merely staying alive.

There was only one of their number who sometimes thought of other
matters, and he did so because he had become lost from his group of
humans once, and had found his way back to it. His name was Burl, and
his becoming lost was pure fantastic accident, and his utilization of a
fully inherited power to think was the result of extraordinary events.
But he still had not the actual habit of thinking. This morning he was
like his fellows.

All of them were soaked with wetness. During the night--every night--the
sky dripped slow, spaced, solemn water-drops during the whole of the
dark hours. This was customary. But normally the humans hid in the
mushroom-forests, sheltered by the toadstools which now grew to three
man-heights. They denned in small openings in the tangled mass of
parasitic growths which flourished in such thickets. But this last night
they had camped in the open. They had no proper habitations of their
own. Caves would have been desirable, but insects made use of caves, and
the descendants of insects introduced untold centuries before had shared
in the size-increase of _paramecium_ and yeasts and the few true plants
which had been able to hold their own. Mining-wasps were two yards long,
and bumble-bees were nearly as huge, and there were other armored
monstrosities which also preferred caves for their own purposes. And of
course the humans could not build habitations, because anything men
built to serve the purpose of a cave would instantly be preempted by
creatures who would automatically destroy any previous occupants.

The humans had no fixed dens at any time. Now they had not even shelter.
They lacked other things, also. They had no tools save salvaged scraps
of insect-armor--great sawtoothed mandibles or razor-pointed
leg-shells--which they used to pry apart the edible fungi on which they
lived, or to get at the morsels of meat left behind when the brainless
lords of this planet devoured each other. They had not even any useful
knowledge, except desperately accurate special knowledge of the manners
and customs of the insects they could not defy. And on this special
morning they concluded that they were doomed. They were going to be
killed. They stood shivering in the open, waiting for it to happen.

It was not exactly news. They had had warning days ago, but they could
do nothing about it. Their home valley, to be sure, would have made any
civilized human being shudder merely to look at it, but they had
considered it almost paradise. It was many miles long, and a fair number
wide, and a stream ran down its middle. At the lower end of the valley
there was a vast swamp, from which at nightfall the thunderously
deep-bass croaking of giant frogs could be heard. But that swamp had
kept out the more terrifying creatures of that world. The thirty-foot
centipedes could not cross it or did not choose to. The mastodon-sized
tarantulas which ravaged so much of the planet would not cross it save
in pursuit of prey. So the valley was nearly a haven of safety.

True, there was one clotho spider in its ogre's castle nearby, and there
was a labyrinth spider in a minor valley which nobody had ever ventured
into, and there were some--not many--praying-mantises as tall as
giraffes. They wandered terribly here and there. But most members of
insect life here were absorbed in their own affairs and ignored the
humans. There was an ant-city, whose foot-long warriors competed with
the humans as scavengers. There were the bees, trying to eke out a
livelihood from the great, cruciform flowers of the giant cabbage-plants
and the milkweeds when water-lilies in the swamps did not bear their
four-foot blooms. Wasps sought their own prey. Flies were consumers of
corruption, but even the flies two feet in length would shy away from a
man who waved his arms at it. So this valley had seemed to these people
to be a truly admirable place.

But a fiend had entered it. As the gray light grew stronger the
shivering folk looked terrifiedly about them. There were only twenty of
the people now. Two weeks before there had been thirty. In a matter of
days or less, there would be none. Because the valley had been invaded
by a great gray furry spider!

       *       *       *       *       *

There was a stirring, not far from where the man-folk trembled. Small,
inquisitive antennae popped into view among a mass of large-sized
pebbles. There was a violent stirring, and gravel disappeared. Small
black things thrust upward into view and scurried anxiously about. They
returned to the spot from which they had emerged. They were ants,
opening the shaft of their city after scouting for danger outside. They
scratched and pulled and tugged at the plug of stones. They opened the
ant-city's artery of commerce. Strings of small black things came
pouring out. They averaged a foot in length, and they marched off in
groups upon their divers errands. Presently a group of huge-jawed
soldier-ants appeared, picking their way stolidly out of the opening.
They waited stupidly for the workers they were to guard. The workers
came, each carrying a faintly greenish blob of living matter. The
caravan moved off. The humans knew exactly what it was. The green blobs
were aphids--plant lice: ant-cows--small creatures sheltered and guarded
by the ants and daily carried to nearby vegetation to feed upon its sap
and yield inestimable honeydew.

Something reared up two hundred yards away, where the thin mist that lay
everywhere just barely began to fade all colorings before it dimmed all
outlines. The object was slender. It had a curiously humanlike head. It
held out horrible sawtoothed arms in a gesture as of benediction--which
was purest mockery. Something smaller was drawing near to it. The
colossal praying mantis held its pose, immovable. Presently it struck
downward with lightning speed. There was a cry. The mantis rose erect
again, its great arms holding something that stirred and struggled
helplessly, and repented its unconsonanted outcry. The mantis ate it
daintily as it struggled and screamed.

The humans did not watch this tragedy. The mantis would eat a man, of
course. It had. The only creatures immune to its menace were ants, which
for some reason it would not touch. But it was a mantis' custom after
spotting its prey to wait immobile for the unlucky creature to come
within its reach. It preferred to make its captures that way. Only if a
thing fled did the mantis pursue with deadly ferocity. Even then it
dined with monstrous deliberation as this one dined now. Still, mantises
could be seen from a distance and hidden from. They were not the terror
which had driven the humans even from their hiding-places.

It had been two weeks since the giant hunting-spider had come through a
mountain pass into this valley to prey upon the life within it. It was
gigantic even of its kind. It was deadliness beyond compare. The first
human to see it froze in terror. It was disaster itself. Its legs
spanned yards. Its fangs were needle-sharp and feet in length--and
poisoned. Its eyes glittered with insatiable, insane blood-lust. Its
coming was ten times more deadly to the unarmed folk than a Bengal tiger
loose in the valley would have been.

It killed a man the very first day it was in the valley, leaving his
sucked-dry carcass, and going on to destroy a rhinoceros-beetle and a
cricket--whose deep-bass cries were horrible--and proceeded down the
valley, leaving only death behind it. It had killed other men and women
since. It had caught four children. But even that was not the worst. It
carried worse, more deadly, more inevitable disaster with it.

Because, bumping and bouncing behind its abdomen as it moved, fastened
to its body with cables of coarse and discolored silk, the
hunting-spider dragged a burden which was its own ferocity many times
multiplied. It dragged an egg-bag. The bag was larger than its body,
four feet in diameter. The female spider would carry this
burden--cherishing it--until the eggs hatched. Then there would be four
to five hundred small monsters at large in the valley. And from the
instant of their hatching they would be just such demoniac creatures as
their parents. They would be small, to be sure. Their legs would span no
more than a foot. Their bodies would be the size of a man's fist. But
they could leap two yards, instantly they reached the open air, and
their inch-long fangs would be no less envenomed, and their ferocity
would be in madness, in insanity and in stark maniacal horror equal the
great gray fiend which had begot them.

The eggs had hatched. Today--now--this morning--they were abroad. The
little group of humans no longer hid in the mushroom-forests because the
small hunting-spiders sought frenziedly there for things to kill.
Hundreds of small lunatic demons roamed the valley. They swarmed among
the huge toadstools, killing and devouring all living things large and
small. When they encountered each other they fought in slavering,
panting fury, and the survivors of such duels dined upon their brothers.
Small truffle-beetles died, clicking futilely. Infinitesimal grubs,
newly hatched from butterfly eggs and barely six inches long, furnished
them with tidbits. But they would kill anything and feast upon it.

A woman had died yesterday, and two small gray devils battled
murderously above her corpse.

Just before darkness a huge yellow butterfly had flung itself agonizedly
aloft, with these small dark horrors clinging to its body, feasting upon
the juices of the body their poison had not yet done to death.

And now, at daybreak, the humans looked about despairingly for their own
deaths to come to them. They had spent the night in the open lest they
be trapped in the very forests that had been their protection. Now they
remained in clear view of the large gray murderer should it pass that
way. They did not dare to hide because of that ogreish creature's young,
who panted in their blood-lust as they scurried here and there and
everywhere.

As the day became established, the clouds were gray--gray only. The
night-mist thinned. One of the younger women of the tribe--a girl called
Saya--saw the huge thing far away. She cried out, choking. The others
saw the monster as it leaped upon and murdered a vividly colored
caterpillar on a milkweed near the limit of vision. The milkweed was the
size of a tree. The caterpillar was four yards long. While the enormous
victim writhed as it died, not one of the humans looked away. Presently
all was still. The hunting-spider crouched over its victim in obscene
absorption. Having been madness incarnate, it now was the very exemplar
of a horrid gluttony.

Again the humans shivered. They were without shelter. They were without
even the concept of arms. But it was morning, and they were alive, and
therefore they were hungry. Their desperation was absolute, but
desperation to some degree was part of their lives. Yet they shivered
and suffered. There were edible mushrooms nearby, but with the deadly
small replicas of the hunting-spider giant roaming everywhere, any
movement was as likely to be deadly as standing still to be found and
killed. The humans murmured to one another, fearfully.

But there was the young man called Burl, who had been lost from his
tribe and had found it again. The experience had changed him. He had
felt stirrings of atavistic impulses in recent weeks--the more
especially when the young girl Saya looked at him. It was not normal, in
humans conditioned to survive by flight, that Burl should feel
previously unimagined hunger for fury--a longing to hate and do battle.
Of course men sometimes fought for a particular woman's favor, but not
when there were deadly insects about. The carnivorous insects were not
only peril, but horror unfaceable. So Burl's sensations were very
strange. On this planet a courtship did not usually involve displays of
valor. A man who was a more skillful forager than the foot-long ants was
an acceptable husband. Warriors did not exist.

Burl did not even know what a warrior was. Yet today the sullen,
unreasonable impulses to conduct what he could not quite imagine were
very strong. He knew all the despairing terror the others felt. But he
also was hungry. The sheer doom that was upon his group did not change
the fact that he wanted to eat, nor did it change the fact that he felt
queer when the girl Saya looked at him. Because she was terrified, the
same sort of atavistic process was at work in her. She looked to Burl.
Men no longer served as protectors against enemies so irresistible as
giant spiders. It was not possible. But when Burl realized her regard
his chest swelled. He felt a half-formed impulse to beat upon it. His
new-found reasoning processes told him that this particular fear was
different in some fashion from the terrors men normally experienced. It
was. This was a different sort of emergency. Most dangers were sudden
and either immediately fatal or somehow avoidable. This was different.
There was time to savor its meaning and its hopelessness. It seemed as
if it should be possible to do something about it. But Burl was not
able, as yet, to think what to do. The bare idea of doing anything was
unusual, now. Because of it, though, Burl was able to disregard his
terror when Saya regarded him yearningly.

       *       *       *       *       *

The other men muttered to each other of the sudden death in the mushroom
thickets. No less certain death now feasted on the dead yellow
caterpillar. But Burl abruptly pushed his way clear of the small crowd
and scowled for Saya to see. He moved toward the nearest fungus-thicket.
An edible mushroom grew at its very edge. He marched toward it,
swaggering. Men did not often swagger on this planet.

But then he ceased to swagger. His approach to the mingled mass of
toadstools and lesser monstrosities grew slower. His feet dragged. He
came to a halt. His impulse to combat conflicted with the facts of here
and now. His flesh crawled at the thought of the grisly small beasts
which now might be within yards. These thickets had been men's safest
hiding-places. Now they were places of surest disaster.

He stopped, with a coldness at the pit of his stomach. But as it was a
new experience to be able to have danger come in a form which could be
foreseen, so Burl now had a new experience in that he was ashamed to be
afraid. Somehow, having tacitly undertaken to get food for his
companions, he could not bring himself to draw back while they watched.
But he did want desperately to get the food in a hurry and get away from
there.

He saw a gruesome fragment of a tragedy of days before. It was the
emptied, scraped, hollow leg-shell of a beetle. It was horrendously
barbed. Great, knife-edged spines lined its edge. They were six inches
in length. And men did not have weapons any more, but they sometimes
used just such objects as this to dismember defenseless giant slugs they
came upon.

Burl picked up the hollow shell of the leg-joint. He shook it free of
clinging moulds--and small things an inch or two in length dropped from
it and scurried frantically into hiding. He moved hesitantly toward the
edible mushroom which would be food for Saya and the rest. He was four
yards from the thicket. Three. Two. He needed to move only six feet, and
then slice at the flabby mushroom-head, and he would be at least an
admirable person in the eyes of Saya.

Then he cried out thinly. Something small, with insane eyes, leaped upon
him from the edge of a giant toadstool.

It was, of course, one of the small beasts which had hatched from the
hunting-spider's egg-bag. It had grown. Its legs now spanned sixteen
inches. Its body was as large as Burl's two fists together. It was big
enough to enclose his head in a cage of loathesomeness formed by its
legs, while its fangs tore at his scalp. Or it could cover his chest
with its abominableness while its poison filled his veins, and while it
feasted upon him afterward....

He flung up his hands in a paralytic, horror-stricken attempt to ward it
off. But they were clenched. His right hand did not let go of the
leg-section with its razor-sharp barbs.

The spider struck the beetle-leg. He felt the impact. Then he heard
gaspings and bubblings of fury. He heard an indescribable cry which was
madness itself. The chitinous object he had picked up now shook and
quivered of itself.

The spider was impaled. Two of its legs were severed and twitched upon
the ground before him. Its body was slashed nearly in half. It writhed
and struggled and made beastly sounds. Thin, colored fluids dripped from
it. A disgusting musky smell filled the air. It strove to reach and kill
him as it died. Its eyes looked like flames.

Burl's arm shook convulsively. The small thing dropped to the ground.
Its remaining legs moved frantically but without purpose.

It died, though its leg continued to twitch and stir and quiver.

Burl remained frozen, for seconds. It was an acquired instinct; a
conditioned reflex which humans had to develop on this world. When
danger was past, one stayed desperately still lest it return. But Burl's
thoughts were now not of horror but a vast astonishment. He had killed a
spider! He had killed a thing which would have killed him! He was still
alive!

And then, being a savage, and an animal, as well as a human being, he
acted according to that highly complicated nature. As a savage, he knew
with strict practicality that it was improbable that there was another
baby spider nearby. If there had been, they would have fought each
other. As an animal, he was again hungry. As a human being, he was vain.

So he moved closer to the toadstool-thicket and put his hand out and
broke off a great mass of the one edible mushroom at the edge. A
noisesome broth poured out and little maggots dropped to the ground and
writhed there in it. But most of what he had broken off was sound. He
turned to take it to Saya. Then he saw the dropped weapon and the
spider. He picked up the weapon.

The spider's legs still twitched, though futilely. He spiked the small
body on the beetle-leg's spines. He strode back to the remnant of his
tribe with a peculiar gait that even he had not often practiced.

It was rather more pronounced than a swagger. It was a strut.

They trembled when they saw the dead creature he had killed. He gave
Saya the food. She took it, looking at him with bright and intense eyes.
He took a part of the mushroom for himself and ate it, scowling.
Thoughts were struggling to form in his mind. He was not accustomed to
thinking, but he had done more of it than any other of the pitiful group
about him.

He felt eyes watching him. There were five adult men in this group
besides himself, and six women. The rest were children, from gangling
adolescents to one mere infant in arms. They were a remarkably colorful
group at the moment, had he only known it. The men wore
yellow-and-gold-brown loin-cloths of caterpillar-fur, stripped from the
drained carcasses of creatures that the formerly resident clothed spider
had killed. The women wore cloaks of butterfly-wing, similarly salvaged
from the remnants of a meal left unfinished by a finicky or engorged
praying mantis. The stuff was thick and leathery, but it was
magnificently tinted in purples and yellows.

Time passed. The mushroom Burl had brought was finished. Some eyes
always explored the clear ground around this group. But other eyes fixed
themselves upon Burl. It was not a consciously questioning gaze. It was
surely not a hopeful one. But men and women and children looked at him.
They marveled at him. He had dared to go and get food! He had been
attacked by one of the creatures who doomed them all, but he was not
dead! Instead, he had killed the spider! It was marvelous! It was
unparalleled that a man should kill anything that attacked him!

       *       *       *       *       *

The doomed small group regarded Burl with wondering eyes. He brushed his
hands together. He looked at Saya. He wished to be alone with her. He
wished to know what she thought when she looked at him. Why she looked
at him. What she felt when she looked at him.

He stood up and said dourly:

"Come!"

She moved timidly and gave him her hand. He moved away. There was but
one way that any human being on this planet would think to move, from
this particular spot just now--away from the still-feasting gigantic
horror whose offspring he had killed. The folk shivered near the edge of
the first upward slope of the valley wall. Burl moved in that direction.
Toward the slope. Saya went with him.

Before they had gone ten yards a man spoke to his wife. They followed
Burl, with their three children. Five yards more, and two of the
remaining three adult men were hustling their families in his wake also.
In seconds the last was in motion.

Burl moved on, unconscious of any who followed him, aware only of Saya.
The procession, absurd as it was, continued in his wake simply because
it had begun to do so. A skinny, half-grown boy regarded Burl's stained
weapon. He saw something half-buried in the soil and moved aside to tug
at it. It was part of the armor of a former rhinoceros-beetle. He went
on, rather awkwardly holding a weapon which might have been called a
dagger, eighteen inches long, except that no dagger would have a
hand-guard nearly its own length in diameter.

They passed a struggling milkweed plant, no more than twenty feet high
and already scabrous with scale and rusts upon its lower parts. Ants
marched up and down its stalk in a steady, single file, placing aphids
from the ant-city on suitable spots to feed, and to multiply as only
parthenogenic aphids can do. But already on the far side of the
milkweed, an ant-lion climbed up to do murder among them. The ant-lion
was the larval form the lace-wing fly, of course. Aphids were its
predestined prey.

[Illustration]

Burl continued to march, holding Saya's hand. The reek of formic acid
came to his nostrils. But that was only ants. The slope grew steeper.
Massacre began behind him on the tree-sized milkweed. The ant-lion which
even when it was but half an inch long, on Earth, could bite through the
skin of a man--the ant-lion reached the pasturing cows. It plunged into
slaughter. It was demoniac. It was such ghastly ferocity that the eggs
from which its kind hatched were equipped, each one, with a plastic
column to hold it well away from the object on which the clutch of eggs
were laid. But for this precaution by the maternal lace-wing fly, the
first of her brood to hatch would devour its unhatched brothers and
sisters. This ant-lion charged into the placidly feeding aphids on the
milkweed plant. It seized one and crushed it, holding it aloft so that
the juices of its body would pour into the ant-lion's mouth. Almost
instantly, it seemed, the mild-eyed aphid was a shrunken empty sack. The
ant-lion seized another. The remaining aphids fed placidly while their
enemy did vast slaughter among them.

Clickings and a shrill stridulation sounded. Warrior-ants climbed with
stupid ferocity to offer battle.

Burl moved on to a minor eminence. He reached its top and looked sharply
about him with the caution that was the price of existence on this
world. Two hundred feet away, a small scurrying horror raged and
searched among the rough-edged layers of what on other worlds was called
paper-mould or rock-tripe. Here it was thick as quilting, and
infinitesimal creatures denned under it. The sixteen-inch spider
devoured them, making gluttonous sounds. But it was busy, and all
spiders are relatively short-sighted.

Burl turned to Saya--and realized that all the human folk had followed
him. One of the adults was reaching fearfully for part of a discarded
cricket-shell in the ground. He tore free an emptied, sickle-shaped jaw.
It was curved and sharp and deadly if properly wielded. The man had seen
Burl kill something. He tried vaguely to imagine killing something
himself. He was not too successful. Another man tugged at the ground.
The skinny boy was practicing thrusts with his giant dagger.

Two of the adults were armed, without any clear idea of what to do with
their arms. But Burl knew, now.

He regarded them angrily. He had not meant to desert them, or even to
take Saya permanently from among them. Humans had little enough of
satisfaction on this planet. The scared company of their kind was one of
the most important. So Burl did not resent that they had followed him.
He did resent that they were near when he wanted to talk to Saya in what
he did not yet think of as lover-like seclusion.

They halted, regarding him humbly. They had been hungry, and he had
found food for them. They had been paralyzed by terror, and he had dared
to move. So they moved with him. They might have followed anybody else,
but only Burl had initiative--so far. They trustfully waited to follow
and to imitate him for so long as panic numbed their ability to think
for themselves.

Burl opened his mouth to shout furiously at them. But it was not a good
idea for humans to draw attention. Spiders did not hunt by scent, but
sound sometimes drew them. Burl closed his mouth again, in a taut
straight line. The men looked at him supplicatingly. They had never been
lost, and so had never learned to think even a little. Burl had learned
to think in a rudimentary fashion and now he suddenly perceived that it
was pleasing to have all the tribe regard him so worshipfully, even if
not in quite the same fashion as Saya. He was suddenly aware that even
as Saya had obeyed him when he told her to come with him, they would
obey. He had, at the moment, no commands to give, but he immediately
invented one for the pleasure of seeing it carried out.

"_I carry sharp things_," he said sternly. "I killed a spider. Go find
_sharp things_ to carry."

They were a meek and abject folk, and they were desperately in need of
something to do to take their minds from the uselessness of doing
anything at all.

They moved to obey. Saya would have loosened her hand and obeyed, too,
but Burl held her beside him. One of the women, with a child three years
old, laid the child down by Burl's feet while she went fearfully to seek
some fragment of a dead creature, that would meet Burl's specification
of sharpness.

Burl heard a stifled scream. A ten-year-old boy stood paralyzed, staring
in an agony of horror at something which had stepped from behind a
misshapen fungoid object.

It was a pallidly greenish creature with a small head and enormous eyes.
It was a very few inches taller than a man. Its abdomen swelled
gracefully into a pleasing, leaf-like shape. The boy faced it, paralyzed
by horror, and it stood stock-still. Its great, hideously spiny arms
were spread out in a pose of pious benediction.

[Illustration: "_The boy faced it, paralyzed by horror._"]

It was a partly-grown praying mantis, not very long hatched. It stood
rigid, waiting benignly for the boy to come closer. If he fled, it would
fling itself after him with ferocity beside which the fury of a tiger
would seem kittenish. If he approached, its fanged arms would flash
down, pierce his body, and hold him inextricably fast by the spikes that
were worse than trap-claws. And of course it would not wait for him to
die before it began its meal.

The small party of humans stood frozen. They were filled with horror
for the boy. They were cast into a deep abyss of despair by the
sight of a half-grown mantis, because if there was one such miniature
insect-dinosaur in the valley, there would be many others. Hundreds of
others. This meant there had been a hatching of them. And they were as
deadly as spiders.

       *       *       *       *       *

But Burl did not think in such terms just now. Vanity filled him. He had
commanded, and he had been obeyed. But now obedience was forgotten
because there was this young praying mantis. If men had ever thought of
fighting such a creature, it could have destroyed any number of them by
pure ferocity and superiority of armament. But Burl raged. He ran toward
the spot. Even mantises were sometimes frightened by the unexpected.
Burl seized a lumpish object barely protruding from the ground. It
looked like a rock. It was actually a flattened ball-fungus, feeding on
the soil through thin white threads beneath it. Burl wrenched it free
and hurled it furiously at the young monster.

Insects simply do not think. Something came swiftly at it, and the
mantis flashed its ghastly arms to seize and kill its attacker. The
ball-fungus was heavy. It literally knocked the mantis backward. The boy
fled frantically. The insect fought crazily against the thing it thought
had assailed it.

The humans gathered around Burl hundreds of yards away--again uphill.
The slope of the mountain-flank was marked here. They gathered about
Burl because of an example set by the woman who had left her
three-year-old child behind. Saya, in the unfailing instinct of a girl
for a small child, had snatched it up when Burl left her. Then she had
joined him because the instinct which had made her obey him in starting
off--it was not quite the same instinct which moved the others--also
bade her follow him wherever he went. The mother of the child went to
retrieve her deposit. Other figures moved cautiously toward him. The
tribe was reconvened.

The floor of the valley seemed a trifle obscured. The mist that hung
always in the air made it seem less distinct; less actual; not quite as
real as it had been.

Burl gulped and said sternly:

"Where are the sharp things?"

The men looked at one another, numbly. Then one spoke despairingly,
ignoring Burl's question. "Now," said the man dully, "there was not only
the hunting-spider in the valley, but its young. And not only the young
of the hunting-spider, but the young of a mantis ... It was hard to stay
alive at the best of times. Now it had become impossible ..."

Burl glared at him. It was neither courage nor resolution. He had come
to realize what a splendid sensation it was to be admired by one's
fellows. The more he was admired, the better. He was enraged that people
thought to despair.

"I," said Burl haughtily, "am _not_ going to stay here. I go to a place
where there are neither spiders nor mantises. Come!"

He held out his hand to Saya. She gave the child to its mother and look
his hand. Burl stalked haughtily away, and she went with him. He went
uphill. Naturally. He knew there were spiders and mantises in the
valley. So many that to stay there was to die. So he went away from
where they were.

Burl had found out that adulation was enjoyable and authority
delectable. He had found that it was pleasant to be a dictator. And then
he had been disregarded. So he marched furiously away from his folk, in
exactly the fashion of a spoiled child refusing to play any longer. He
happened to march up the mountainside toward the cloud-bank that he
considered the sky. He had no conscious intent to climb the mountain. He
did not intend to lead the others. He meant to sulk, by punishing them
through the removal of his own admirable person from their society. But
they followed him.

So he led his people upward. It has happened on other planets, in other
manners. Most human achievements come about through the daring of those
who strive.

       *       *       *       *       *

The sun was very near. It shone upon the top of the cloud-bank and the
clouds glowed with a marvelous whiteness. It shone upon the
mountain-peaks where they penetrated the clouds, and the peaks were
warmed, and there was no snow anywhere despite the height. There were
winds here where the sun shone. The sky was very blue. At the edge of
the plateau where the cloud-bank lay below, the mountainsides seemed to
descend into a sea of milk. Great undulations in the mist had the
seeming of waves, which moved with great deliberation toward the shores.
They seemed sometimes to break against the mountain-wall where it was
cliff-like, and sometimes they seemed to flow up gentler inclinations
like water flowing up a beach.

All this was in the slowest of slow motion, because the cloud-waves were
sometimes miles from crest to crest.

The look of things was different on the plateau, too. This part of the
unnamed world, no less than the lowlands, had been seeded with life on
two separate occasions. Once with bacteria and moulds and lichens to
break up the rocks and make soil of them, and once with seeds and
insects-eggs and such living things as might sustain themselves
immediately upon hatching. But here on the heights the conditions were
drastically unlike the lowland tropic moisture. Different things had
thriven, and in quite different fashion.

Here moulds and yeasts and rusts were stunted by the sunlight. Grasses
and weeds and trees survived, instead. This was an ideal environment for
plants that needed sunlight to form chlorophyll, and chlorophyll to
make use of the soil that had been formed. So here was vegetation that
was nearly Earth-like. And there was a remarkable side-effect on the
fauna which had been introduced at the same time and in the same manner
as down below. In coolness which amounted to a temperate climate there
could be no such frenzy of life as formed the nightmare-jungles in the
lowlands. Plants grew at a slower tempo than fungi, and less
luxuriantly. There was no adequate food-supply for large-sized
plant-eaters. Insects which were to survive in sunshine could not grow
to be monsters. Moreover, the nights were chill. Many insects grow
torpid in the cool of a temperate-zone night, but warm up to activity
soon after sunrise. But a large creature, made torpid by cold, will not
revive so quickly. If large enough, it will not become fully active
until close to dusk. On the plateau, the lowland monsters would starve
in any case. But more--they would have only a fraction of a day of full
activity.

There was a necessary limit then, to the size of the insects that lived
above the clouds. The life on the plateau would not have seemed
horrifying at all to humans living on other planets. Save for the
absence of birds to sing and lack of a variety of small mammals, the
untouched sunlit plateau with its warm days and briskly chill nights
would have impressed most men as an ideal habitation.

But Burl and his companions were hardly prepared to see it that way at
first glimpse. Certainly if told about it beforehand, they would have
viewed it with despair.

But they did not know beforehand. They toiled upward, their leader moved
by such ridiculous motives as have sometimes caused men to achieve
greatness throughout all history. Back on Earth, two great continents
were discovered by a man trying to get spices to conceal the gamey
flavor of half-spoiled meat. The power that drives mile-long
space-craft, and that lights and runs the cities of the galaxy, was
first developed because it could be used in bombs to kill other men.
There were precedents for Burl leading his fellows into sunshine merely
because he was angered that they ceased to admire him.

The trudging, climbing folk were high above the valley, now. The thin
mist that was never absent anywhere had hidden their former home, little
by little. They climbed a steeply slanting mountain-flank. The stone was
mostly covered by ragged, bluish-green rock-tripe in partly overlapping
sheets. Such stuff is always close behind the bacteria which first
attack a rock-face. On a slope, it clings while soil is washed downward
as fast as it forms. The people never ate it. It produced frightening
cramps. In time they would learn that if thoroughly dried it can he
soaked to pliability again and cooked to a reasonable palatability. But
so far they knew neither dryness nor fire.

Nor had they ever known such surroundings as presently enveloped them. A
slanting, stony mountainside which stretched up frighteningly to the
very sky. Grayness overhead. Grayness, also, to one side--the side away
from the mountain. And equal grayness below. The valley in which they
lived could no longer be seen at all. Trudging and scrambling up the
interminable incline, the people of Burl's personal following gradually
realized the strangeness of their surroundings. As one result, they grew
sick and dizzy. To them it seemed that the solid earth had tilted, and
might presently tilt further. There was no horizon, but they had never
seen a horizon. So they felt that what had been _down_ was now partly
_behind_, and they feared lest a turning universe let them fall
ultimately toward the grayness they considered sky.

In this frightening strangeness, their only consolation was the company
of their fellows. To stop would be to be abandoned in this place where
all values were turned topsy-turvy. To go back--but none of them could
imagine descending again to be devoured as one-third of their number
already had been. If Burl had stopped, his followers would have squatted
down and shivered together miserably, and waited for death. They had no
thought of adventure nor any hope of safety. The only goodnesses they
could imagine were food and the nearness of other humans. They clung
together, obsessed by the dread of being left alone.

Burl's motivation was no longer noble. He had started uphill in a fit of
sulks, and he was ashamed to stop.

They came to a place where the mountain-flank sank inward. There was a
flat area, and behind it there was a winding cañon of sorts, like a vast
crack in the mountain's substance. Burl breasted the curving edge, and
walked on level ground. Then he stopped short.

The mouth of the cañon was perhaps fifty yards from the lip of the
downward slope. There was this level space, and on it there were
toadstools and milkweed, and there was food. It was a small, isolated
asylum for life such as they were used to. It could have been that here
they could have found safety. But it wasn't that way.

       *       *       *       *       *

They saw the web at once. It was slung from between the opposite
cliff-walls by cables two hundred feet long. Its radiating cables
reached down to anchorages on stone. The snare-threads, winding out and
out in that logarithmic spiral which men on other planets had noted
thousands of years before--the snare-threads were a yard apart. The web
was set for giant game. It was empty now, but Burl searched keenly and
saw the tight-rope-cable leading from the very center of the web to a
rocky shelf some fifty feet above the cañon's floor. At its end he saw
the spider. It waited there, almost invisible against the stone, with
one furry leg touching the cable that led to its waiting-place so that
the slightest touch on any part of the web would warn it instantly.

Burl's followers accumulated behind him. They stared. They knew, of
course, that a web-spider will not leave its snare under any normal
circumstances. They were not afraid of that. But they looked at the
ground between the web and themselves.

It was a charnel-house of murdered creatures. Half-inch-thick wing-cases
of dead beetles. The cleaned-out carcasses of other giants. The
ovipositor of an ichneumon-fly--six feet of slender, springy,
deadly-pointed tube--and abdomen-plates of bees and draggled antennae of
moths and butterflies.

Something very terrible lived in this small place. The mountainsides
were barren of food for big flying things. Anything which did fly so
high for any reason would never land on sloping, foodless stone. It
would land here. And very obviously it would die. Because
something--something--killed them as they came. It denned back in the
cañon where they could not see. It dined here.

The humans looked and shivered. All but Burl. He deliberately chose for
himself a magnificent lance grown by one dead creature for its own
defense. He pulled it out of the ground and cleaned it with his hands.
He seemed absorbed, but he was terribly aware of the inner depths of the
cañon. He was actually pretending, for the sake of what he believed his
dignity.

Fearfully, the other humans imitated him in choosing weapons from the
armory of the devoured. Then Burl stalked grandly to one side and began
to climb again. His people followed him in numbed silence. They were
filled with dread, but it was not quite terror. Insects do not stalk
their prey. The deadly unseen monster of the cañon had not attacked
them. Therefore, it did not know they were there. And therefore they
were safe from it until it appeared. But none of them desired to stay.

The slope lessened here, and half a mile further on there was a small
thicket of mushrooms. From within it came the cheerful loud clicking of
some small beetle, arrived at this spot nobody could possibly know how,
but happily ensconced in a twenty-yard patch of jungle above a hollow
that had gathered soil through the centuries. There were edible
mushrooms in the thicket.

The humans ate. Naturally. And here they realized that they were no
longer doomed by the creatures in the valley. Since their climb began
they had seen no dangerous thing except the one gigantic, motionless
web-spider. They had left the valley and its particular dangers behind.

A man exclaimed in naïve astonishment. He was eating raw mushroom at the
moment, and his mouth was full. But abruptly it occurred to him that
their doom was lifted. He mentioned the fact in a sort of startled
wonder.

"We will stay here," he added happily. "There is food."

And Burl regarded him with knitted brows. Burl was well on the way to
becoming spoiled. He had tasted power over his folk, and he found
himself jealous of any decision by anybody else.

"I go on," he said haughtily. "Now! You may stay behind if you
wish--alone!"

He broke off food for the journey. He held out his hand to Saya. He went
on. And again he went upward because to go back was to go to the cañon
of the unknown killer. And his folk docilely followed him. They did not
really reason about it. To follow him had become a pattern, more or less
precarious. In time it could become a habit. Over a period of years it
could even become a tradition.

The procession marched on and up. Burl noticed that the air seemed
clearer, here. It was not the misty, quasi-transparent stuff of the
valley. He could see for miles to right and left, and the curvatures of
the mountain-face. But he could not see the valley.

Then he realized that the cloud-bank he saw was finite--an object. He
had never thought of it specifically before. To him it had seemed simply
the sky.

Now he saw an indefinite lower surface which yet definitely hid the
heights toward which he moved. He and his followers were less than a
thousand feet below it. It appeared to Burl that presently he would run
into an obstacle that would simply keep him from going any further. But
until that happened he obstinately continued to climb.

The thing which was the sky appeared to stir. It moved. A little higher,
and he could see that there were parts of it which were lower than he
was. They moved also. But they did not approach him. And he had no
experience of anything inimical which did not plunge upon its victims.
Therefore he was not afraid.

In fact, a little later he observed that the whiteness retreated before
him, and he was pleased. Weak things such as humans fled aside when
predators approached. Here was something which fled aside at his
approach. His followers undoubtedly observed the same phenomenon. He had
killed a spider. He was a remarkable person. This unknown white stuff
was afraid of him.

Burl, with bland conceit, marched confidently through the cloud-bank,
ever climbing. At its thickest, he could see only feet in each
direction, but always when he advanced threateningly upon opacity, it
cleared before him.

Presently the gray light grew brighter. Burl and his folk were
accustomed to a shadowless illumination such as fungi could endure--the
equivalent of a heavily overcast day on an Earth-type planet. Now the
mist about him took on a luminosity which was of a different kind.
Suddenly he noticed the silence. He had never known even comparative
silence before in all his life. His ears had been assailed every minute
since he had been born by a din which was the noise of creatures. By
stridulations, by chirpings, by screams, or at the least by the clicking
of armor or the deep-toned pulsations of wings. He had always lived in
the uproar of frenzied struggle. Now, that hellish chorus of shrieks and
cries and mating-calls was cut off. The lower surface of the cloud-bank
reflected it. Burl and his people moved upward through an unparalleled
stillness.

They fell silent, marveling. They heard each other's movements. They
could hear each other's voices. But they moved in a vast quietness over
stones which here were not even lichen-covered, but glistened with wet.
And all about them a golden glow hung in the very air. Stillness, and
quietude, and golden light which grew stronger and stronger and
stronger....

It was very remarkable when they came up through the sea of mist upon a
shore of sunshine, and saw blue sky and sunlight for the first time. The
light smote upon their pink skins and brilliantly colored furry
garments. It glinted in changing, ever-more-colorful flashes upon the
cloaks made of butterfly wings. It sparkled upon the great lance carried
by Burl in the lead, and the quite preposterous weapons borne by his
followers.

The little party of twenty humans waded ashore through the last of the
thinning white stuff which was cloud. They gazed about them with
blinking, wondering, astounded eyes. The sky was blue. There was green
grass. And there was sound. The sound was of wind blowing in the trees
and sunshine.

They heard insects, too, but they did not know what it was they heard.
The shrill, small musical whirrings, the high-pitched small cries which
made up a strange new elfin melody, were totally strange. All things
were novel to their eyes, and an enormous exultation filled them. From
deep-buried ancestral memories, they knew that this was somehow right,
was somehow normal. And they breathed clean air for the first time in
many generations.

Burl even shouted, in triumph, and his voice rang echoing among rocks.

The plateau rang with the shouting of a man in triumph!

       *       *       *       *       *

They had enough food for days. They had brought it from the isolated
thicket not too far beneath the clouds. Had they found other food
immediately, they would have settled down comfortably, in the fashion
normal to creatures whose idea of bliss is a secure hiding-place and
food on hand. Somehow they believed that this high place was secure. But
it was not a hiding-place. And though they did accept, with the
simplicity of children and savages, that they had no enemies here, their
first quest, nevertheless, was for a place in which they could conceal
themselves.

[Illustration]

They found a cave. It was small to hold all of them, so that they would
be crowded in it, but, as it turned out, that was fortunate.

At some time it had been occupied by some other creature, but the dirt
which floored it had settled flat and there were no recent tracks. It
retained faint traces of an odor which was unfamiliar but not
unpleasant. It had no connotation of danger.

Ants stank of formic acid plus the musky odor of their particular city
and kind. One could tell not only the kind of ant but what hill they
came from, from a mere sniff at a well-traveled ant-trail. Spiders had
their own hair-raising odor. The smell of a praying-mantis was acrid,
and of beetles decay, and of course those bugs whose main defense was
smell gave off an effluvium which tended to strangle all but themselves.

The cave's smell was quite different. The humans thought vaguely that it
might be another kind of man. Actually, it _was_ the smell of a
warm-blooded animal. But Burl and his fellows knew of no warm-blooded
creatures but themselves.

They had come above the clouds a bare two hours before sunset--of which
they knew nothing. For an hour they marveled, staying close together.
They were astounded by the sun, more particularly since they could not
look at it. But presently, being savages, they accepted it with the
matter-of-factness of children.

They could not cease to wonder at the vegetation about them. They were
accustomed only to gigantic fungi, and a few feverishly growing plants
striving to flower and bear seed before being devoured. Here they saw
many plants, and at first no insects at all. However, they looked only
for the large things they were accustomed to.

They were astounded by the slenderness of the plants. Grass fascinated
them, and weeds. A large part of their courage came from the absence of
debris upon the ground. In the valley, the habitation of a trapdoor
spider was marked by grisly trophies--armor emptied of all meat but not
yet rotted by the highly specialized bacteria which flourished upon
chitin. The hunting-ground of even a mantis was marked by discarded,
transparent beetle-wings and sharp spiny bits of armor, and mandibles
not tasty enough to be consumed. Here, in the first hour of their
exploration, they saw no sign that any insect from the lowlands had ever
come to this place at all. But they interpreted the fact quite correctly
as rarity, rather than complete absence of huge creatures blundering up
into the sunlight.

They were relieved that they had found a cave. There was no thicket of
trees close-growing enough to shelter them. They were ludicrously amazed
when they found that trees were hard and solid, because the fungi they
knew were easily cut by sawtoothed tools. They found nothing to eat, but
they were not yet hungry. They did not worry about it while they still
had bits of edible mushroom from their climb.

When the sun sank low and the crimson colorings filled the western
horizon, they shivered. They watched the glory of their first sunset
with scared, incredulous eyes. Yellows and reds and purples reared
toward the zenith. It became possible to look and gaze directly at the
sun. They saw it descend behind something they could not guess at. Then
there was dark.

The fact stunned them. So night came like this!

Then they saw the stars as they winked singly into being. And the folk
from the lowland crowded frantically into the cave with its faint odor
of having once been occupied. They filled the cave tightly. But Burl was
somewhat reluctant to admit his fear, and Saya lingered close to him.
They were the last to enter.

       *       *       *       *       *

Nothing happened. Nothing. The sounds of evening continued. They were
strange but infinitely soothing and somehow what night-sounds ought to
be. Burl and the others could not possibly analyze it, but for the first
time in many generations they were in an environment really similar to
that intended for their race. It had a rightness and a goodness about it
which was perceptible for all its novelty. And because Burl had once
been lost from his tribe, he was capable of estimating novelties a
little better than the rest.

He listened to the night-noises from close by the cave's small entrance.
He heard the breathing of his tribesmen. He felt the heat of their
bodies, keeping the crowded enclosure warm enough for all. Saya was
close beside him. She held fast to his arm for reassurance. He was
wakeful, and thinking very busily and very painfully.

Saya was filled with a tumult that was combined fear of the unknown and
relief from much greater fear of the familiar ... and warm, proud
memories of the sight of Burl leading and commanding the others, and
memories of the look and feel of sunshine, and pictures of sky and
grass and trees which she had never seen before. Emotion-filled memories
of Burl as he killed a spider! Flinging a ball-fungus at a hatchling
mantis, saving a young boy. Grandly leading the others up the
mountainside which it had never occurred to anybody else to climb.
Keeping onward sternly when it seemed that the solid ground had twisted
and would drop them into a misplaced sky. And now, between her and the
doorway to the strange and very beautiful night outside.

Saya felt an absorbed, impassioned, delectable disquiet from the touch
of Burl's arm beneath her fingers.

He stirred. She whispered a question.

"I am going out," he murmured in her ear. "I wish to see the lights. To
see if they come nearer, or move."

It had occurred to him that the first few stars they had seen glowed in
darkness like the giant fireflies of the valley. They were comparable in
size to all the enlarged insect kingdom. They were a yard and more in
length, and sometimes at night they soared and wheeled above the lowland
fungus jungles, and the segmented larval females of their kind, which
never grew wings, grew frantic at the sight. They climbed recklessly
upon the flat tops of toadstools and waved their dimmer twinned lanterns
at the flying males.

But this was not the lowland. Burl freed his arm from Saya's fingers. He
crept through the constricted opening of the cave, carrying his lance
before him. He already had a vague idea that it should be not only an
instrument but a weapon. He imagined stabbing enemy creatures with
it--but only vaguely, as yet.

He stood upright in the open air. There was coolness. Night had fallen,
but only a little while since. There were smells in the air such as Burl
had never smelled before--green things growing, and the peculiar clean
odor of wind that has been bathed in sunshine, and the peculiarly
satisfying fragrance of coniferous trees.

But Burl raised his eyes to the heavens. He saw the stars in all their
glory, and he was the first man in at least forty generations to look at
them from this planet. There were myriads upon myriads of them, varying
in brightness from stabbing lights to infinitesimal twinklings. They
were of every possible color. They hung in the sky above him, immobile
and unthreatening. They had not come nearer. They were very beautiful.

[Illustration: "_... he was the first man in ... forty generations to
look at them._"]

Burl stared. And then he noticed that he was breathing deeply, with a
new zest. He was filling his lungs with clean, cool, fragrant air such
as men were intended to breathe from the beginning, and of which Burl
and many others had been deprived. It was almost intoxicating to feel so
splendidly alive and unafraid.

There was a rustling. Saya stood beside him, trembling a little. To
leave the others had required great courage. But she had come to realize
that if any danger befell Burl she wished to share it. So she had come.
They shared the starlight.

They heard the nightwind and the orchestra of night-singers. They
wandered aside from the cave-mouth, and Saya found completely primitive
and wholly atavistic pride in the courage of Burl, who was actually not
afraid of the dark! Her own uneasiness became merely something to give
more savor to her pride in him. She stayed close beside him, not only
for reassurance but also for joy in being close to him.

Presently they heard a new sound in the night. It was very far away and
not in the least like any sound they had ever heard before. It changed
in pitch. Insect-cries do not. It was a baying, yelping sound. It rose
in pitch, and held the higher note, and abruptly dropped in pitch before
it ceased. Minutes later it came again.

Saya shivered, but Burl said thoughtfully:

"That is a good sound."

He didn't know why. Saya shivered once more. She said reluctantly:

"I am cold."

It had been a rare sensation in the lowlands. It came only after one of
the infrequent thunderstorms, when wetted human bodies were exposed to
the gusty winds that otherwise rarely blew there. But here the nights
grew cold, after sundown. The heat in the ground radiated to outer space
at night, not being trapped by a layer of clouds. Before dawn, the
temperature would be close to freezing, though anything worse than a
light fleeting hoar-frost would be rare on this plateau.

The two of them went back to the cave. It was warm there. The cave was
so packed with humans that their body-heat kept the air from growing
chill. Burl and Saya crouched among the rest, and became drowsy and
comfortable. Presently Saya dropped off to sleep, her hand trustfully in
Burl's.

But he remained awake for a long time, blinking. He thought of the
stars, but they were too strange. He thought of the trees and grass. But
most of the impressions of this upper world were so remote from previous
knowledge that he could only accept them as they were and defer
reflection upon them until later. But he did feel an enormous
complacency, what with having brought his followers to an effective
paradise of safety, and having arrived at a completely satisfactory
emotional status with Saya.

But the last thing he actually thought about, before his eyes blinked
shut in sleep, was that yelping noise he had heard in the night. It was
totally novel in kind, yet there was something buried among his racial
heritages that told him it was good.

       *       *       *       *       *

Burl was first awake of all the tribesmen and he looked out into a cold
and pallid grayness. He saw trees. One side of the cluster was brightly
lighted, the other side was dark. He heard tiny singing noises of the
creatures of this place. Presently he crawled out of the cave to scout
for danger.

The air was biting in its chill. It was an excellent reason why giant
insects could not survive here, but it was particularly invigorating as
he breathed it in. Then he summoned courage to move to where he could
peer at the source of this strange light.

He saw the top of the sun as it peered above the eastern cloud-bank. The
sky grew lighter. He blinked at the sun and saw it rise more fully into
view. He thought to look upward, and the stars that had bewildered him
were nearly gone.

He ran to call Saya.

The rest of the tribe waked as he roused her. One by one they followed,
to watch their first sunrise. The men and women gaped at the sun as it
filled the east with colorings and rose above the seemingly steaming
layer of clouds and then appeared to spring free of the horizon and swim
on upward.

The children blinked and shivered and crept to their mothers for warmth.
The women enclosed them in their cloaks, and they thawed and peered out
once more at the glory of sunshine and the day. Soon, though, they
realized that warmth came from the glaring body in the sky. The
children presently discovered a game. It was the first game they had
ever played, and it consisted simply of running into a shaded place
until they shivered, and then of running out into the sunshine again
where they were warm. Until this dawning they had never been free enough
from fear to play at all. But this discovery of the nightly chill and of
the utility of cloaks for warmth up here as well as it had been against
the nightly rain of the lowlands, was a specific suggestion of the value
of clothing. Which was to have another significance, a short time later.

In this first dawn of their experience, the tribesmen ate of the edible
mushroom they had brought up the mountain-flank. But there was not an
indefinite amount of food left. Burl shared the meal Saya brought him.
She touched him fondly. But he regarded his happy fellows with something
like a scowl. They were quite contented, and they had for the moment no
need of his guidance. They did not look to him for orders. And Burl
wanted attention.

He spoke abruptly.

"We do not want to go back to the place we came from," he said sternly.
"We must look for food here, so we can stay for always. Today we look
for food."

It was a seizure of the initiative. It was the linking of what the folk
most craved with obedience to Burl. It was the instinct of a leader. The
eating men murmured agreement. There was a certain definite idea of
goodness--not moral virtue, but of the desirable--becoming associated
with what Burl did and what Burl commanded. His tribe was becoming a
group of which he was the leader, rather than only a loose association
held together only by the fear of solitude.

He led them exploring as soon as they had eaten. All of them, of course.
None had yet become confident enough to be left behind. They straggled
irregularly behind Burl and Saya. They came to a brook and regarded it
with amazement. There were no leeches. No fungus. No swiftly drifting
islands of scum. It was clear. Greatly daring, Burl tasted it and it was
water, but such as he had never tasted before. It was clean, fresh,
sparkling water, not fouled by drainage through mould or rust.

The rest of the tribe tasted. A child slipped on a muddy place and sat
down hard on white stuff that yielded and almost splashed. The child
howled. Saya picked it up. Then she looked where it had been for spines
or small stinging things.

She stared blankly.

She went to Burl with a tiny white thing in her hand. It was a mushroom.
But it was a _tiny_, clean, appetizing object. Saya had no words for it.
She was amazed.

Burl smelled it carefully. He tasted it. And it was actually no more and
no less than a normal mushroom, growing in a shaded place upon
enormously rich soil. It had been protected from sunlight, but it had
not the means nor the stimulus to become a monster.

Burl ate it. He carefully composed his features. Then he announced the
find to his followers.

There was food here, he told them. But in this splendid world to which
he had led them, food was small. There would be no great enemies here,
but the food would have to be sought in small objects rather than great
ones. They must look at this place and seek others like it, where food
would be found....

The tribesmen were doubtful. But they plucked mushrooms--whole
ones!--instead of merely breaking off parts of their tops. In deep
astonishment they recognized miniatures of what they had known only in
gigantic forms. They tasted. The tiny mushrooms had the same savor, but
they were not coarse or stringy or tough like the giants. They melted in
the mouth! Life in this place to which Burl had led them was delectable!
Truly the doings of Burl were astonishing!

When a child found a beetle on a leaf, and they recognized it, they were
entranced, for instead of being bigger than a man and a thing to flee
from, it was less than an inch in size and helpless against them. From
that moment on, they would follow Burl anywhere and obey him in any
matter, in the happy conviction that he could do nothing that was not
desirable in all respects.

The belief, of course, was not quite accurate. Tender tiny mushrooms as
a staple, instead of the tough and chewy provender they were used to, in
time would cause them to have toothaches. But they could not anticipate
it, and it was actually very far away in time.

They struggled after Burl through vast patches of bushes with thorns on
them. They were not used to thorns, and they deeply distrusted the
bushes and even the glistening fruit on them, which eventually they
would know were blackberries. Near midday they heard noises in the
distance.

The sounds were made up of cries of varying pitch, some of which were
sharp and abrupt, and others longer and less loud. The people did not
understand them in the least. They could have been the cries of human
beings, but they were assuredly not cries of pain. Also they were not
language. They seemed to convey an impression of enormous, zestful
excitement. They had no overtone of horror. And Burl and his folk had
known of no excitement among insects except the frenzy of ferocity. They
were unable to imagine even the nature of the tumult.

To Burl the cries seemed to have somewhat the timbre of the yelping
sounds he had heard the night before. And he had felt instinctively
drawn to that sound. He liked it.

He led the way boldly in the direction of the noise. And presently he
came out of breast-high weeds with Saya close behind him and the others
trailing. He emerged upon a space of bare stone, a little upraised. He
looked down into a small and grassy amphitheater. The tumult came from
its center.

A pack of dogs were joyously attacking something that Burl could not see
clearly. They _were dogs_. They barked zestfully, and they yelped and
snarled and yapped in a dozen different voices, and they darted at the
unseen something and darted away, and they were having a thoroughly
enjoyable time, though it might not be so good for the thing they
attacked.

One of them saw the humans and stopped stock-still and barked. The
others whirled and saw the humans as they came out into view. The tumult
ceased entirely.

There was silence. The men for the first time saw creatures with only
four legs. They had never before seen any moving thing with fewer than
six--except men. Spiders had eight. The dogs did not have mandibles.
They did not act like insects.

And the dogs saw men, whom they had never seen before. Much more
important, they smelled men. And the difference between man-smell and
that of insects was vast. Through many generations the dogs had not
smelled anything with warm blood save their own kind. The difference in
smell between insect and man was so great that the dogs did not react
with suspicion, but with curiosity. This was an unparalleled smell. It
was even a good smell.

The dogs regarded the men with their heads on one side, sniffing them in
the deepest possible amazement--amazement so intense that they could not
feel hostility. One of them whined a little because he did not
understand.

       *       *       *       *       *

Peculiarly enough, it was a matter of topography. The plateau which
reached above the clouds rose with a steep slope from the valley in
which Burl and the others had lived. To westward, however, the highland
was subject to an indentation which almost severed it. No more than
twenty miles from where Burl's group had climbed to sunshine, there was
a much more gradual slope downward. There, mushroom-forests grew almost
to the cloud-layer. From there, giant insects strayed up and onto the
plateau itself. They could not live on the plateau, of course. There was
no food for their insatiable hunger. Especially at night, there was no
warmth to keep them active. But they did stray from their normal
environment, and some of them reached the sunshine, and perhaps some of
them blundered back down to their mushroom-forests again. But those that
did not find their way back were chilled to torpor during their first
night on the highland. They were only partly active on the second day
if, indeed, they were active at all. And few or none recovered from the
second night of cold. Certainly none kept their full ferocity and
deadliness. And this was how the dogs survived.

Unquestionably the dogs were descended from dogs on the wrecked
ship--name now unknown--which had landed on this planet some forty-odd
human generations since. The humans had no memories of that ship, and
the dogs had surely no traditions. But perhaps because those early dogs
had less of intellect, they had possessed more useful instincts. Perhaps
dogs were bred by the first desperate generations of humans, to warn
them against dangers. But no human civilization could survive the
environment of the lowlands. The humans inevitably reverted to the
primitive. The environment was not one in which dogs could survive, so
somehow they took to the heights. Perhaps dogs survived their masters.
Perhaps some were abandoned or driven away. But dogs had reached the
heights. And they did survive because of the simple fact that giant
insects blundered up after them--and could not survive the proper
environment for dogs and men.

There was even a reason why they had not multiplied excessively. The
food-supply was limited. When there were too many dogs, their attacks on
stumbling insects were more desperate, and made earlier before ferocity
of the insects was lessened. And more dogs died. So there was a specific
adjustment of the dog population to the food-supply. There was also a
selection of those intelligent enough not to attack foolishly, but not
of those whose cowardice left them out of conflict altogether.

These dogs who regarded men with their heads cocked on one side were
excellent dogs. Intelligent dogs. They did not attack anything
imprudently, and they knew it was not necessary to be more than wary of
insects in general. Even spiders, unless they were very newly arrived
from the lowlands. So the attitude of men and dogs was that of
astonished curiosity rather than that of instant fear or rage. Burl knew
that the shaggy, bright-eyed creatures were unlike insects. Actually,
they behaved strikingly like men. They were estimating these strange
beings, men. Insects never estimated. Those that were not carnivorous
had no interest in anything but food, and those that were carnivorous
lumbered insanely into battle the instant any prey came to their notice.
The dogs did neither. They sniffed. They considered. They were amazed.

Burl said harshly to his group:

"Stay here!"

He walked slowly down into the amphitheater. Saya, disregarding his
order, followed him instantly. The dogs moved warily aside. But they
raised their noses and sniffed--long, luxurious sniffs. The smell of
humankind was a good smell. Dogs had gone hundreds of generations
without having it in their nostrils. But before that there were
thousands of generations of dogs to whom that smell was a fulfillment.

Burl reached the object the dogs had been attacking. It lay on the
grass, throbbing painfully. It had come up from the world below. It was
the larva of an azure-blue moth which spread ten-foot wings at
nightfall. The time for its metamorphosis was near, and it had gone
blindly in search of a place where it could spin its cocoon safely and
change to its winged form. It had come to another world--the world above
the clouds. It could find no proper place. Its stores of fat had
protected it a little from the chill. But the dogs had found it.

Burl considered. It was the custom of wasps to sting creatures like this
within a certain special spot--marked for them apparently by a tuft of
dark fur.

Burl thrust his lance into that particular spot. The creature died
quickly and without agony. The thought to kill was an inspiration, which
was the result of continued adventuring. Burl cut off meat for his
tribesmen. The dogs offered no objection. They were well-fed enough.
Burl and Saya, together, carried the meat back to the blinking
tribesfolk. On the way they passed within two yards of a dog which
regarded them with extreme intent and almost a wistful expression. Their
smell did not mean game. It meant--something the dog struggled dumbly to
remember.

"I have killed the thing," said Burl, in the tone of one speaking to an
equal. "You can go and eat it now. I took only part of it."

The dog wagged its tail--and then backed away as if in confusion. After
all, matters had not yet progressed to cordiality.

The humans consumed what Burl had brought them. Most of the dogs went to
the feast Burl had left. Presently they were back. They had no reason to
be hostile. They were fed. The humans offered them no injury. The humans
smelled good. The dogs were fascinated by their smell.

Presently they were close about the humans. They were not insects. They
were interested. The humans were extremely interested in anything which
was interested in them. It was a wholly novel experience. It was the
feeling Burl had felt in becoming the tribal leader. Now every human
felt a little of it, in the intent regard of the dogs. And everything
else was so strange that it was possible to accept anything without
question. Even the possible friendliness of unparalleled creatures which
assuredly were not of a kind with past enemies.

A similar state of "mind" existed among the dogs.

Saya had more meat than she desired. She looked about among the humans.
All were well supplied. She tossed it to a dog. He jerked away alertly,
and then sniffed at the meat where it had dropped. A dog can always eat.
He ate it.

"I wish you would talk to us," said Saya hopefully.

The dog wagged his tail.

"You do not look like us," said Saya interestedly, "but you act as we
do. Not as the--monsters!"

The dog looked at meat in Burl's hand. Burl tossed it. The dog caught it
with a quick snap, swallowed it, wagged his tail briefly and came
closer. It was a completely incredible action, but dogs and men were
blood-kin on this planet. Besides, there was subconscious racial-memory
instinct in friendship between man and dog. It was not overlaid by any
past experience of either. They were the only warm-blooded creatures on
this world. It was kinship felt by both.

Burl stood up and spoke politely to the dog. He addressed him with the
same respect he would have given to another man. In all his life he had
never felt equal to an insect, but he felt no arrogance toward this dog.

He felt superior only to other men.

[Illustration]

"We are going back to our cave," he said politely. "Maybe we will meet
again."

He led his tribe back to the cave in which they had spent the previous
night. The dogs followed, ranging on either side. They were well-fed,
with no memory of hostility to any creature which smelled like men. They
had instinct and intelligence. The latter part of the return to the
cave--if anybody had been qualified to notice--was remarkably like a
group of dogs taking a walk with a group of people. It was
companionable. It felt remarkably right.

That night Burl left the cave, as before, to look at the stars. This
time Saya went with him, gladly. But as they emerged from the
cave-entrance there was a stirring. A dog rose and stretched itself
elaborately, yawning the while. When Burl and Saya walked aside from the
cave, the dog trotted amiably with them.

They talked to it, embarrassed. And the dog seemed pleased. It wagged
its tail.

When morning came the dogs were still waiting hopefully for the humans
to come out. They appeared to expect the humans to take another nice
long walk, on which they would accompany them. It was a brand-new
satisfaction they did not wish to miss. After all, from a dog's
standpoint, humans were made to take long walks with, among other
things. The dogs greeted the humans with tail-waggings and cordiality.

       *       *       *       *       *

The friendship of the dogs assured the humans' new status in life. They
had ceased to be fugitive game for any insect murderer. They had hoped
to be unpursued foragers. But, joined to the dogs, they were raised to
the estate of hunters. The men did not domesticate the dogs. They made
friends with them. The dogs did not subjugate themselves to the men.
They joined them, at first tentatively and then with worshipful
enthusiasm. And the partnership was so inherently right that within a
month it was as if it had been always. And indeed, except for a few
centuries, for them, it had.

The humans had made a permanent encampment by then. There were a few
caves at an appropriate distance from the slope up which most wanderers
from the lowlands came. The humans moved into the caves. A child found
the chrysalis of a giant butterfly, whose caterpillar form had so
offensive an odor that the dogs had not attacked it. But when it
emerged from the chrysalis, humans and dogs together assailed it before
it could take flight. They ended with warm approval of each other. The
humans had great wings with which to make cloaks. And men wore cloaks
now--shorter than the women's--but cloaks. They were very useful against
the evening chill. When one dawning a vast outcry of dogs awoke the
humans, Burl led the rush to the spot, and his great lance did execution
which the dogs appeared to admire. Burl wore a moth's feathery antennae,
now, bound to his forehead like a knight's plumes. They were very
splendid.

In a single month their entire way of life went through a revolution.
The ground was often thorny. A man pierced his foot, and bandaged it
with a strip of wing-fabric so he could walk. The injured foot was more
comfortable to walk with than the well one. Within a week women were
busily contriving divers forms of footgear, to achieve the greatest
comfort. One day Saya admired glistening red berries and tried to pluck
them, and they stained her fingers. She licked the fingers--and berries
were added to the tribe's menu. A veritable orgy of experimentation
began. And this was a state of affairs which is very, very rare among
human beings. A tribe with an established culture and tradition cannot
change without disaster. But men who have abandoned their old ways and
are seeking new ones can go far.

Already the dogs were established as sentries and watchmen and friends
to every one of the humans. By now mothers did not feel alarmed if a
child wandered out of sight. There would be dogs along. No danger could
approach a child without vociferous warning from the dogs. Men went
hunting, now, with zestful tail-wagging dogs as companions in the chase.
By the time a stray monster from the lowlands reached this area, it was
dazed and half-numbed by at least one night of bitter cold. Even spiders
could not find energy to leap. They fought like fiends, but sluggishly.
Men could kill them while dogs kept their attention. Burl killed one
the third week on the plateau. He was nerved to the deed by a peculiar
feeling that he must be worthy of the courage of the dogs with him at
the time.

And presently, while their way of life was still fluid, the permanent
pattern of civilization on the nightmare planet was settled. Burl and
Saya went out early one morning with the dogs, to hunt for meat for the
village. Hunting was easiest in the morning while creatures strayed up
the night before were still numbed. Often, hunting was merely butchery
of an enfeebled monster to whom any sort of movement was enormous
effort.

This morning the humans moved briskly. The dogs roamed exuberantly
through the brush before them. They were five miles from the village
when the dogs bayed game some distance ahead. And Burl and Saya ran to
the spot hand in hand--which was something of a change from their former
actions at the thought of a giant creature of the insect kind--and found
the dogs dancing and barking around one of the most ferocious and most
ghastly of the carnivorous beetles. It was not too large, to be sure.
Its body might have been four feet long, but its horrid mandibles added
three feet more.

Those scythe-like objects gaped wide--opening sidewise as a beetle's
jaws do--and snapped hideously, swinging about as the dogs dashed at
them. The legs were spurred and spiked and armed with dagger-like
spines. Burl plunged into the fight.

[Illustration: "_Those scythe-like objects gaped wide ... as the dogs
dashed at them._"]

The great gaping mandibles clicked and clashed. They were capable of
disemboweling a man or snapping a dog's body in half without effort.
There were whistling noises as the beetle breathed through its abdominal
spiracles. It fought furiously, making frantic plunges at the dogs who
dashed in and out to torment and bewilder it while they created the most
zestfully excited of uproars.

There was something beside this conflict that Burl and Saya should have
noticed, but they were instantly intent. The other thing was quite
unparalleled. There had been nothing else like it on this planet in many
hundreds of years. It moved slowly above the plateau as if examining it.
It was half a dozen miles away and perhaps a mile higher when Burl and
Saya prepared to intervene professionally on behalf of the dogs. Then it
swerved and moved directly toward them. It moved swiftly.

But it was silent, and they did not know at all. Burl leaped in with a
lance-thrust at the tough integument where an armored leg joined the
body. He missed, and the monster whirled. Then Saya flashed her cloak
before the beetle, so that it seemed a larger and nearer antagonist. As
the creature whirled again, Burl thrust once more and a hind-leg
crumpled.

Instantly the thing limped crazily. A beetle does not use its legs like
four-legged creatures. It moves the two end legs on one side with the
center leg on the other, so that always it is braced on an adjustable
tripod. But it cannot adjust readily to crippling.

A dog snatched at a spiny lower leg and crunched and darted away. The
expressionless, machine-like horror uttered a formless, deep-bass cry
and was spurred to all possible ferocity. The fight became a thing of
furious movement and uproar, with Burl striking once at a multiple eye
so the pain would deflect it from a charge on Saya, and Saya again
deflecting it with her cloak and once breathlessly trying to strike it
with her shorter spear.

Then the beetle sank to the ground, all three legs on one side crippled.
The remaining three thrust and thrust and struggled terribly and
suddenly it was on its back, still striking its gigantic jaws
frantically in the hope of murder. But Burl stabbed home between two
armor-plates where a ganglion was almost exposed. A thrust killed it
instantly.

Burl and Saya smiled at each other. There was a monstrous sound of
splintering trees. They whirled. The dogs pricked up their ears. One of
them barked defiantly.

       *       *       *       *       *

Something huge--truly huge!--settled to the ground a bare hundred yards
away. It was metal, and there were ports, and it was utterly beyond
experience, because, of course, there had been no spaceship landings on
this planet in forty-odd human generations. But as Burl and Saya stared
blankly at it, a port opened, and men came out, and they waved hopefully
to the two barbarically attired figures who had been seen fighting a
monster with the help of dogs. Which meant some sort of civilization.

The dogs confirmed it. They sniffed. These, also, were men. And Burl and
his tribe had this smell, and were friends. So the dogs trotted forward
with the self-confident cordiality of dogs on excellent terms with
men--and there was no question of friendship. None at all. The men came
forward joyously to talk to Burl and Saya.

There were difficulties, of course. But Burl and Saya had the calm
composure of savages, and the alertness of people who are changing the
pattern of their lives of their own volition--and finding it very
pleasant--and things went swimmingly. There was, on the spaceship, an
"educator." They invited Burl to put it on his head. He obliged. And
very shortly he understood a new language, and was equipped with a very
considerable fund of general information. Among the items of information
was the fact that presently he would have a splitting headache--he
did--and that the making of records for an educator was so different
that it required generations to get all the facts and knowledge for a
single type of education down in permanent form.

All of which fitted admirably into the arrangements that the men on the
spaceship were anxious to make, and Burl was enthusiastically willing to
accede to. He and his folk knew the creatures of the lowlands as nobody
else could possibly know them. No electronic educator could possibly
make a record making available that knowledge in less than two
generations--maybe three. Therefore--

       *       *       *       *       *

The nightmare world swims in space about its nearby sun. It has a name
now, but it does not matter. It has a city on it, which probably matters
less. It is a curious city, though. The people in it wear gorgeous
colored fur, and cloaks of butterfly wings. The least of the people in
that city wear garments which would fetch fortunes on other inhabited
worlds. In fact, such garments do. But it is most practical for Burl,
and Saya, and their followers to wear such garments. There is no day but
that a small, winged flying craft rises from the city to go silently
over the plateau until it reaches the space above the cloud-bank, and
then dives down into it. It is wise for the occupants and the operators
of such small craft to wear garments like the other humans on this
planet. They are recognized, that way, when garments such as most
planets find suitable would make them seem strange.

They want to be recognized, in the jungles and the noisesome valleys of
the lowlands. There are other humans down there. The people of the city,
of course, bring their fellows out as fast as they can find them. There
is a session with an educator--and a splitting headache afterward--and
very soon the folk who have hidden from monsters all their lives are
zestfully hunting them with dogs. Presently they are hunting them with
flying machines.

It is a nice arrangement. The search for more people in the lowlands is
a prosperous business even when it is unsuccessful. The wings of white
morph butterflies bring the highest price, but even a common
swallow-tail is riches enough. And the fur of caterpillars--duly
processed--goes into the holds of the regular spaceliners with the same
care given elsewhere to jewels and platinum.

But the nightmare planet has not become a merely sordid place of
business. What comforts and what luxuries spaceships can bring are
available enough, to be sure. But the city on the plateau, and the homes
of the barbarically clad inhabitants are not places to which invitations
are coveted for the luxury of them. The planet is a sportman's paradise.

Not long since, the Planet President of _Surmor III_ was a guest in
Burl's dwelling. Burl is all hard muscle, despite his graying hair, and
he and Saya have fitted very beautifully into the sort of civilization
that turned out to be congenial to them. They have grown children now,
and their home is quite fit to entertain a World President in its
richness. But it is small--the size they want it to be.

The atmosphere is oddly informal. There are self-respecting and amiable
dogs nearly everywhere. The World President of _Surmor III_ was inclined
to be stand-offish at first. But he is a sportsman, like Burl. And since
the last hunting trip, he is very respectful. After all, there are few
planet leaders who will, as they do, for pure sporting joy of the hunt,
fight the mastodon-sized tarantula of the lowlands with nothing but a
spear--and win.

But Burl does.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Nightmare Planet, by Murray Leinster

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NIGHTMARE PLANET ***

***** This file should be named 42987-8.txt or 42987-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/2/9/8/42987/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Denny Lien, Mary Meehan and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
