The Project Gutenberg EBook of What Do You Read?, by Boyd Ellanby

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.



Title: What Do You Read?

Author: Boyd Ellanby

Release Date: August 21, 2015 [EBook #49754]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WHAT DO YOU READ? ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net










                           WHAT DO YOU READ?

                           _By Boyd Ellanby_

                    _Illustrated by Malcolm Smith_

     [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from Other Worlds
     March 1953. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
     the U.S.copyright on this publication was renewed.]


     Writers have long dreamed of a plot machine, but the machines in
     Script-Lab did much more than plot the story--they wrote it. Why
     bother with human writers when the machines did the job so much
     faster and better?


Herbert would have preferred the seclusion of a coptor-taxi, but he
knew he could not afford it. The Bureau paid its writers adequately,
but not enough to make them comfortable in taxis. In front of his
apartment house, he took the escalator to the Airway. It must have been
pleasant, he thought as he stepped onto the moving sidewalk, to be a
writer in the days when they were permitted to receive royalties and,
presumably, to afford taxi fare.

On the rare occasions when he was forced to travel in the city, he
usually tried to insulate himself from the Airway crowds by trying to
construct new plots for his fiction. In his younger days, of course, he
had occupied the time in reading the classics, but lately, so great was
the confusion of the city, he preferred to close his eyes, and try to
devise a reverse twist for one of his old stories.

Today, he found it harder than usual to concentrate. The Airway was
crowded, and he had never heard the people so noisy. Up ahead half a
block, there was a sharp scream. Herbert opened his eyes and peered
ahead to see what had happened. Someone had been pushed through the
railing of the Airway, and as his section rolled on and passed, he
could see lying on the pavement below the body of a young cripple, his
hands still holding a broken crutch.

Herbert shuddered. He felt sick, and closed his eyes again.

"Wonder how that happened?" said the man in front of him.

"He probably got in the way," said a girl, callously.

The man ahead made no comment, and Herbert dismissed his own
puzzlement. Could he make a plot out of this incident of the crippled
boy? he wondered.

He shifted to the slower track, descended the escalator, and stepped
onto the street across from the Bureau of Public Entertainment. He had
to wait a moment, for an ambulance was clanging down the street; then
he crossed to the stone-faced building.

As he rode up the elevator, he wondered again why John had ordered him
to come to lunch. He realized that he was no longer a young man, but he
certainly did not feel ready to be pensioned. And in the last year he
had actually written more fiction than in any other year of his life.
Very little of it had been used, for some reason, but story for story
he thought it matched any of his previous output.

Ludwig received him with little ceremony. "Sit down, Herbert. It was
good of you to come. Miss Dodson," he called through the intercom,
"this is strictly off the air. Nothing is to be recorded. Is that
clear?"

"Well, John," said Carre. "You're looking harassed, if I may say
so. Are they working you too hard? Or are you just faced with the
unpleasant job of firing an old friend? I realize, of course, that AFE
aren't using much of my stuff just now."

Ludwig smiled unhappily and shook his head. "I'm not planning to fire
you, Herbert. But you know, of course, that you're in the same boat
with the other Writers, and that boat is in choppy waters. Frankly,
I'm not very happy about the situation. The five-year experimental
period is coming to an end. This Bureau has the job of providing
entertainment, and that includes, among many other categories,
literature. Books, articles, and stories. And I'm faced with a
difficult decision: shall we employ Writers, or use Script-Lab? You are
only one of the many people we support, of course, and both you and
Script-Lab furnish material to Adult Fiction, Earth, who distribute it
as they see fit."

Herbert Carre nibbled at his graying moustache. "I know. And for the
last year, for some reason, AFE has not seen fit to use much of my
stuff. And yet it's no different. I write just the same sort of thing I
always did."

"Tastes change, Herbert. Script-Lab reports that the public seem to
prefer the machine-made stories. I have a week to make a definite
decision, and I'm particularly anxious to finish the job because I've
been asked to transfer, at the earliest possible moment, to the Bureau
of Public Safety. The Committee are inclined, on the whole, to favor
the enlarging of Script-Lab, and transferring all the Writers to some
other department."

"Great Gamma! You mean _all_ literature will be machine-made from now
on?"

"Don't get excited, Herb! That's what I've got to decide. But if they
can really write it just as well, why not? You remember Hartridge,
don't you? Class behind me at college, majored in electronics? He's in
charge of the machine experiment and he's about convinced us that his
machines can turn out manuscripts at lower cost, more rapidly and of
better quality than you Writers can. And he says the public like his
product better. Have you seen any of it?"

"No," said Carre, "I don't know that I have. You know I never read
anything but the classics, for pleasure; nothing later than Thackeray,
or, at the latest, James Joyce. What principle do they work on?"

"I'm not an electronics man. Hartridge tells me they are specially
sensitive blocks of tubes, and that memory, including all the basic
plots of fiction, and all the basic varieties of dialog have been built
into them."

Carre shuddered. "I will never believe, in the face of any evidence,
that machines can take the place of human writers. What machine could
have written 'Alice'?"

"Calm down, Herbert. I want your help. I haven't followed developments
since the days of the early electronic computers, and I haven't time
for studying them now. And, unfortunately, I never read modern fiction
any more--no time for anything but official reports. Now I've always
respected your judgment. I want your opinion of the adequacy of the
material put out by Script-Lab."

"Have you forgotten," said Carre, "that I am a Writer? Aren't you
afraid of a biased report?"

"Not from you. I need a competent judge. And if you are forced to bring
in a favorable report, you know I'd find you a place in some other
field. I might even get you a pension."

"I hope not. Not yet."

"Go over and see Hartridge, look over his machines, and bring me a
critical estimate of the quality of their work--not just literary
quality, of course; we're interested also in entertainment value. Don't
be prejudiced. I imagine you'd be the last to deny that writing can be
damned hard work."

"You're right," said Carre. "I would be the last person to deny it.
Somehow, I've always liked the work, but if the machines can really
take our place, I will try to bow out gracefully."

       *       *       *       *       *

Once again Carre took the escalator to the Airway and moved across the
city. He tried to think of fiction plots, but he could not control his
mind. He was worried. The people standing near him were quarreling,
their shrill voices hurt his ears, and the crowd was so dense that he
could not move away.

Age, he feared, was making him irritable. As he approached his station,
he pushed towards the escalator. He brushed against a woman who was
reading a plastibacked book. She looked up, frowned, and then stamped
viciously on his extended foot. Half-stunned with pain and amazement,
Herbert managed to get to the escalator, went down, and limped slowly
through the doorway of Computer House. What had possessed the woman? he
wondered. He'd barely brushed her sleeve, in passing.

He stood before the door labelled "Manuscript Laboratory: Dr. Philip
Hartridge," and pushed the button. The door opened, but two husky
guards with pistols in hand blocked his entrance.

"Your name, please, and your business?"

Herbert fought a tendency to stammer. His foot still hurt him, he had
developed a headache, and he felt bewildered.

"I just want--My name is Herbert Carre and I want to see Dr. Hartridge.
Why, we've known each other for years!"

"Identification, please?"

They examined his identity card and his Bureau papers, and nodded. Then
one returned his pistol to its holster and approached him.

"Just as a formality, if you please. Dr. Hartridge apologizes for
this." He ran his hands over Herbert's shabby blouse and trousers, then
stepped back.

"That's all, Mr. Carre," he said. "You can go in." They preceded him
into the reception room, advanced to the rear wall and pushed a series
of buttons in a complex pattern. A double door, made of metal instead
of the innocent oak it had seemed to be, slowly swung open.

Philip Hartridge rose from his desk and extended his hand.

"Awfully good to see you, Carre," he said. "It must have been nearly
ten years. Sorry you've never come over to see us sooner. We're very
proud of Script-Lab. How are things?"

"Not bad," said Herbert. "I'm still feeling overwhelmed by the
elaborate protective system you have here. What explains the
body-guards? I didn't suppose this laboratory was classified."

Hartridge leaned back in his chair. "It's not classified. Those men are
here to protect me from possible violence."

"Violence? Great Gamma, do you mean personal threats?"

"Yes. Only last week, my 'coptor exploded a few minutes after I started
the motor. By a lucky chance, I had gone back to the house to get my
brief-case. But someone had certainly tried to kill me."

"Why on earth, Hartridge, should some one--"

"It might be one of several people," he said. "But I think it's
my brother Ben. He would, of course, like to have my share of the
money our father left us. But I'll take care he doesn't get it." He
grinned, and patted his hip. "It's rather more likely to be the other
way around. But we won't waste time in trivialities, Carre. Ludwig
called me. I know you want to see our set-up here. Come in and see the
machines."

They walked through another set of double doors and into the Laboratory.

The noise was deafening. Twenty enormous machines sat in the room. Each
was contained in a dull plastic case, and the control panels were a
maze of dials, buttons, and red and green indicator lights. An electric
typewriter was connected to and operated by each machine, and through
each typewriter ran an endless roll of paper, which emerged to be cut
off into eleven-inch lengths by automatic knives.

"How do you stand the noise?" asked Carre. "Why don't you use Silent
Typers?"

"Oh, the machines don't mind the noise. Silent Typers would be an
unnecessary expense, and as a matter of fact, I've come to like the
sound. It's soothing, after a time."

Carre strolled slowly, rather mournfully, from one monster to another,
glancing at the emerging manuscripts.

"The rate of output," said Hartridge, "is not less than a hundred words
a minute, and they never have to stop to look up their facts, or to
struggle with a balky plot. Can you do as well?"

"I wish I could," said Carre. "I know so little about electronics. Do
the machines use much current?"

"No, that's another of their virtues, they're very economical. The
tubes are so efficient that all twenty machines are run from this one
source, right here--Don't touch it! It's not ordinary house current,
you know. We start with eight thousand volts,--it saves on metal and
transformers."

Herbert found it hard to think against the clatter of the typewriters.
"I'm ashamed to admit," he said, "that I feel a kind of envy, they
seem to compose with such ease."

Hartridge laughed. "No trouble at all! I tell you, my pretty
typewriters are going to put you out of business. You can see for
yourself, Carre, that there's no need for you human writers. We are
doing a perfect job here, and we could supply all the material--novels,
stories, fact articles, biographies--that the country could read. AFE
has been using more and more of our scripts, as you probably know."

"I know."

"I can't say exactly why it is, but we do seem to be able to hit the
public taste better than you Writers." He reached over and patted one
of the plastic cases, as though it had been an affectionate dog.

"Do your machines do nothing but write new material?" asked Carre, as
he strolled on.

"That depends on the demand. Sometimes we have a call for some
out-of-print item, or some work which is so hard to get hold of that
we simply have the machines re-do it. After Number Twelve, here,
produced the entire English translation of 'War and Peace' without
a single semantic error, we were not afraid to trust them with
anything. As a matter of fact, we've got Number Eight re-writing some
nineteenth-century items that have not been available for years--things
that were destroyed or banned during the Atomic Wars, but which the
present government finds acceptable. Would you like to see?"

Carre stood in front of Number Eight in fascination as the metal arms
hammered out the words and lines. After a moment, he frowned. "I seem
to remember this! I must have read it in my early boyhood. It seems so
long ago. Joan of Arc! But I don't remember its happening just this
way."

"Just goes to show you can't trust your memory, Carre. You know the
machines are perfectly logical, and they can't make a mistake."

"No, of course not. Odd, though." He brushed his hand over a forehead
grown wet.

The knife flashed down, cut the paper, and the page fell into its
basket. Hartridge picked it up.

"Would you like this sheet, as a memento? Number Eight can easily re-do
it."

"Thank you."

"And is there anything else I can show you? I don't mind admitting I'm
very proud of my machines."

"Well," said Carre, "perhaps you might let me have some of your current
manuscripts, just for tonight? I can make a comparative study, for
Ludwig, and return them sometime tomorrow."

"Nothing easier." He assembled a bundle of stapled sheets and put them
in a box, and then rang for the guards, to show him out.

"Take care of yourself, Carre. See you tomorrow."

       *       *       *       *       *

Herbert sat, that evening, in his book-lined room, reading manuscripts.
He looked more and more puzzled, and ill at ease. He got up, after a
time, to pace the room, and on a sudden impulse he left the apartment
and hurried up the street.

It had grown dark outside, and he hurried. He could not stand the
thought of the Airway, so he walked. He had covered nearly half a mile
when, at the corner ahead, two Street-taxis approached each other at
right angles. The drivers glared at each other. Neither slowed to
let the other pass; they crashed, and began to burn. Carre hurried
on, trying not to hear the screams of the people or the siren of the
approaching ambulance. No wonder, he thought, that they need Ludwig in
the Bureau of Public Safety; people were behaving so irrationally!

He climbed the steps of the City Library, and advanced to the desk.

"I should like to see files of the magazines published by Adult
Fiction, Earth, if you please."

"But which magazine, sir? They publish hundreds."

"Well, as a start, let me see those which publish light fiction."

For two hours he sat in the Scholar's Room, skimming the pages of the
magazines--_Sagebrush Westerns_, _Romance and Marriage_, _Pinkerton's
Own_, _Harper's_, and a dozen others. He read with concentration,
and made few notes. On his way home he stopped at a news-machine and
selected an armful of the current issues to take home with him. He read
in his room until nearly dawn, and when he did lie down he could not
sleep, or rest.

"I don't believe it," he whispered to himself. "It can't be true." And,
half an hour later, "How did it happen?"

       *       *       *       *       *

At nine next morning he was sitting in the reception room of the Bureau
of Public Entertainment, with brief-case on his knees, waiting for
Ludwig. It was nearly noon before Ludwig himself arrived, and summoned
his visitor.

He sat at his desk, his white hair rumpled, and nervously fingered his
watch chain as Carre took the chair opposite.

"Sorry to keep you waiting, Herbert. The Commissioners over in Safety
have a bad situation to handle, and I've been trying to advise them.
I'll be glad when this writing business is straightened out, and I can
give full attention to Safety. What did you think of Script-Lab?"

"Well, it's very efficient."

"I knew that," said Ludwig. "Machines are built to be efficient. But
what do you think of their output? How does it compare with the work of
the Writers?"

Carre cleared his throat. "John, don't you read the magazines any more?"

"No. No time. Do you?"

"I haven't, until yesterday. I read them, all night. I hardly know how
to express myself. John, something is wrong with the machines."

"Nonsense! There can't be anything wrong with them. They're fed the
plots, fed the variations, and then with perfect logic they create
their stories. You're not an electronics expert, you know."

Carre stared at the floor. Ludwig sighed.

"I'm sorry, Herbert. I'm just too tired to be decently courteous. But
what I wanted from you, after all, was a literary evaluation and not a
scientific one."

"I express myself so badly. There's something wrong, something I can't
exactly define, with what they write."

Ludwig looked exasperated. "But _what_, man? Be concrete."

"I'll try. Here's a short story that was made yesterday. Glance over
it, please, and tell me how it strikes you."

Ludwig read through the manuscript with his accustomed rapidity. "I
don't see anything particularly wrong about it," he said. "Murder
mysteries have never been to my taste, and I don't know that I exactly
approve of the hero's killing his benefactress with an undetectable
poison, and then inheriting her fortune and marrying her niece.
Undetectable poisons are all nonsense, anyway."

"The story doesn't seem to you--unhealthy?"

"I don't know what you're getting at! It's on the grim side, I suppose,
but isn't most modern fiction a little grim? How about your own stuff?"

"I think there's a difference. I know I've written a few mysteries,
and even some tragic stories, but I don't believe I've ever written
anything exactly like this. And this is typical. They're doing
reprints, too, of books that were destroyed or lost during the Atomic
Wars. Do you remember Joan of Arc? Mark Twain's version? Here is a page
from Script-Lab's manuscript."

Ludwig took the sheet and read aloud: "By-and-by a frantic man in
priest's garb came wailing and lamenting and tore through the crowd and
the barrier of soldiers and flung himself on his knees by Joan's cart
and put up his hands in supplication, crying out--

'"O, forgive, forgive!"

'It was Loyseleur!

'And Joan's heart knew nothing of forgiveness, nothing of compassion,
nothing of pity for all that suffer and have been offensive--'"

Ludwig looked up with a frown. "That's odd. It's been so long since I
saw that book--I was only a boy--but that isn't just the way I remember
it."

"That's what Script-Lab is writing."

"But the machines, don't--"

"I know. They don't make mistakes."

The buzz of the visi-sonor interrupted them, and the Commissioner of
Public Safety spoke from the screen.

"For heaven's sake, Ludwig, shelve the book-business and get over
here. We've had a rash of robberies with violence, a dozen bad street
accidents, and two suspicious deaths of diabetics in coma. We need
help."

Ludwig was already reaching for his brief case. "Right away," he said,
and flicked the switch.

"John!" Carre begged, "This book matter is serious. You can't just drop
it! Come with me to Hartridge's lab and see for yourself!"

"I can't. No time. You heard the Commissioner."

"Tomorrow morning?"

"Can't make it. Have to go to a funeral. A niece of mine who died
suddenly of cancer. Poor girl. We thought she was doing so well, too,
with the hormone injections. Not that her husband will break his heart,
from what I know of the scoundrel."

Carre followed him towards the door. "Then make it tomorrow afternoon!
It's vital!"

Ludwig pulled out his watch, and thought for a second. "All right. Meet
you there tomorrow at three." The door slammed behind him.

       *       *       *       *       *

They followed the guards through the chrome steel doors into the room
with the machines. All twenty typewriters were hammering out their
hundred words a minute.

"It is an honor to have a visit from you, Commissioner Ludwig," said
Hartridge. "We're very proud of Script-Lab. You'll agree, I know, that
the experiment has been eminently successful. Tough on you, of course,
Carre. But you Writers can always land on your feet."

"The decision has not yet been made," said Ludwig. "Now to business."
He pulled a chair up to the desk, opened his brief case, and took out
some papers.

"Before I examine the machines, I'd like to check with you the facts
and figures that Carre has compiled for me. In 1971, the first year of
the experiment, only ten per cent of Script-Lab's output of stories,
books, and articles was accepted by Adult Fiction, Earth. Right?"

"Right," said Hartridge. "But that was our worst year. Since then--"

Ludwig held up his hand. "In the second year, you supplied thirty-five
per cent of the needs of AFE. Check?"

"Check."

"In the two years following you supplied seventy-five per cent, and
in 1976, this year you are supplying about ninety per cent of all
published matter, with the Writers supplying only ten per cent.
Correct?"

"Correct. A wonderful record, Commissioner."

Ludwig turned to another sheet of data. "As I understand it, you feed
into the machine's memories, basic plots, factual data, conversational
variants, and they do the rest?"

"That's right. We give them the material, and they create with perfect
rationality. I myself read nearly everything they make, and even I am
amazed at their craftsmanship. And they are so efficient, and write so
swiftly!"

"Speed is no doubt a desirable feature," said Ludwig.

"But not the only one!" said Carre.

Hartridge smiled. "Professional jealously is warping your judgment, old
man. It may be hard to take, but you Writers have nothing to give the
world, anymore, that machines can't."

Ludwig turned his back and surveyed the room. "I would like to see,
now, some of your productions."

Hartridge beamed. "As a matter of fact, I have something that ought to
interest you, particularly. Just follow me, gentlemen. Here, by the
way, is our power source. Note how simple and efficient the circuit
design is. Ah, here we are. Knowing that you were making us a visit
today, I gave to Number Seven, here, the necessary data for creating
your own monologue on 'Our Duties to the Aged.' That was your doctoral
thesis, I believe?"

"But that's out of print! I haven't seen a copy myself in years!"

"To Script-Lab, that is unimportant. Feed it the data, the basic
premises, and it will do the rest. Would you like to see?"

The three men crowded around Number Seven, and watched the emergence of
paper from the typewriter as the keys tapped the words into lines, and
the carriage shifted. Ludwig, at first, showed only the pleasure which
any writer feels on re-reading a good piece of work. Gradually, his
face changed. He looked puzzled, uncertain, and then his skin reddened
with anger.

[Illustration: "_He looked puzzled, uncertain, and then his skin
reddened with anger._"]

The automatic knife chopped down and severed the completed page. Ludwig
scooped it up from the basket and read the page a second time. He
raised his eyes to meet the tense gaze of Carre.

"Is this what you were trying to tell me, Herbert?"

"That sort of thing. Yes."

"Is something wrong, Commissioner?" said Hartridge. "I thought you'd be
pleased."

"Pleased? But this is something I never wrote!"

"But you _must_ have written it," said Hartridge. "Or are you just
trying to sabotage my project with a deliberate misstatement?"

"Read it!" said Ludwig. "Read that paragraph out loud."

"'Our duties to the aged,'" read Hartridge, "'are closely bound to our
duties to ourselves. When the old become infirm, they should be quietly
helped out of a contented existence. After all, the only measure of
the value of aged men and women should be their present usefulness to
society.'

He looked up from the page. "I don't see why you're so unwilling to
admit your authorship, Commissioner. There's nothing wrong with this."

"Only," Ludwig said softly, "I didn't write it. What the monologue
actually said was something like this: 'Our duties to the aged are
closely bound to our duties to ourselves. When the old become infirm,
they should be quietly helped to a contented existence. After all, the
only measure of the value of aged men and women should be their past
usefulness to our society.'

"You've made your point, Carre," he went on. "If this sort of perverted
advice has been fed to our people the last few years, it's no wonder
we're having a wave of crimes. Be selfish! It pays. An eye for an eye!
Poison the old man! Nobody will ever know and you'll get his money!"

Hartridge was still studying the typescript, and he spoke with
defiance. "Number Seven's excerpt from your monologue seems perfectly
sensible to me," he said. "For some reason of your own you must be
lying about it. Why, the version you say you remember is utterly
illogical!"

"Of course it's illogical!" said Carre. "Don't you see--"

"Of course it's illogical!" shouted Ludwig. "It was illogical for Joan
to forgive her tormentor. It's illogical to take care of invalids. It's
illogical to forget an injury. But it's human! How on earth is society
to exist if it feels only the rational emotions? You, yourself,
Hartridge, have been corrupted by reading the work of Script-Lab, and
you no longer have any sense of human charity. These monsters have
been undermining our whole life, because the only motivation they were
provided was the most dangerous and ugly thing possible in the world of
human beings--pure logic!"

As he shouted, he fumbled at his watch, unhooked the long gold chain,
and with a sudden lunge, flung it across the bus bars which supplied
the current to the machines.

There was a blinding flash, a hiss, and the eternal clacking of the
typewriters was replaced by silence.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of What Do You Read?, by Boyd Ellanby

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WHAT DO YOU READ? ***

***** This file should be named 49754.txt or 49754.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/9/7/5/49754/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
