The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Gravity Business, by James E. Gunn

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: The Gravity Business

Author: James E. Gunn

Illustrator: Ashman

Release Date: September 6, 2015 [EBook #49897]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GRAVITY BUSINESS ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Adam Buchbinder, Mary Meehan and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net









                         The Gravity Business

                           By JAMES E. GUNN

                         Illustrated by ASHMAN

     [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from Galaxy January
     1956. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
     copyright on this publication was renewed.]


     _This little alien beggar could dictate his own terms, but how
     could he--and how could anyone find out what those terms might be?_


The flivver descended vertically toward the green planet circling the
old, orange sun.

It was a spaceship, but not the kind men had once dreamed about. The
flivver was shaped like a crude bullet, blunt at one end of a fat
cylinder and tapering abruptly to a point at the other. It had been
slapped together out of sheet metal and insulation board, and it sold,
fully equipped, for $15,730. It didn't behave like a spaceship, either.

As it hurtled down, its speed increased with dramatic swiftness. Then,
at the last instant before impact, it stopped. Just like that.

A moment later, it thumped a last few inches into the ankle-deep grass
and knee-high white flowers of the meadow. It was a shock of a jar that
made the sheet-metal walls boom like thunder machines. The flivver
rocked unsteadily on its flat stern before it decided to stay upright.

Then all was quiet--outside.

Inside the big, central cabin, Grampa waved his pircuit irately in the
air. "Now look what you made me do! Just when I had the blamed thing
practically whipped, too!"

Grampa was a white-haired 90-year-old who could still go a fast round
or two with a man (or woman) half his age, but he had a habit of
lapsing into tantrum when he got annoyed.

"Now, Grampa," Fred soothed, but his face was concerned. Fred, once
called Young Fred, was Grampa's only son. He was sixty and his hair had
begun to gray at the temples. "That landing was pretty rough, Junior."

       *       *       *       *       *

Junior was Fred's only son. Because he was thirty-five and capable
of exercising adult judgment and because he had the youngest adult
reflexes, he sat in the pilot's chair, the control stick between his
knees, his thumb still over the Off-On button on top. "I know it,
Fred," he said, frowning. "This world fooled me. It has a diameter
less than that of Mercury and yet a gravitational pull as great as
Earth."

Grampa started to say something, but an 8-year-old boy looked up from
the navigator's table beside the big computer and said, "Well, gosh,
Junior, that's why we picked this planet. We fed all the orbital data
into Abacus, and Abacus said that orbital perturbations indicated that
the second planet was unusually heavy for its size. Then Fred said,
'That looks like heavy metals', and you said, 'Maybe uranium--'"

"That's enough, Four," Junior interrupted. "Never mind what I said."

Those were the Peppergrass men, four generations of them, looking
remarkably alike, although some vital element seemed to have dwindled
until Four looked pale and thin-faced and wizened.

"And, Four," Reba said automatically, "don't call your father 'Junior.'
It sounds disrespectful."

Reba was Four's mother and Junior's wife. On her own, she was a
red-haired beauty with the loveliest figure this side of Antares. That
Junior had won her was, to Grampa, the most hopeful thing he had ever
noticed about the boy.

"But everybody calls Junior 'Junior,'" Four complained. "Besides, Fred
is Junior's father and Junior calls him 'Fred.'"

"That's different," Reba said.

Grampa was still waving his puzzle circuit indignantly. "See!" The
pircuit was a flat box equipped with pushbuttons and thirteen slender
openings in the top. One of the openings was lighted. "That landing
made me push the wrong button and the dad-blasted thing beat me again."

"Stop picking on Junior," Joyce said sharply. She was Junior's mother
and Fred's wife, still slim and handsome as she approached sixty, but
somehow ice water had replaced the warm blood in her veins. "I'm sure
he did the best he could."

"Anybody talks about gravitational pull," Grampa said, snorting,
"deserves anything anybody could say about him. There's no such thing,
Junior. You ought to know by now that gravitation is the effect of the
curving of space-time around matter. Einstein proved that two hundred
years ago."

"Go back to your games, Grampa," Fred said impatiently. "We've got work
to do."

       *       *       *       *       *

Grampa knitted his bushy, white eyebrows and petulantly pushed the last
button on his pircuit. The last light went out. "You've got work to
do, have you? Whose flivver do you think this is, anyhow?"

"It belongs to all of us," Four said shrilly. "You gave us all a sixth
share."

"That's right, Four," Grampa muttered, "so I did. But whose money
bought it?"

"You bought it, Grampa," Fred said.

"That's right! And who invented the gravity polarizer and the space
flivver? Eh? Who made possible this gallivanting all over space?"

"You, Grampa," Fred said.

"You bet! And who made one hundred million dollars out of it that the
rest of you vultures are just hanging around to gobble up when I die?"

"And who spent it all trying to invent perpetual motion machines and
longevity pills," Joyce said bitterly, "and fixed it so we'd have to
go searching for uranium and habitable worlds all through this deadly
galaxy? You, Grampa!"

"Well, now," Grampa protested, "I got a little put away yet. You'll be
sorry when I'm dead and gone."

"You're never going to die, Grampa," Joyce said harshly. "Just
before we left, you bought a hundred-year contract with that
Life-Begins-At-Ninety longevity company."

"Well, now," said Grampa, blinking, "how'd you find out about that?
Well, now!" In confusion, he turned back to the pircuit and jabbed a
button. Thirteen slim lights sprang on. "I'll get you this time!"

Four stretched and stood up. He looked curiously into the corner by the
computer where Grampa's chair stood. "You brought that pircuit from
Earth, didn't you? What's the game?"

Grampa looked up, obviously relieved to drop his act of intense
concentration. "I'll tell you, boy. You play against the pircuit,
taking turns, and you can put out one, two or three lights. The player
who makes the other one turn out the last light is the winner."

"That's simple," Four said without hesitation. "The winning strategy is
to--"

"Don't be a kibitzer!" Grampa snapped. "When I need help, I'll ask
for it. No dad-blamed machine is gonna outthink Grampa!" He snorted
indignantly.

       *       *       *       *       *

Four shrugged his narrow shoulders and wandered to the view screen.
Within it was the green horizon, curving noticeably. Four angled the
picture in toward the ship, sweeping through green, peaceful woodland
and plain and blue lake until he stared down into the meadow at the
flivver's stern.

"Look!" he said suddenly. "This planet not only has flora--it has
fauna." He rushed to the air lock.

"Four!" Reba called out warningly.

"It's all right, Reba," Four assured her. "The air is within one per
cent of Earth-normal and the bio-analyzer can find no micro-organisms
viable within the Terran spectrum."

"What about macro-organisms--" Reba began, but the boy was gone
already. Reba's face was troubled. "That boy!" she said to Junior.
"Sometimes I think we've made a terrible mistake with him. He should
have friends, play-mates. He's more like a little old man than a boy."

But Junior nodded meaningfully at Fred and disappeared into the chart
room. Fred followed casually. Then, as the door slid shut behind him,
he asked impatiently. "Well, what's all the mystery?"

"No use bothering the others yet," Junior said, his face puzzled. "You
see, I didn't let the flivver drop those last few inches. The polarizer
quit."

"Quit!"

"That's not the worst. I tried to take it up again. The flivver--it
won't budge!"

       *       *       *       *       *

The thing was a featureless blob, a two-foot sphere of raspberry
gelatin, but it was alive. It rocked back and forth in front of Four.
It opened a raspberry-color pseudo-mouth and said plaintively, "Fweep?
Fweep?"

Joyce drew her chair farther back toward the wall, revulsion on her
face. "Four! Get that nasty thing out of here!"

"You mean Fweep?" Four asked in astonishment.

"I mean that thing, whatever you call it." Joyce fluttered her hand
impatiently. "Get it out!"

Four's eyes widened farther. "But Fweep's my friend."

"Nonsense!" Joyce said sharply. "Earthmen don't make friends with
aliens. And that's nothing but a--a blob!"

"Fweep?" queried the raspberry lips. "Fweep?"

"If it's Four's friend," Reba said firmly, "it can stay. If you don't
like to be around it, Grammy, you can always go to your own room."

Joyce stood up indignantly. "Well! And don't call me 'Grammy!' It makes
me sound as old as that old goat over there!" She glared malignantly
at Grampa. "If you'd rather have that blob than me--well!" She swept
grandly out of the central cabin and into one of the private rooms that
opened out from it.

"Fweep?" asked the blob.

"Sure," Four said. "Go ahead, fweep--I mean sweep."

Swiftly the sphere rolled across the floor. Behind it was left a
narrow path of sparkling clean tile.

Grampa glanced warily at Joyce's door to make sure it was completely
closed and then cocked a white eyebrow at Reba. "Good for you, Reba!"
he said admiringly. "For forty years now, I've wanted to do that. Never
had the nerve."

"Why, thanks, Grampa," Reba said, surprised.

"I like you, gal. Never forget it."

"I like you, too, Grampa. If you'd been a few years younger, Junior
would have had competition!"

"You bet he would!" Grampa leaned back and cackled. Then he leaned
over confidentially toward Reba and whispered, "Beats me why you ever
married a jerk like Junior, anyhow."

Reba looked thoughtfully toward the airlock door. "Maybe I saw
something in him nobody else saw, the man he might become. He's been
submerged in this family too long; he's still a child to all of you
and to himself, too." Reba smiled at Grampa brilliantly. "And maybe I
thought he might grow into a man like his grandfather."

       *       *       *       *       *

Grampa turned red and looked quickly toward Four. The boy was staring
intently at Fweep. "What you doing, Four?"

"Trying to figure out what Fweep does with the sweepings," Four said
absently. "The outer inch or two of his body gets cloudy and then
slowly clears. I think I'll try him with a bigger particle."

"That's the idea, Four. You'll be a Peppergrass yet. How about building
me a pircuit?"

"You get the other one figured out?"

"It was easy," Grampa said breezily, "once you understood the
principle. The player who moved second could always win if he used the
right strategy. Dividing the thirteen lights into three sections of
four each--"

"That's right," Four agreed. "I can make you a new one by cannibalizing
the other pircuit, but I'll need a few extra parts."

Grampa pushed the wall beside his chair and a drawer slid out of it.

Inside were row after row of nipple-topped, flat-sided, flexible
free-fall bottles and a battered cigar box. "Thought you'd say that,"
he said, picking out the box. "Help yourself." With the other hand, he
lifted out one of the bottles and took a long drag on it. "Ahhh!" he
sighed, wiped his mouth with the back of his hand, and carefully put
the bottle away.

"What is that stuff you drink, Grampa?" Four asked.

"Tonic, boy. Keeps me young and frisky. Now about that pircuit--"

"Did you ever work on Niccolò Tartaglia's puzzle about the three lovely
brides, the three jealous husbands, the river and the two-passenger
rowboat?"

"Yep," Grampa said. "Too easy."

Four thought a moment. "There's a modern variation with three
missionaries and three cannibals. Same river, same rowboat and only one
of the cannibals can row. If the cannibals outnumber the missionaries--"

"Sounds good, boy," Grampa said eagerly. "Whip it up for me."

"Okay, Grampa." Four looked at Fweep again. The translucent sphere had
paused at Grampa's feet.

Grampa reached down to pat it. For an instant, his hand disappeared
into Fweep, and then the alien creature rolled away. This time its path
seemed crooked.

Its gelatinous form jiggled. "Hic!" it said.

       *       *       *       *       *

As if in response, the flivver vibrated. Grampa looked querulously
toward the airlock. "Flivver shouldn't shake like that. Not with the
polarizer turned on."

The airlock door swung inward. Through the oval doorway walked Fred,
followed closely by Junior. They were sweat-stained and weary,
scintillation counters dangling heavily from their belts.

"Any luck?" Reba asked brightly.

"Do we look it?" Junior grumbled.

"Where's Joyce?" asked Fred. "Might as well get everybody in on this at
once. Joyce!"

The door to his wife's room opened instantly. Behind it, Joyce was
regal and slim. The pose was spoiled immediately by her avid question:
"Any uranium? Radium? Thorium?"

"No," Fred said slowly, "and no other heavy metals, either. There's a
few low-grade iron deposits and that's it."

"Then what makes this planet so heavy?" Reba asked.

Junior shrugged helplessly and collapsed into a chair. "Your guess is
as good as anybody's."

"Then we've wasted another week on a worthless rock," Joyce complained.
She turned savagely on Fred. "This was going to make us all filthy
rich. We were going to find radioactives and retire to Earth like
billionaires. And all we've done is spent a year of our lives in this
cramped old flivver--and we don't have many of them to spare!" She
glared venomously at Grampa.

"We've still got Fweepland," Four said solemnly.

"Fweepland?" Reba repeated.

"This planet. It's not big, but it's fertile and it's harmless. As
real estate, it's worth almost as much as if it were solid uranium."

"A good thing, too," Junior said glumly, "because this looks like the
end of our search. Short of a miracle, we'll spend the rest of our
lives right here--involuntary colonists."

Joyce spun on him. "You're joking!" she screeched.

"I wish I were," Junior said. "But the polarizer won't work. Either
it's broken or there's something about the gravity around here that
just won't polarize."

"It's these '23 models," Grampa put in disgustedly. "They never were
any good."

       *       *       *       *       *

The land of the Fweep turned slowly on its axis. The orange sun set and
rose again and stared down once more at the meadow where the improbable
spaceship rested on its improbable stern. The sixteen Earth hours that
the rotation had taken had changed nothing inside the ship, either.

Grampa looked up from his pircuit and said, "If I were you, Junior, I
would take a good look at the TV repairman when we get back to Earth.
_If_ we get back to Earth," he amended. "You can't be Four's father.
All over the Universe, gravity is the same, and if it's gravity, the
polarizer will polarize it."

"That's just supposition," Junior said stubbornly. "The fact is, it
isn't because it doesn't. Q.E.D."

"Maybe the polarizer is broken," Fred suggested.

Grampa snorted. "Broken-shmoken. Nothing to break, Young Fred. Just a
few coils of copper wire and they're all right. We checked. We know
the power plant is working: the lights are on, the air and water
recirculation systems are going, the food resynthesizer is okay. And,
anyway, the polarizer could work from the storage battery if it had to."

"Then it goes deeper," Junior insisted. "It goes right to the principle
of polarization itself. For some reason, it doesn't work here. Why?
Before we can discover the answer to that, we'll have to know more
about polarization itself. How does it work, Grampa?"

Grampa gave him a sarcastic grin. "Now you're curious, eh? Couldn't
be bothered with Grampa's invention before. Oh, no! Too busy. Accept
without question the blessings that the Good Lord provideth--"

"Let's not get up on any pulpits," Fred growled. "Come on, Grampa,
what's the theory behind polarization?"

Grampa looked at the four faces staring at him hopefully and the
jeering grin turned to a smile. "Well," he said, "at last. You know
how light is polarized, eh?" The smile faded. "No, I guess you don't."

       *       *       *       *       *

He cleared his throat professorially. "Well, now, in ordinary light
the vibrations are perpendicular to the ray in all directions. When
light is polarized by passing through crystals or by reflection or
refraction at non-metallic surfaces, the paths of the vibrations are
still perpendicular to the ray, but they're in straight lines, circles
or ellipses."

The faces were still blank and unillumined.

"Gravity is similar to light," he pressed on. "In the absence of
matter, gravity is non-polarized. Matter polarizes gravity in a circle
around itself. That's how we've always known it until the invention of
spaceships and later the polarizer. The polarizer polarizes gravity
into a straight line. That makes the ship take off and continue
accelerating until the polarizer is shut off or its angle is shifted."

The faces looked at him silently. Finally Joyce could endure it no
longer. "That's just nonsense! You all know it. Grampa's no genius.
He's just a tinkerer. One day he happened to tinker out the polarizer.
He doesn't know how it works any more than I do."

"Now wait a minute!" Grampa protested. "That's not fair. Maybe
I didn't figure out the theory myself, but I read everything the
scientists ever wrote about it. Wanted to know myself what made the
blamed thing work. What I told you is what the scientists said, near
as I remember. Now me--I'm like Edison. I do it and let everybody else
worry over 'why.'"

"The only thing you ever did was the polarizer," Joyce snapped.
"And then you spent everything you got from it on those fool
perpetual-motion machines and those crazy longevity schemes when any
moron would know they were impossible."

Grampa squinted at her sagely. "That's what they said about the gravity
polarizer before I invented it."

"But you don't really know why it works," Junior persisted.

"Well, no," Grampa admitted. "Actually I was just fiddling around with
some coils when one of them took off. Went right through the ceiling,
dragging a battery behind it. I guess it's still going. Ought to be out
near the Horsehead Nebula by now. Luckily, I remembered how I'd wound
it."

"Why won't the ship work then, if you know so much?" Joyce demanded
ironically.

"Well, now," Grampa said in bafflement, "it rightly should, you know."

       *       *       *       *       *

"We're stuck," Reba said softly. "We might as well admit it. All we can
do is set the transmitter to send out an automatic distress call--"

"Which," Joyce interrupted, "might get picked up in a few centuries."

"And make the best of what we've got," Reba went on, unheeding. "If we
look at it the right way, it's quite a lot. A beautiful, fertile world.
Earth gravity. The flivver--even if the polarizer won't work, there's
the resynthesizer; it will keep us in food and clothes for years. By
then, we should have a good-sized community built up, because out here
we won't have to stop with one child. We can have all the babies we
want."

"You know the law: one child per couple," Joyce reminded her frigidly.
"You can condemn yourself to exile from civilization if you wish. Not
me."

Junior frowned at his wife. "I believe you're actually glad it
happened."

"I could think of worse things," Reba said.

"I like your spunk, Reb," Grampa muttered.

"Speaking of children," Junior said, "where's Four?"

"Here." Four came through the airlock and trudged across the room,
carrying a curious contraption made of tripod legs supporting a
small box from which dangled a plumb bob. Behind Four, like a round,
raspberry shadow, rolled Fweep.

"Fweep?" it queried hopefully.

"Not now," said Four.

"Where've you been?" Reba asked anxiously. "What've you been doing?"

"I've been all over Fweepland," Four said wearily, "trying to locate
its center of gravity."

"Well?" Fred prompted.

"It shifts."

"That's impossible," said Junior.

"Not for Fweep," Four replied.

"What do you mean by that?" Joyce suspiciously asked.

"It shifted," Four explained patiently, "because Fweep kept following
me."

"Fweep?" Junior repeated stupidly.

"Fweep?" Fweep said eagerly.

"He's why the flivver won't work. What Grampa invented was a linear
polarizer. Fweep is a circular polarizer. He's what makes this planet
so heavy. He's why we can't leave."

       *       *       *       *       *

The land of the Fweep rotated once on its axis, and Grampa lowered
the nippled bottle from his lips. He sighed. "I got it figured out,
Four," he said, holding out the pircuit proudly. "A missionary takes
over a non-rowing type cannibal, leaves him there, and then the rowing
cannibal takes over the other cannibal and leaves him there and--"

"Not now, Grampa," Four said inattentively as he watched Fweep making
the grand tour of the cabin.

The raspberry sphere swept over a scattering of crumbs, engulfed them,
absorbed them. Four looked at Joyce. Joyce was watching Fweep, too.

"Rat poison?" Four asked.

Joyce started guiltily. "How did you know?"

"There's no use trying to poison Fweep," Four said calmly. "He's got no
enzymes to act on, no nervous system to paralyze. He doesn't even use
what he 'eats' on a molecular level at all."

"What level does he use?" Junior wanted to know.

"Point the scintillation counter at him."

Junior dug one of the counters out of the supply cabinet and aimed the
pickup at Fweep. The counter began to hum. As Fweep approached, the hum
rose in pitch. As it passed, the hum dropped.

Junior looked at the counter's dial. "He's radioactive, all right. Not
much, but enough. But where does he get the radioactive material?"

"He uses ordinary matter," Four said. "He must have used up the few
deposits of natural radioactives a long time ago."

"He uses ordinary substances on an atomic level?" Junior said
unbelievingly.

Four nodded. "And that 'skin' of his--whatever it is he uses for
skin--is more efficient in stopping particle emissions than several
feet of lead."

Fred studied Fweep thoughtfully. "Maybe we could feed him enough
enriched uranium from the pile to put him over the critical mass."

"And blow him up? I don't think it's possible, but even if it were, it
might be a trifle more than disastrous for us." Four giggled at the
thought.

       *       *       *       *       *

Joyce glared at him furiously. "Four! Act your age! We've got to do
something with him. It's preposterous that we should be detained here
at the whim of a mere blob!"

"I don't figure it's a whim," Grampa said. "Circular gravity is what
he's got to have for one reason or another, so he just naturally bends
the space-time continuum around him--conscious or subconscious, I don't
know. But protoplasm is always more efficient than machines, so the
flivver won't move."

"I don't care why that thing does it," Joyce said icily. "I want it
stopped, and the sooner the better. If it won't turn the gravity off,
we'll just have to do away with it."

"How?" asked Four. "Fweep's skin is pretty close to impervious and
you can't shoot him, stab him or poison him. He doesn't breathe, so
you can't drown or strangle him. You can't imprison him; he 'eats'
everything. And violence might be more dangerous to us than to him.
Right now, Fweep is friendly, but suppose he got mad! He could lower
his radioactive shield or he might increase the gravity by a few times.
Either way, you'd feel rather uncomfortable, Grammy."

"Don't call me 'Grammy!' Well, what are we going to do, just sit around
and wait for that thing to die?"

"We'd have a long wait," Four observed. "Fweep is the only one of his
kind on this planet."

"Well?"

"Probably he's immortal."

"And he doesn't reproduce?" Reba asked sympathetically.

"Probably not. If he doesn't die, there's no point in reproduction.
Reproduction is nature's way of providing racial immortality to mortal
creatures."

"But he must have some way of reproduction," Reba argued. "An egg or
something. He couldn't just have sprung into being as he is now."

"Maybe he developed," Four offered. "It seems to me that he's bigger
than when we first landed." "He must have been here a long, long time,"
Fred said. "Fweepland, as Four calls it, kept its atmosphere and its
water, which a planet this size ordinarily would have lost by now."

       *       *       *       *       *

Reba looked at Fweep kindly. "We can thank the little fellow for that,
anyway."

"I thank him for nothing," Joyce snapped. "He lured us down here by
making us think the planet had heavy metals and I want him to let us go
_immediately_!"

Fred turned impatiently on his wife. "Well, try making him understand!
And if you can make him understand what you want him to do, try making
him do it!"

Joyce looked at Fred with startled eyes. "Fred!" she said in a high,
shocked voice and turned blindly toward her room.

Grampa lowered his bottle and smacked his lips. "Well, boy," he said to
Fred, "I thought you'd never do that. Didn't think you had it in you."

Fred stood up apologetically. "I'd better go calm her down," he
muttered, and walked quickly after Joyce.

"Give her one for me!" Grampa called.

Fred's shoulders twitched as the door closed behind him. From the room
came the filtered sound of high-pitched voices rising and falling like
some reedy folk music.

"Makes you think, doesn't it?" Grampa said, looking at Fweep benignly.
"Maybe the whole theory of gravitation is cockeyed. Maybe there's a
Fweep for every planet and sun, big and little, polarizing the gravity
in circles, and the matter business is not a cause but a result."

"What I can't understand," Junior said thoughtfully, "is why the
polarizer worked for a little while when we landed--long enough to keep
us from being squashed--and then quit."

"Fweep didn't recognize it immediately, didn't know what it was or
where it came from," Four explained. "All he knew was he didn't like
linear polarization and he neutralized it as soon as he could. That's
when we dropped."

       *       *       *       *       *

"Linear polarization is uncomfortable for him, is it?" Grampa said.
"Makes you wonder how something like Fweep could ever develop."

"He's no more improbable than people," said Four.

"Less than some I've known," Grampa conceded.

"If he can eat anything," Reba said, "why does he keep sweeping the
cabin for dust and lint?"

"He wants to be helpful," Four replied without hesitation, "and he's
lonely. After all," he added wistfully, "he's never had any friends."

"How do you know all these things?" Joyce asked from her doorway,
excitement in her voice. "Can you talk to it?"

Behind her, Fred said, "Now, Joyce, you promised--"

"But this is important," Joyce cut him off eagerly. "Can you? Talk to
it, I mean?"

"Some," Four admitted.

"Have you asked it to let us go?"

"Yes."

"Well? What did it say?"

"He said he didn't want his friend to leave him."

At the word, Fweep rolled swiftly across the floor and bounced into
Four's lap. It nestled against him lovingly and opened raspberry lips.
"Fwiend," it said.

"Well, now," Grampa said maliciously, his eye on Joyce, "that's no
problem. We can just leave Four here with Fweep."

In a voice filled with sanctimonious concern, Joyce said, "That's quite
a sacrifice to ask, but--"

"Joyce!" Reba cried, horrified. "Grampa was joking, but you actually
mean it. Four is only a baby and yet you'd let him--"

"Never mind, Reba," Four said evenly. "It was just what I was going to
suggest myself. It's the one really logical solution."

"Fwiend," said Fweep gently.

       *       *       *       *       *

The land of the Fweep turned like a fat old man toasting himself in
front of an open fire, and Junior sat at the computer's keyboard
swearing in a steady monotone.

"Junior!" said Joyce, shocked.

Junior swung around impatiently. "Sorry, Mother, but this damned thing
won't work."

"I'm sure that calling it names won't help, and besides, you shouldn't
expect a machine to do something that we can't do. And if it did work,
it would only say that the logical answer is the one I sug--"

"Mother!" Junior warned. "We decided not to talk about it any more.
Four is strange enough without encouraging him to think like a martyr.
It's out of the question. If that's the only way we can leave this
planet, we'll stay here until Four has a beard as white as Grampa's!"

"Well!" Joyce said in a stiff, offended tone and sat back in her chair.

Grampa lowered the nippled bottle from his lips and chortled. "Junior,
I apologize for all the mean things I ever said about you. Maybe you
got the makings of a Peppergrass yet."

Junior turned back to the keyboard and studied it, his chin in his
hand. "It's just a matter of stating the problem in terms the computer
can work on."

"I take it all back," said Grampa. "That computer won't help you with
this problem, Junior. This ain't a long, complicated calculation; it's
a simple problem in logic. It's a pircuit problem, like the one about
the cannibals and the missionaries. We can't leave Fweepland because
Fweep won't let our polarizer work. He won't let our polarizer work
because he doesn't like gravity that's polarized in a straight line,
and he don't want Four to leave him.

"Now Fweep ain't the brightest creature in the Universe, so he can't
understand why we're so gosh-fired eager to leave. And as long as he's
got Four, he's happy. Why should he make himself unhappy? As a favor
to Four, he'd let us leave--if we'd leave Four here with him, which we
ain't gonna do.

"That's the problem. All we got to do is figure out the answer. No use
making a pircuit, because a puzzle circuit is just a miniature computer
with the solution built in; if you can build the pircuit, you've
already solved the problem. And if you can state the problem to Abacus,
you've already got the answer. All you want from it then is decimal
points."

"That may be," Junior said stubbornly, "but I still want to know why
this computer won't work. It won't even do simple arithmetic! Where's
Four? He's the only one who understands this thing."

"He's outside, playing in the meadow with Fweep," Reba said, her voice
soft. "No, here they come now."

       *       *       *       *       *

Through the airlock came Four, carrying Fweep on his shoulder like
a raspberry cat without head or tail. Four's thin face glowed with
exertion and glistened with sweat. Already the orange sun had begun to
paint his skin tan.

"We've been playing dodge ball," Four panted. "Fweep was the ball and I
had to dodge him."

"There's something wrong with this computer," Junior complained. "Take
a look at it."

"Sure, Daddy," Four said promptly, and he took his father's place at
the keyboard. After a few moments, he began to frown, then detached
a front panel. He started sorting through the maze of wires and
electronic components.

Grampa watched him with a wary eye.

Joyce was unable to restrain herself any longer. "The way you people
talk, a person would think we were never going to leave this
godforsaken, miserable, uncivilized planet."

"That seems to be the general idea," Grampa chuckled, enjoying her
dismay.

"Unless we can build a reaction rocket ship to push us out of Fweep's
range," Fred said glumly.

"We've got the iron ore!" Junior put in eagerly.

Grampa snorted. "Come on, use your brains. You'd have to build a ship;
these flivvers weren't built for the stresses of reaction flight.
By the time you've solved all the problems of motors and alloys and
rocket-tube linings, fuel, ship construction, personnel protection,
and all the rest of it, this planet would be another Detroit and your
great-great-great-grandchildren would be living in it. You couldn't
build a blast furnace even if you had the complete Congressional
microfilm library! You'd do better trying to figure out how Fweep does
what he does and doing some practicing on that."

"Well," Junior said peevishly, "trying to get away is better than
sitting here talking about it."

Reba stared thoughtfully at Junior and said, "Maybe Fweep would go with
us."

"Yes!" Joyce said excitedly. "Maybe the dear little thing _would_ go
with us. That would solve everything!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Without looking around, Four said, "I asked him already. Fweep's afraid
to come along."

"I'm sure we would be very good to him," Joyce said swiftly. "I've
always liked pets. Why, I once had a goldfish of my very own!"

"Which you let die," Fred said dryly, "because you forgot to feed it."

"Oh, he's not afraid of _people_," Four told them. "He's afraid of
space and unpolarized gravity and things like that. He's lived here all
his life--that's a long time--and it makes him feel awful funny just to
think about leaving. He says he can still remember the way our linear
gravitation felt inside when we landed."

"Well," Joyce said firmly, "he'll just have to fight it, that's all.
If a person let that kind of neurotic impulse rule his life, he'd be
completely demoralized in no time."

Four glanced over his shoulder at Joyce, as if to see if she were
joking. Shaking his head, he returned to the computer's innards. A
moment later, he swung around and stared accusingly at Grampa. "You've
cannibalized Abacus!"

"Well, now," Grampa protested, licking his lips nervously. "You see,
I--"

"That's where you got the parts for the pircuits!" Four said with
merciless logic.

Joyce stood up virtuously and shook her finger at Grampa. "First you
entice us out here in this nasty old flivver; then you get us stuck;
and now you've ruined the computer for your nasty old games!"

"Well, now," Grampa blustered, "the goldarn thing wouldn't work, would
it? We didn't need it--not with Four around. He figures everything out
in his head and we just used Abacus to sort of check him. Ain't that
right now?"

Five pairs of eyes stared at him in silence.

"Well, now," Grampa said defensively, "I got it all worked out anyhow.
We can leave here any time we get ready."

       *       *       *       *       *

The land of the Fweep turned and grew small in the view screen, and
Junior sat in the pilot's chair, his hand on the control stick, his
eyes fixed on the moving dials in front of him.

There were three others in the room: Reba, who looked at the dwindling
Fweepland and sighed; Joyce, who sat tautly in her chair, her face
fixed and unbelieving; and Fred, who looked at Joyce and shook his head.

Grampa opened the door to his room and stepped cockily into the central
cabin, shutting the door behind him. "Well?" he demanded confidently.
"Are we heading for Earth?"

Junior gestured toward the screen. "If Four's coordinates are right."

"Speaking of coordinates," Grampa said briskly, "make sure we got the
coordinates of Fweepland. It'll take a long time for that atmosphere to
dissipate. A nice little world like that is worth its weight in uranium
to a good real estate salesman."

"How did you do it?" Joyce challenged.

Grampa slapped her familiarly on the shoulder. "A problem of gravity,"
he said gayly, "but a simple one. Nothing for an old pircuit man like
me. I guess you folks won't laugh at Grampa and his pircuits any more.
Not only did Grampa get you out of Fweepland, but he's taking you back
with a valuable little subdivision in the third quadrant to file on."

"I hate to spoil the party," Fred said, "but have you thought about
what you're going to do with Fweep?"

"Fweep?" Grampa repeated, puzzled. "Why should I do anything with
Fweep?"

"We can't take him back to Earth with us."

"Why not?" Grampa demanded.

"In the first place, the Immigration Authority would have to pass on
him. That might take years, with Fweep's powers and abilities. More
important, if Fweep got loose on Earth, every flivver would have the
same problem there that we had here. And next time Fweep might not be
so cooperative. I don't know what you did to Fweep in there, but if
he's still alive, the I.A. isn't going to take a chance."

Grampa considered the prospect without dismay. "I wonder if we could
smuggle him in. With all those flivvers not working, they'd have to pay
us before they could take off."

"Grampa!" Fred said sternly. "That would be blackmail--or worse.
Besides getting in trouble with the I.A., you'd get it from the W.B.I.
and the I.C.C."

       *       *       *       *       *

Grampa waved his hand impatiently. "We'll solve that problem when we
come to it. After all, an old pircuit man like me--"

"What _did_ you _do_ to Fweep?" Joyce repeated insistently.

Grampa cleared his throat with pride. "Well, now, I'll tell you. I
just happened to notice that Fweep liked my tonic. Every time I took a
little nip, the little beast was around my chair, trying to clean my
hand for me."

"Tonic!" Joyce sniffed. "Liquor, you mean!"

"Now that's not right," Grampa objected. "I said tonic and I mean
tonic. Got a little alcohol in it for a preservative, maybe, but the
important part is the minerals. That's the Longevity Institute's
secret. It's what keeps me young. Want a little nip?" He leered at
Joyce.

"You mean you got Fweep drunk?" Fred exclaimed.

"Well, now, that was the _effect_, but I can't swear it was the
alcohol. Not unless Fweep can use the stuff on the molecular level if
he wants. On the other hand, maybe it was the minerals in there that
affected him. Little world like Fweepland, maybe it lacked a few
things when it was made. But the way I looked at it, it stood to reason
the little fellow could use a drink. Alone all these centuries, he
must've got pretty dry. But whatever it was, he sure got high. Lost all
control."

"Poor Fweep," Reba murmured.

"Poor nothing," Grampa said. "He was the happiest little critter I ever
saw. When Four explained to him just what we wanted, he went right to
work on that bottle and--"

Gramp's door swung open once more. "Grampa! Grampa!" Four shouted.
"Fweep! He--I mean--well, we've been calling him by the wrong pronoun.
Look!"

Four came running out of the room. Behind him rolled a tiny raspberry
sphere about the size of a marble. Occasionally it hopped in the air
and said, "Fweep?" in a small, high voice.

Behind it rolled and hopped a second raspberry marble. "Fweep?" it
said. Behind it came another and another until the cabin was full of
them, rolling, bouncing, calling "Fweep?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Dazedly, Junior counted them. "One hundred and one, one hundred and
two, one hundred and--"

"Oh, Junior," Reba said, hugging him excitedly. "Aren't they cute?"

"What happened?" Grampa asked, as dazed as Junior.

"Maybe it was the tonic," Four said, "but I suspect it was the the
unpolarized gravity. All of a sudden, Fweep started splitting like an
amoeba, over and over. Do you suppose that was what made him nervous?"

"That's the way the little fellow reproduces, all right," said Grampa.
"I wonder if he has to wait until a race becomes civilized enough to
discover the polarizer, eh?"

"Ugh!" gasped Joyce, brushing a Fweep out of her lap.

Grampa looked at the cabin and its occupants happily.

"I'd like to remind you," Fred said gravely, "that this multiplies our
problem of what to do with Fweep over one hundred times."

"What problem?" asked Grampa. "The only problem we got is how we're
gonna spend the cash. We're in business--the gravity business. We'll
call it Gravity, Incorporated, and we can reclaim every little hunk of
rock in the Solar System. Each one of those little fellows is worth
a fortune! We'll give the satellites and the asteroids Earth-normal
gravities and atmospheres and, by golly, we're rich!"

"Rich?" Joyce echoed. A smile slowly replaced the expression of
distaste. She snapped her fingers. "Here, Fweepie," she said in her
most enticing tone. "Here, little darlings! Come to dear Joyce!"

But they had all hopped to Four and were clustered around him like a
raspberry bubble bath. Through them, his face peered, thin and happy.

Grampa looked at Reba. She was hugging Junior happily and smiling at
Four. Grampa looked back at the boy.

"We'll have to be exclusive, though," Grampa said. "Considering the
Fweeps' likes and dislikes, that is. We'll sell only to people with
children."





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Gravity Business, by James E. Gunn

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GRAVITY BUSINESS ***

***** This file should be named 49897-8.txt or 49897-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/9/8/9/49897/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Adam Buchbinder, Mary Meehan and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
