The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Snare, by Richard R. Smith

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: The Snare

Author: Richard R. Smith

Illustrator: Weiss

Release Date: September 7, 2015 [EBook #49901]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SNARE ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Adam Buchbinder, Mary Meehan and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net










                               The Snare

                          By RICHARD R. SMITH

                         Illustrated by WEISS

     [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from Galaxy January
     1956. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
     copyright on this publication was renewed.]


     _It's easy to find a solution when there is one--the trick is to
     do it if there is none!_


I glanced at the path we had made across the _Mare Serenitatis_. The
Latin translated as "the Sea of Serenity." It was well named because,
as far as the eye could see in every direction, there was a smooth
layer of pumice that resembled the surface of a calm sea. Scattered
across the quiet sea of virgin Moon dust were occasional islands
of rock that jutted abruptly toward the infinity of stars above.
Considering everything, our surroundings conveyed a sense of serenity
like none I had ever felt.

Our bounding path across the level expanse was clearly marked. Because
of the light gravity, we had leaped high into the air with each step
and every time we struck the ground, the impact had raised a cloud of
dustlike pumice. Now the clouds of dust were slowly settling in the
light gravity.

Above us, the stars were cold, motionless and crystal-clear.
Indifferently, they sprayed a faint light on our surroundings ... a
dim glow that was hardly sufficient for normal vision and was too weak
to be reflected toward Earth.

We turned our head-lamps on the strange object before us. Five beams
of light illuminated the smooth shape that protruded from the Moon's
surface.

The incongruity was so awesome that for several minutes, we remained
motionless and quiet. Miller broke the silence with his quavering
voice, "Strange someone didn't notice it before."

       *       *       *       *       *

Strange? The object rose a quarter of a mile above us, a huge, curving
hulk of smooth metal. It was featureless and yet conveyed a sense
of _alienness_. It was alien and yet it wasn't a natural formation.
Something had made the thing, whatever it was. But was it strange that
it hadn't been noticed before? Men had lived on the Moon for over a
year, but the Moon was vast and the _Mare Serenitatis_ covered three
hundred and forty thousand square miles.

"What is it?" Marie asked breathlessly.

Her husband grunted his bafflement. "Who knows? But see how it curves?
If it's a perfect sphere, it must be at least two miles in diameter!"

"If it's a perfect sphere," Miller suggested, "most of it must be
beneath the Moon's surface."

"Maybe it isn't a sphere," my wife said. "Maybe this is all of it."

"Let's call Lunar City and tell the authorities about it." I reached
for the radio controls on my suit.

Kane grabbed my arm. "No. Let's find out whatever we can by ourselves.
If we tell the authorities, they'll order us to leave it alone. If we
discover something really important, we'll be famous!"

I lowered my arm. His outburst seemed faintly childish to me. And yet
it carried a good measure of common sense. If we discovered proof of
an alien race, we would indeed be famous. The more we discovered for
ourselves, the more famous we'd be. Fame was practically a synonym for
prestige and wealth.

"All right," I conceded.

Miller stepped forward, moving slowly in the bulk of his spacesuit.
Deliberately, he removed a small torch from his side and pressed the
brilliant flame against the metal.

A few minutes later, the elderly mineralogist gave his opinion: "It's
steel ... made thousands of years ago."

Someone gasped over the intercom, "Thousands of years! But wouldn't it
be in worse shape than this if it was that old?"

Miller pointed at the small cut his torch had made in the metal. The
notch was only a quarter of an inch deep. "I say _steel_ because it's
_similar_ to steel. Actually, it's a much stronger alloy. Besides that,
on the Moon, there's been no water or atmosphere to rust it. Not even
a wind to disturb its surface. It's _at least_ several thousand years
old."

       *       *       *       *       *

We slowly circled the alien structure. Several minutes later, Kane
shouted, "Look!"

A few feet above the ground, the structure's smooth surface was broken
by a circular opening that yawned invitingly. Kane ran ahead and
flashed his head-lamp into the dark recess.

"There's a small room inside," he told us, and climbed through the
opening.

We waited outside and focused our lamps through the five-foot opening
to give him as much light as possible.

"Come on in, Marie," he called to his wife. "This is really something!
It _must_ be an alien race. There's all kinds of weird drawings on the
walls and gadgets that look like controls for something...."

Briefly, my lamp flickered over Marie's pale face. Her features
struggled with two conflicting emotions: She was frightened by the
alienness of the thing and yet she wanted to be with her husband. She
hesitated momentarily, then climbed through the passage.

"You want to go in?" my wife asked.

"Do you?"

"Let's."

I helped Verana through the opening, climbed through myself and turned
to help Miller.

Miller was sixty years old. He was an excellent mineralogist, alert
mentally, but with a body that was almost feeble. I reached out to help
him as he stepped into the passageway.

For a brief second, he was framed in the opening, a dark silhouette
against the star-studded sky.

The next second, he was thrown twenty yards into the air. He gasped
with pain when he struck the ground. "_Something_ pushed me!"

"Are you all right?"

"Yes."

He had fallen on a spot beyond our angle of vision. I started through
the passage....

... and struck an invisible solid wall.

       *       *       *       *       *

My eyes were on the circular opening. A metal panel emerged from a
recess on one side and slid across the passage. The room darkened with
the absence of starlight.

"_What happened?_"

"The door to this damned place closed," I explained.

"_What?_"

Before we could recover from the shock, the room filled with a
brilliant glare. We turned off our lamps.

The room was approximately twelve feet long and nine feet wide. The
ceiling was only a few inches above our heads and when I looked at the
smooth, hard metal, I felt as if I were trapped in some alien vault.

The walls of the room were covered with strange drawings and
instruments. Here and there, kaleidoscopic lights pulsed rhythmically.

Kane brushed past me and beat his gloved fists against the metal door
that had imprisoned us.

"Miller!"

"Yes?"

"See if you can get this thing open from the outside."

I knelt before the door and explored its surface with my fingers. There
were no visible recesses or controls.

Over the intercom network, everyone's breath mingled and formed a
rough, harsh sound. I could discern the women's quick, frightened
breaths that were almost sobs. Kane's breath was deep and strong;
Miller's was faltering and weak.

"Miller, get help!"

"I'll--" The sound of his breathing ceased. We listened intently.

"What happened to him?"

"I'll phone Lunar City." My fingers fumbled at the radio controls and
trembled beneath the thick gloves.

I turned the dials that would connect my radio with Lunar City....

Static grated against my ear drums.

_Static!_

       *       *       *       *       *

I listened to the harsh, erratic sound and my voice was weak by
comparison: "Calling Lunar City."

"Static!" Kane echoed my thoughts. His frown made deep clefts between
his eyebrows. "There's no static between inter-lunar radio!"

Verana's voice was small and frightened. "That sounds like the static
we hear over the bigger radios when we broadcast to Earth."

"It does," Marie agreed.

"But we wouldn't have that kind of static over _our_ radio, unless--"
Verana's eyes widened until the pupils were surrounded by circles of
white--"unless we were in outer space!"

We stared at the metal door that had imprisoned us, afraid even to
speak of our fantastic suspicion.

I deactivated my radio.

Marie screamed as an inner door opened to disclose a long, narrow
corridor beyond.

Simultaneous with the opening of the second door, I felt air press
against my spacesuit. Before, our suits had been puffed outward by the
pressure of air inside. Now our spacesuits were slack and dangling on
our bodies.

We looked at each other and then at the inviting corridor beyond the
open door.

We went single file, first Kane, then his wife Marie. Verana followed
next and I was the last.

We walked slowly, examining the strange construction. The walls were
featureless but still seemed alien. At various places on the walls were
the outlines of doors without handles or locks.

Kane pressed his shoulder against a door and shoved. The door was
unyielding.

I manipulated the air-vent controls of my spacesuit, allowed a small
amount of the corridor's air into my helmet and inhaled cautiously.
It smelled all right. I waited and nothing happened. Gradually, I
increased the intake, turned off the oxygenating machines and removed
my helmet.

"Shut off your oxy," I suggested. "We might as well breathe the air in
this place and save our supply. We may need the oxygen in our suits
later."

They saw that I had removed my helmet and was still alive and one by
one removed their own helmets.

       *       *       *       *       *

At the end of the corridor, Kane stopped before a blank wall. The sweat
on his face glistened dully; his chest rose and fell rapidly. Kane was
a pilot and one of the prerequisites for the job of guiding tons of
metal between Earth and the Moon was a good set of nerves. Kane excited
easily, his temper was fiery, but his nerves were like steel.

"The end of the line," he grunted.

As though to disprove the statement, a door on his right side opened
soundlessly.

He went through the doorway as if shoved violently by an invisible hand.

The door closed behind him.

Marie threw herself at the door and beat at the metal. "Harry!"

Verana rushed to her side. Another door on the opposite side of the
corridor opened silently. The door was behind them; they didn't notice.

Before I could warn them, Marie floated across the corridor, through
the doorway.

Verana and I stared at the darkness beyond the opening, our muscles
frozen by shock.

The door closed behind Marie's screaming, struggling form.

Verana's face was white with fear. Apprehensively, she glanced at the
other doors that lined the hall.

I put my arms around her, held her close.

"Antigravity machines, force rays," I suggested worriedly.

For several minutes, we remained motionless and silent. I recalled the
preceding events of the day, searched for a sense of normality in them.
The Kanes, Miller, Verana and I lived in Lunar City with hundreds of
other people. Mankind had inhabited the Moon for over a year. Means
of recreation were scarce. Many people explored the place to amuse
themselves. After supper, we had decided to take a walk. As simple as
that: a walk on the Moon.

We had expected only the familiar craters, chasms and weird rock
formations. A twist of fate and here we were: imprisoned in an alien
ship.

My legs quivered with fatigue, my heart throbbed heavily, Verana's
perfume dizzied me. No, it wasn't a dream. Despite our incredible
situation, there was no sensation of unreality.

       *       *       *       *       *

I took Verana's hand and led her down the long corridor, retracing our
steps.

We had walked not more than two yards when the rest of the doors
opened soundlessly.

Verana's hand flew to her mouth to stifle a gasp.

Six doors were now open. The only two that remained closed were the
ones that the Kanes had unwillingly entered.

This time, no invisible hand thrust us into any of the rooms.

I entered the nearest one. Verana followed hesitantly.

The walls of the large room were lined with shelves containing
thousands of variously colored boxes and bottles. A table and four
chairs were located in the center of the green, plasticlike floor. Each
chair had no back, only a curving platform with a single supporting
column.

"Ed!" I joined Verana on the other side of the room. She pointed a
trembling finger at some crude drawings. "The things in this room are
food!"

The drawings were so simple that anyone could have understood them.
The first drawing portrayed a naked man and woman removing boxes and
bottles from the shelves. The second picture showed the couple opening
the containers. The third showed the man eating from one of the boxes
and the woman drinking from a bottle.

"Let's see how it tastes," I said.

I selected an orange-colored box. The lid dissolved at the touch of my
fingers.

The only contents were small cubes of a soft orange substance.

I tasted a small piece.

"Chocolate! Just like chocolate!"

Verana chose a nearby bottle and drank some of the bluish liquid.

"Milk!" she exclaimed.

"Perhaps we'd better look at the other rooms," I told her.

       *       *       *       *       *

The next room we examined was obviously for recreation. Containers were
filled with dozens of strange games and books of instructions in the
form of simple drawings. The games were foreign, but designed in such a
fashion that they would be interesting to Earthmen.

Two of the rooms were sleeping quarters. The floors were covered with a
spongy substance and the lights were dim and soothing.

Another room contained a small bathing pool, running water,
waste-disposal units and yellow cakes of soap.

The last room was an observatory. The ceiling and an entire wall were
transparent. Outside, the stars shone clearly for a few seconds, then
disappeared for an equal time, only to reappear in a different position.

"Hyper-space drive," Verana whispered softly. She was fascinated by
the movement of the stars. For years, our scientists had sought a
hyperspatial drive to conquer the stars.

We selected a comfortable chair facing the transparent wall, lit
cigarettes and waited.

A few minutes later, Marie entered the room.

I noticed with some surprise that her face was calm. If she was
excited, her actions didn't betray it.

She sat next to Verana.

"What happened?" my wife asked.

Marie crossed her legs and began in a rambling manner as if discussing
a new recipe, "That was really a surprise, wasn't it? I was scared
silly, at first. That room was dark and I didn't know what to expect.
Something touched my head and I heard a telepathic voice--"

"Telepathic?" Verana interrupted.

"Yes. Well, this voice said not to worry and that it wasn't going to
hurt me. It said it only wanted to learn something about us. It was
the _oddest_ feeling! All the time, this voice kept talking to me in
a nice way and made me feel at ease ... and at the same time, I felt
_something_ search my mind and gather information. I could actually
_feel_ it search my memories!"

"What memories?" I inquired.

She frowned with concentration. "Memories of high school mostly. It
seemed interested in English and history classes. And then it searched
for memories of our customs and lives in general...."

       *       *       *       *       *

Kane stalked into the room at that moment, his face red with anger.
"_Do you know where we are?_" he demanded. "When those damned aliens
got me in that room, they explained what this is all about. We're
guinea pigs!"

"Did they use telepathy to explain?" Verana asked. I suddenly
remembered that she was a member of a club that investigated
extra-sensory perception with the hope of learning how it operated. She
was probably sorry she hadn't been contacted telepathically.

"Yeah," Kane replied. "I saw all sorts of mental pictures and they
explained what they did to us. Those damned aliens want us for their
zoo!"

"Start at the beginning," I suggested.

He flashed an angry glance at me, but seemed to calm somewhat. "This
ship was made by a race from another galaxy. Thousands of years ago,
they came to Earth in their spaceships when men were primitives living
in caves. They wanted to know what our civilization would be like
when we developed space flight. So they put this ship on the Moon as a
sort of booby-trap. They put it there with the idea that when we made
spaceships and went to the Moon, sooner or later, we'd find the ship
and enter it--_like rabbits in a snare!_"

"And now the booby-trap is on its way home," I guessed.

"Yeah, this ship is taking us to their planet and they're going to keep
us there while they study us."

"How long will the trip take?" I asked.

"Six months. We'll be bottled up in this crate for six whole damned
months! And when we get there, we'll be prisoners!"

Marie's hypnotic spell was fading and once more her face showed the
terror inside her.

"Don't feel so bad," I told Kane. "It could be worse. It should be
interesting to see an alien race. We'll have our wives with us--"

"Maybe they'll dissect us!" Marie gasped.

Verana scoffed. "A race intelligent enough to build a ship like this? A
race that was traveling between the stars when we were living in caves?
Dissection is primitive. They won't _have to_ dissect us in order to
study us. They'll have more advanced methods."

"Maybe we can reach the ship's controls somehow," Kane said excitedly.
"We've got to try to change the ship's course and get back to the
Moon!"

"It's impossible. Don't waste your time." The voice had no visible
source and seemed to fill the room.

       *       *       *       *       *

Verana snapped her fingers. "So that's why the aliens read Marie's
mind! They wanted to learn our language so they could talk to us!"

Kane whirled in a complete circle, glaring at each of the four walls.
"Where are you? _Who_ are you?"

"I'm located in a part of the ship you can't reach. I'm a machine."

"Is anyone else aboard besides ourselves?"

"No. I control the ship." Although the voice spoke without stilted
phrases, the tone was cold and mechanical.

"What are your--your masters going to do with us?" Marie asked
anxiously.

"You won't be harmed. My masters merely wish to question and examine
you. Thousands of years ago, they wondered what your race would be like
when it developed to the space-flight stage. They left this ship on
your Moon only because they were curious. My masters have no animosity
toward your race, only compassion and curiosity."

I remembered the way antigravity rays had shoved Miller from the ship
and asked the machine, "Why didn't you let our fifth member board the
ship?"

"The trip to my makers' planet will take six months. There are food,
oxygen and living facilities for four only of your race. I had to
prevent the fifth from entering the ship."

"Come on," Kane ordered. "We'll search this ship room by room and we'll
find some way to make it take us back to Earth."

"It's useless," the ship warned us.

For five hours, we minutely examined every room. We had no tools to
force our way through solid metal walls to the engine or control rooms.
The only things in the ship that could be lifted and carried about were
the containers of food and alien games. None were sufficiently heavy or
hard enough to put even a scratch in the heavy metal.

       *       *       *       *       *

Six rooms were open to our use. The two rooms in which the Kanes had
been imprisoned were locked and there were no controls or locks to work
on.

The rooms that we could enter were without doors, except the ones that
opened into the corridor.

After intensive searching, we realized there was _no way_ to damage the
ship or reach any section other than our allotted space.

We gave up.

The women went to the sleeping compartments to rest and Kane I went to
the "kitchen."

At random, we sampled the variously colored boxes and bottles and
discussed our predicament.

"Trapped," Kane said angrily. "Trapped in a steel prison." He slammed
his fist against the table top. "But there must be a way to get out!
Every problem has a solution!"

"You sure?" I asked.

"What?"

"_Does_ every problem have a solution? I don't believe it. Some
problems are too great. Take the problem of a murderer in our
civilization: John Doe has killed someone and his problem is to escape.
Primarily, a murderer's problem is the same principle as ours. A
murderer has to outwit an entire civilization. We have to outwit an
entire civilization that was hundreds of times more advanced than ours
is now when we were clubbing animals and eating the meat raw. Damned
few criminals get away these days, even though they've got such crowds
to lose themselves in. All we have is a ship that we can't control. I
don't think we have a chance."

My resignation annoyed him. Each of us had reacted differently: Kane's
wife was frightened, Verana was calm because of an inner serenity that
few people have, I was resigned and Kane was angry.

       *       *       *       *       *

For several minutes, we sampled the different foods. Every one had a
distinctive flavor, comparable to that of a fruit or vegetable on Earth.

Kane lifted a brown bottle to his lips, took a huge gulp and almost
choked.

"Whiskey!"

"My masters realized your race would develop intoxicants and tried to
create a comparable one," the machine explained.

I selected a brown bottle and sampled the liquid. "A little stronger
than our own," I informed the machine.

We drank until Kane was staggering about the room, shouting insults at
the alien race and the mechanical voice that seemed to be everywhere.
He beat his fist against a wall until blood trickled from bruised
knuckles.

"Please don't hurt yourself," the machine pleaded.

"_Why?_" Kane screamed at the ceiling. "Why should you care?"

"My masters will be displeased with me if you arrive in a damaged
condition."

Kane banged his head against a bulkhead; an ugly bruise formed rapidly.
"Shtop me, then!"

"I can't. My masters created no way for me to restrain or contact you
other than use of your language."

It took fully fifteen minutes to drag Kane to his sleeping compartment.

After I left Kane in his wife's care, I went to the adjoining room and
stretched out on the soft floor beside Verana.

I tried to think of some solution. We were locked in an alien ship at
the start of a six months' journey to a strange planet. We had no tools
or weapons.

Solution? I doubted if two dozen geniuses working steadily for years
could think of one!

I wondered what the alien race was like. Intelligent, surely: They had
foreseen our conquest of space flight when we hadn't even invented
the wheel. That thought awed me--somehow they had analyzed our brains
thousands of years ago and calculated what our future accomplishments
would be.

They had been able to predict our scientific development, but they
hadn't been able to tell how our civilization would develop. They were
curious, so they had left an enormously elaborate piece of bait on the
Moon.

The aliens were incredibly more advanced than ourselves. I couldn't
help thinking, _And to a rabbit in a snare, mankind must seem
impossibly clever_.

I decided to ask the machine about its makers in the "morning."

       *       *       *       *       *

When I awoke, my head was throbbing painfully.

I opened my eyes and blinked several times to make sure they were
functioning properly. I wasn't in the compartment where I had fallen
asleep a few hours before.

I was tied to one of the chairs in the "kitchen." Beside me, Verana was
bound to a chair by strips of cloth from her skirt, and across from us,
Marie was secured to another chair.

Kane staggered into the room. Although he was visibly drunk, he
appeared more sober than the night before. His dark hair was rumpled
and his face was flushed, but his eyes gleamed with a growing alertness.

"Awake, huh?"

"What have you done, Harry?" his wife screamed at him. Her eyes were
red with tears and her lips twisted in an expression of shame when she
looked at him.

"Obvious, isn't it? While all of you were asleep, I conked each of you
on the head, dragged you in here and tied you up." He smiled crookedly.
"It's amazing the things a person can do when he's pickled. I'm sorry I
had to be so rough, but I have a plan and I knew you wouldn't agree or
cooperate with me."

"What's your plan?" I asked.

He grinned wryly and crinkled bloodshot eyes. "I don't want to live in
a zoo on an alien planet. I want to go home and prove my theory that
this problem has a solution."

I grunted my disgust.

"The solution is simple," he said. "We're in a trap so strong that the
aliens didn't establish any means to control our actions. When men put
a lion in a strong cage, they don't worry about controlling the lion
because the lion can't get out. We're in the same basic situation."

"So what?" Verana queried in a sarcastic tone.

"The aliens want us transported to their planet so they can examine and
question us. Right?"

"Right."

"Ed, remember that remark the machine made last night?"

"What remark?"

"It said, '_My_ masters will be displeased with _me_ if you arrive in a
damaged condition.' What does that indicate to you?"

       *       *       *       *       *

I assumed a baffled expression. I didn't have the slightest idea of
what he was driving at and I told him so.

"Ed," he said, "if you could build an electronic brain capable of
making decisions, how would you build it?"

"Hell, I don't know," I confessed.

"Well, if I could build an electronic brain like the one running this
ship, I'd build it with a _conscience_ so it'd do its best at all
times."

"Machines always do their best," I argued. "Come on, untie us. I'm
getting a crick in my back!" I didn't like the idea of being slugged
while asleep. If Kane had been sober and if his wife hadn't been
present, I would have let him know exactly what I thought of him.

"_Our_ machines always do their best," he argued, "because we punch
buttons and they respond in predetermined patterns. But the electronic
brain in this ship isn't automatic. It makes decisions and I'll bet it
even has to decide how much energy and time to put into each process!"

"So what?"

He shrugged muscular shoulders. "So this ship is operated by a
thinking, conscientious machine. It's the first time I've encountered
such a machine, but I think I know what will happen. I spent hours last
night figuring--"

"What are you talking about?" I interrupted. "Are you so drunk that you
don't know--"

"I'll show you, Ed."

He walked around the table and stood behind my chair. I felt his thick
fingers around my throat and smelled the alcohol on his breath.

"Can you see me, machine?" he asked the empty air.

"Yes," the electronic brain replied.

"Watch!"

Kane tightened his fingers around my throat.

Verana and Marie screamed shrilly.

My head seemed to swell like a balloon; my throat gurgled painfully.

"Please stop," the machine pleaded.

"What will your masters think of you if I kill all of us? You'll return
to them with a cargo of dead people!"

       *       *       *       *       *

The machine didn't answer. I waited for the electronic brain to
interfere and, with a cold knot in my stomach, realized the machine had
said it had no way to control our actions!

"Your purpose won't be fulfilled, will it?" Kane demanded. "Not if you
return with dead specimens!"

"No," the machine admitted.

"If you don't take us back to the Moon," Kane threatened, "I'll kill
_all of us_!"

The alien electronic brain was silent.

By this time, I couldn't see and Kane's voice was a hollow, faraway
thing that rang in my ears. I tugged at my bindings, but they only
tightened as I struggled.

"If you take us back to the Moon, your masters will never know you
failed in your mission. They won't know you failed because you won't
bring them proof of your failure."

My fading consciousness tried to envision the alien mechanical brain as
it struggled with the problem.

"Look at it this way," Kane persisted. "If you carry our corpses to
your masters, all your efforts will have been useless. If you return us
to the Moon alive, you'll still have a chance to carry out your mission
later."

A long silence followed. Verana and Marie screamed at Kane to let go.
A soft darkness seemed to fill the room, blurring everything, drowning
even their shrieks in strangling blackness.

"You win," the machine conceded. "I'll return the ship to the Moon."

Kane released his grip on my throat.

"See?" he asked. "Didn't I tell you every problem has a solution?"

I didn't answer. I was too busy enjoying breathing again.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Snare, by Richard R. Smith

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SNARE ***

***** This file should be named 49901.txt or 49901.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/9/9/0/49901/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Adam Buchbinder, Mary Meehan and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
