The Project Gutenberg EBook of Education of a Martian, by Joseph Shallit

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: Education of a Martian

Author: Joseph Shallit

Release Date: January 8, 2016 [EBook #50877]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK EDUCATION OF A MARTIAN ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                        EDUCATION OF A MARTIAN

                           By JOSEPH SHALLIT

                          Illustrated by EMSH

           [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from
                  Galaxy Science Fiction August 1952.
            Extensive research did not uncover any evidence
       that the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]




             It was for his ideals Joyce loved the alien.
                But ideals are conditioned reflexes....


Walter Harley glowered across the room at his daughter. He didn't like
the willful tone that crept into her voice these days; he didn't like
the way her gray eyes spread wide at him, the way her lips tensed, the
way she drew herself up, tall and slim, an arch of determination. The
darned girl had grown up too fast, that was the trouble.

Joyce faced up to his scowl, shaky as she was. She knew what he was
thinking, because he had told her enough times--she was a headstrong
girl without a brain cell to her name; her college education had been
a waste; worse than that, it had pumped her full of crazy ideas, had
knocked her sense of values upside down.

"How anybody in their right mind...." he growled at her. "Listen,
you've already been to Mars. You've seen it. What do you want to go to
that miserable, dried-up hole again for?"

"Because ... because I was happy there," she said tremulously.

"What? With those miserable savages?" He slapped his euphoria pipe down
on the table. "Ethel, will you listen to that?"

Joyce's mother, plump and round-shouldered and vague-eyed, was deep in
her reclining chair, the miniature transviewer on her lap, watching a
garden party in Rome.

"What is it, dear?" she asked unhappily.

"This crazy girl wants to take her vacation on Mars again."

"Well ... it _is_ educational," Ethel said.

Harley made a wild, exasperated sound. "What do you know about it?
You've never been there. It's a dried-up hole, I tell you. It's a
slum--it's one great big slum. Just one decent hotel in the whole
place, and that's only because some of our boys went out there and put
it up for them."

"That awful hotel--" Joyce caught herself. Not an argument about this,
please! There was trouble enough waiting for her. "I wouldn't stay at
the hotel," she said quietly.

"What do you mean? Where would you stay?"

"With some people I know there."

She saw his heavy eyebrows clench, saw his eyes search her
suspiciously. She heard her mother's uneasy movements. She sat tautly,
her hands in her lap.

"Who," Harley said finally, "are these people?"

"Just ... some friends," Joyce said. Now it was coming, now, now.

"What friends?" Her father's voice was lower, harsher.

"Just some people I met when I was there last time."

"Just some.... Say! Is this why we've been running up these solarphone
bills? What've you been doing--talking to these people every week?"

"Only a few times."

"Look here. Look at me. Joyce, answer me. Have you been talking to that
fellow you told us about--the one you met on your other trip?"

She let it out, a tiny, miserable, "Yes."

Harley's hand slammed down on the table. He wrestled his heavy body
up out of his chair, stamped halfway across the room toward her and
stopped.

"Young lady, I'm not going to have this. I'm not going to have
anything like this! You hear? You want to get tangled up with him? My
God, you've been communicating with him for a _year_?"

"Whenever I was able to," Joyce said hoarsely, looking at the floor.

"Joyce!" He came to her, reached down and lifted her chin. "Joyce,
you're not--you're not in love with this--this creature!"

She nodded, suddenly angered at her weakness, angered at the wetness in
her eyes.

"Oh, my God!" Harley raised his arms, brought them down with a slap
against his thighs. He turned away from her. He glared at his wife, who
was drifting nervously up out of her chair. He turned back to Joyce.
"You're not serious. You can't be. This can't--this just can't happen
to us. You'll have to get this foolishness out of your head right now.
Right this minute. My God, the next thing you know, you'll be wanting
to marry one of those things."

"I do...." The sound barely came out. She swallowed, forced her voice
up. "I am going to marry him."

       *       *       *       *       *

A blast of silence swept the room, but, strangely, the shock of it
didn't touch her. All at once, she was calm, quiet. She had said it,
and now she was armored against everything.

"No," her father was saying dully. "No, Joyce. No."

"I'm sorry, Dad," she said all in a rush. "I've thought about it a long
time. I thought I'd forget him after a little while. I wasn't able to.
I'm in love with him--I'll always be in love with him. When I come
back, I'm bringing him with me. We're going to be married here."

Now, finally, the storm broke out of him. He yelled at her, he stamped
around, his fists pounded the air--it was just as she had pictured it,
dreaded it. Yet she was unshaken now, detachedly able to watch him as
if he were some unruly, unintelligent child. I am going to marry him,
she had said, and once the words were out, everything else was easy.
There were no problems. There was nothing to be afraid of.

"His name is Gregrill," she said. "They don't have last names. We'll
have to make one up or perhaps use mine."

"I'll see my daughter dead before I let her marry a Martian!" Harley
roared.

"But if she really loves him--" Ethel intruded timorously.

"Loves him? Love that miserable scum?"

"Dad, please," Joyce said quietly. "You're condemning somebody you've
never seen."

"I don't have to see him! He's a Martian, isn't he? He has horns,
doesn't he?"

"They're not horns. They're antennae."

"Call them what you like, they're horns!"

"They're antennae, Dad," Joyce repeated firmly. "They're proof of
advanced development. They can communicate with each other hundreds of
miles. They can sense instantly--"

"I don't want to hear about it!"

"But, dear," Ethel tried again, "sometimes, when they marry an
Earthling girl, they cut those horns off, and then they look just like
us."

"I wouldn't let him--" Joyce bit off each word--"do any such thing. I'd
be utterly ashamed of him. I wouldn't marry him if he knuckled under
to our prejudices like that. What does he have to be apologetic about?
He's a superior being--"

"Superior?" her father howled at her, but his voice was losing its
power.

       *       *       *       *       *

"In spite of our buildings and machines and things, they're far richer
than we are, really. They have such a richness of feeling, such warmth,
such sensitivity. They understand and feel so much more than we do.
It's--it's fantastic. It's just something we can't comprehend."

"I see," he said bitterly. "And how are you going to comprehend them?"

"Gregrill can speak Earthling as well as I can," Joyce said. "He's a
graduate of the university there in Memnonia. Maybe, with his guidance,
I'll eventually get some insight into--"

"My God," Harley said dully. He walked unsteadily away from her and
fell into his chair. "A daughter of mine...." He looked at her again.
"Joyce, can't you see it's impossible? It couldn't work. These mixed
marriages have never worked out. Never! Don't you see how it would be?
You'd be an outcast. None of your friends would ever want to see you
again."

"Well, if they should happen to be stupid and prejudiced--"

"_I'm_ that stupid and prejudiced! I wouldn't let a Martian in my
house! They're the scum of the Solar System!"

"Dad, I won't listen to you talk like that."

"What do you want to do--be the wife of a janitor?" he went on
relentlessly. "Porters and janitors, that's all they're fit for."

"If they were ever given a chance--"

"A chance? What would they do with it? Loaf around dreamily, get
nowhere. Nowhere at all! And pull us down to their level while they're
fouling up our civilization!"

Joyce stood up, her hands trembling.

"You're not going to Mars!" Harley shouted. "You're not going, you
hear? You're staying right here on earth!"

"I'm afraid," she said unsteadily, "that you're too late. I already
have my ticket. I expected you'd make a fuss. My--my trunk is at the
spaceport. Nothing can stop me now, Dad."

"I'll stop you. You'll never marry that scum. By God, if I have to take
it to the Panterrestrial Court--"

"Good-by, Dad. I'm not booked to sail till Thursday, but I think
it's better if I spend the remaining days in a hotel. It'll be more
comfortable for all of us."

"Joyce, come back here!"

"Good-by, Dad." She waved a shaky hand at her mother. "Good-by, Mom.
See you soon."

"Joyce! Come back!"

She went out, quietly closing the door behind her.

       *       *       *       *       *

The huge 1200-passenger spaceship settled down slowly toward the
landing field, its braking jets making a queer whistling sound in the
thin Martian air. The passengers crowded to the windows. Most of them
were already in their thermosuits, though the daylight temperature
was close to fifty degrees. Some were even adjusting their oxygen
packs. These weren't necessary at all, except for long hikes or intense
exertion, which few of the visitors would indulge in. But they'd
bought the things and they were going to use them--it was part of the
adventure.

Most of the passengers were working people on vacation, taking
advantage of the special two-in-a-room rate. There were a few salesmen,
nervous but hopeful about the possibilities of opening up the
hinterlands; so far, only Memnonia, the Martian capital, had provided
Earthlings with any business.

In the bow of the spaceship was a crowd of girls, a college graduating
class. Some of them were dressed in the new skin-tight thermosuits
which were stirring up so much fuss in the fashion magazines. Listening
to their ecstatic, senseless chatter, Joyce suddenly felt immensely
older. The day, thirteen months ago, when she first sighted the
Memnonian landscape with her own class, seemed impossibly long ago....

The ship nestled in against the vast loading ramp. A whistle sounded.
The doors slid open. Husky, bare-chested Martian porters crowded
aboard, began wheeling out the luggage. Joyce stepped out into the
pale sunlight. The clear, thin air tingled at her nostrils, dizzied
her, as she'd known it would till she got used to it. She followed
her porter down the ramp. It seemed to her, in her giddiness, that
Gregrill himself was down there, down at the end of the ramp, bronzed,
bare-armed, coming toward her--

It _was_ he!

He had made the two-hundred-mile trip to meet her!

She began to run. She stumbled, caught herself on somebody's arm, ran
again, plunged against him, lost herself against his big, powerful
chest.

"Oh, Greg! Greg, you're here!"

It was a long while before she could pull herself away to look at him.
She had forgotten his strength, the magnificent arch of his chest. He
was wearing a white fiber vest in the traditional style, sleeveless,
cut low in front. His sun-washed skin glowed like polished bronze. The
highlights shone on the strong, high arc of his nose, the ridge of his
cheekbones. His fragile russet antennae swayed like wheat stalks in the
wind.

There were muttered complaints around her. She was being shoved,
prodded. She'd hardly realized they were standing in the midst of the
swarming passengers.

"Oh," she laughed tremulously, "let's move. My luggage. Where--oh,
there it is, that man over there with the cart."

"I will get it," Gregrill said.

"Oh, no, please."

But he was already striding away, big and powerful, towering over most
of the Earthlings who were scurrying past. She saw him give something
to the Martian porter, watched him swing the trunk up on his shoulder.
It writhed in her, it devastated her, her father's contemptuous
dismissal--"porters and janitors, that's all they're fit for."

"Greg, put it down," she said frantically. "I won't have you carrying
it!"

He smiled at her indulgently. "It is not heavy."

"I don't want you to," she pleaded.

"Why do you not want me to?" he asked puzzledly. "Somebody must."

But how could she say it? How could she discuss it at all? She walked
beside him, dumbly. They went down the ramp to where the aircabs were
loading. An Earthling company had put in all the air transport here;
the Martians themselves had never bothered to develop anything more
advanced than the _eshbrug_, a lumbering, three-wheeled, sun-powered
vehicle.

"We shall take the airbus," Gregrill said.

"Oh, do we have to?" she asked.

"How else can we go?"

"Can't we get an _eshbrug_?"

He looked at her wonderingly. "To travel three times as long? I am
aware that you are tired--"

"I'm tired of a lot of things," she blurted. "I'm tired of all the
smooth, cynical, streamlined--Right now, I'd rather walk the whole way
than step into an Earthling airbus."

He gave an uncertain laugh. "I am not sure that I understand your
meaning."

"I'll explain it some time."

But how could she ever? He thought Earthlings were all such noble,
shining, gifted creatures. How could she tell him of the rot at the
heart of so many of them?

"Come on," she insisted desperately. "Let's find an _eshbrug_."

       *       *       *       *       *

The driver let them out at Gregrill's road. Gregrill shouldered the
trunk, and they walked down past the irregular row of red, sunbaked,
dome-shaped houses, each with its big tank in the rear for catching
Mars' meager rainfall. Joyce felt a quickening, a surge of warmth,
when she saw them and the quiet, open-faced people in their doorways,
smiling their shy welcomes. She was coming home.

She was coming home....

Gregrill's mother and father were waiting just inside their door. They
opened their arms; they hardly said a word. Joyce ran to them, folded
them against her. She didn't mind the tears.

She let them lead her into the main room, let them seat her, put
pillows around her. She sat there bathing in their tenderness, their
simple good-heartedness.

Couldn't everybody see it? Why couldn't her father know it? These were
the best people in the Universe!

Dinner was an Earthling meal. Joyce had been looking forward to a dish
of _mrila_, the Martian rice, and _krulevak_, the white fruit that
tasted like luscious chicken meat. But Gregrill's parents had obviously
felt that their humble foods were too mean for her exalted taste and
they had gone to the expense of bringing in vegetables and meats from
the Earthling import shop in Memnonia.

Joyce hid her disappointment. She had an impulse to say, "Please,
please don't mimic our Earthling ways. Stay the way you are. Don't
spoil anything. Don't lose what you have."

After dinner, Gregrill took her for a walk. Joyce had her thermosuit
on now. The Sun was setting, and the startling cold of the Martian
night was coming in fast. Gregrill changed his fiber vest for a sleeved
jacket, though of the same light material. It was incredible how little
protection these people needed against the cold. But, of course,
they'd adapted to it.

They walked along the edge of the gorge that cut through the stunted
forest half a mile from Gregrill's home. The rough sides of the gorge
rose sheer and splendid, a marvel of glittering color--red, orange,
yellow, brown. Far down on the rocky bed, a shallow stream flowed
sluggishly to the south.

Soon, as summer came on, the stream would quickly deepen. From the
northern ice fields, a torrent of blue water would come rushing
down the gorges, and the heavy rains would come, and the red ground
underfoot would turn to a miraculous green, and the _mrila_ would
sprout up like a rug of green velvet across the wide fields and the
terraced hills.

If she could only stay here, if they could only build their lives here
with these simple, good-hearted people....

But she knew it couldn't be. Gregrill would be wasted here. Earth,
despite all its hatefulness for her, was the only place where his
genius would have a chance to unfold and display its potentialities.

"It is time that we go back?" Gregrill asked. "You are cold?"

Suddenly, helplessly, Joyce began to laugh.

"What is it?" Gregrill said, confused by the sudden laughter.

"The funny stiff way you talk!" She laughed on and on. She couldn't
stop.

"I am sorry," he said, turning aside, his face full of hurt.

"Oh, no!" She caught his arm. "Don't misunderstand. I love the
way you talk. I want you always to talk the way you do now. Don't
change--please don't ever change. I love you just as you are."

       *       *       *       *       *

Gregrill got his visa five days later. It was a complicated affair.
Joyce had to sign half a dozen affidavits at the Earthling consulate,
all certifying in one way or another that she intended to marry
Gregrill as soon as they reached Earth, and that she guaranteed he
wouldn't become a public charge. It was practically the only way a
Martian had of getting to Earth.

It infuriated her, this stupid legislation by which Earth denied itself
everything these people could contribute to its culture. A few years
ago, the Earthling government had admitted several thousand Martians to
fill the pressing shortage of menial labor, and had permitted Venusians
to take jobs as room stewards and waiters on the spaceships; and by
that trivial concession, it had felt it was fulfilling its obligations
to the Interplanetary Union.

When would it learn what its narrow prejudices were costing? Would
it have to wait till someone like Gregrill stepped forward and
demonstrated all the richness it was missing?

The formal good-bys had been said. The neighbors had held a party for
them. It had been in a clearing behind the houses, out in the clean,
lemon-yellow sunlight. They had eaten roasted _trork_, the crustacean
delicacy from the northern gorges, and _mrila_ made into candied
patties. Gregrill's mother and father had danced the grave, stately
farewell dance. And now, on their final evening on Mars, Joyce and
Gregrill were taking their last walk along the deep, echoing gorge.

She had just been watching him finish his packing, and the pain of
it still sat in her throat. He had included his college books--every
one of his texts and notebooks--packing them in so reverently, so
pathetically confident that all he had to do was follow his classroom
precepts, and recognition and success would come tumbling into his
hands....

"I hope that your parents will like me as well as my parents like you,"
Gregrill said.

"Oh, yes," Joyce assured him hoarsely.

"Perhaps they will not be pleased that you marry a Martian."

"No, Greg, no. They'll--" But she couldn't carry it on.

He turned to face her; he looked at her hard. He was starting to speak,
to ask the obvious questions, but she flung herself against him.

"Greg! Let's get married here! Let's get married before we leave."

He held her away from him so he could look at her. "But you had wished
to be married on Earth," he said bewilderedly.

"I know, but I've changed my mind. I want it here, now. Oh, Greg, I'm
afraid...."

His big russet eyes narrowed, his high-winged nostrils flared, scenting
danger. "You are afraid of what?" he asked quietly.

"I don't know, Greg. I--I'm just afraid something will happen,
something will go wrong, I don't know what." She couldn't look him in
the eyes. "Let's get married here, in the morning, before we leave.
Then we'll be married.

"Nothing can go wrong."

"Will not your parents be angered that you--"

"No, no, Greg. It'll be all right. This is the best way, believe me."

"I believe you," he said gravely.

And it caught her again, his small-boy solemnity. She was caught in a
burst of helpless laughter. "Oh, Greg, I love you!"

       *       *       *       *       *

They were married by a Martian priest in a small red-draped temple in
Memnonia, not far from the spaceport. The ceremony was without words,
like all religious rites on Mars. The tall, round-bodied priest, a
huge cylinder of a man in heavy ritual fiber robes, stood facing them,
his hands stiff against his sides, his eyes closed, his heavy features
motionless.

Joyce closed her eyes, too. She strained to hear, feel, sense something
of what was passing between the priest and Gregrill. Surely, if she
strained hard enough, she would catch some echo, some aura. But the air
defied her; she was deaf, blind, insensate; she was cut off irrevocably
from this higher level of communication. Perhaps their children....

"He is saying the words now," Gregrill whispered in her ear. "You
two together ... comfort each other ... against the darkness and the
drought ... through the long dry misery of winter ... when the water
is locked and nothing grows ... till the glad day of rain and running
streams ... you two together ... comfort each other...."

"Say yes, my darling," Gregrill told her.

"Yes, yes! Oh, yes!"

They were outside, striding exultantly through the sunshine, the light
wind tossing their hair, and the words kept singing to her: "Through
the long dry misery of winter ... till the glad day of rain...."

Oh, yes, Greg! Yes!

When they reached the spaceship, their bags had already been taken to
their stateroom, unpacked, the clothing arranged in the dressers--the
meticulous work of the Venusian stewards. Even the bedcovers were
turned down, her nightgown laid out.

"Greg," she said in a rush of embarrassment, "let's go out and watch
the ... watch how we take off."

"You go, and I shall join you soon," he said. "I must wash and anoint
myself as a bridegroom."

Joyce went down the corridor into the observation rotunda. The huge
semicircular window was cluttered with jabbering passengers. She
squeezed in among them, but she stayed only a moment. She pushed
her way back out and went to a table near the head of the corridor,
and waited restlessly for him. Midway down the corridor, a Venusian
steward, a scrawny little gray-skinned, long-beaked fellow, was running
a cleaning machine over the floor. She smiled at him, but he turned his
face shyly away.

And then Gregrill came, moving up the corridor with his lithe,
magnificent grace.

His wet hair glistened.

"Greg, you look wonderful!" she cried, instantly aware of how foolish
she sounded.

He speeded his steps. He didn't see the cleaning hose in his path. The
Venusian moved quickly to pull it aside, but it caught Gregrill's foot.
He stumbled, caught himself on the corridor rail. Swiftly he turned,
his arm swung out, his forearm slammed against the jaw of the little
Venusian, sending him crashing down against his cleaning machine.
Gregrill looked down at him a moment. Then he turned, gave Joyce a
broad smile and walked to her table.

"Greg." Her throat was dry. "Why did you do that? He didn't mean it."

"It is his duty to avoid such accidents," Gregrill said.

"But look, he's still lying there. Let's go help him."

"Leave him there," he said. "He is only a Venusian."

"Only a--?"

"Venusian." His lips curled. "They are the scum of the Solar System."

The tremor that went through her was lost in the thrust of the jets as
the ship took off.

"They are not even fit for cleaning floors," Gregrill said. He suddenly
smiled. "Do you not see the change I have made?" He gestured at his
head.

Through tear-blinded eyes, she saw his glossy waves of hair. The
antennae were gone!

"It hurt only a little," he said. "I could not wait until I had them
off. I have been ashamed of them for so long."

Lord, who was this person she had married? _She didn't know him!_

"I see that you are still upset," he said. "Please understand that
these Venusians must be kept in their place."

It was some stranger. She couldn't be married to him. She couldn't!

"I wonder if I look like an Earthling now," he said. "Tell me, do you
think that I look a little like your father and his friends?"

She answered him wearily, defeatedly: "Yes, Greg. You do. Exactly."





End of Project Gutenberg's Education of a Martian, by Joseph Shallit

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK EDUCATION OF A MARTIAN ***

***** This file should be named 50877.txt or 50877.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/0/8/7/50877/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
