The Project Gutenberg EBook of Bodyguard, by Christopher Grimm

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: Bodyguard

Author: Christopher Grimm

Release Date: January 21, 2016 [EBook #50988]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BODYGUARD ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                               Bodyguard

                         By CHRISTOPHER GRIMM

                         Illustrated by CAVAT

           [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from
                 Galaxy Science Fiction February 1956.
         Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
         the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]




            When overwhelming danger is constantly present,
           of course a man is entitled to have a bodyguard.
                The annoyance was that he had to do it
             himself ... and his body would not cooperate!


The man at the bar was exceptionally handsome, and he knew it. So did
the light-haired girl at his side, and so did the nondescript man in
the gray suit who was watching them from a booth in the corner.

Everyone in the room was aware of the big young man, and most of the
humans present were resentful, for he handled himself consciously and
arrogantly, as if his appearance alone were enough to make him superior
to anyone. Even the girl with him was growing restless, for she was
accustomed to adulation herself, and next to Gabriel Lockard she was
almost ordinary-looking.

As for the extraterrestrials--it was a free bar--they were merely
amused, since to them all men were pathetically and irredeemably
hideous.

Gabe threw his arm wide in one of his expansive gestures. There was a
short man standing next to the pair--young, as most men and women were
in that time, thanks to the science which could stave off decay, though
not death--but with no other apparent physical virtue, for plastic
surgery had not fulfilled its bright promise of the twentieth century.

The drink he had been raising to his lips splashed all over his
clothing; the glass shattered at his feet. Now he was not only a rather
ugly little man, but also a rather ridiculous one--or at least he felt
he was, which was what mattered.

"Sorry, colleague," Gabe said lazily. "All my fault. You must let me
buy you a replacement." He gestured to the bartender. "Another of the
same for my fellow-man here."

The ugly man dabbed futilely at his dripping trousers with a cloth
hastily supplied by the management.

"You must allow me to pay your cleaning bill," Gabe said, taking out
his wallet and extracting several credit notes without seeming to look
at them. "Here, have yourself a new suit on me." _You could use one_
was implied.

And that, coming on top of Gabriel Lockard's spectacular appearance,
was too much. The ugly man picked up the drink the bartender had just
set before him and started to hurl it, glass and all, into Lockard's
handsome face.

       *       *       *       *       *

Suddenly a restraining hand was laid upon his arm. "Don't do that," the
nondescript man who had been sitting in the corner advised. He removed
the glass from the little man's slackening grasp. "You wouldn't want to
go to jail because of him."

The ugly man gave him a bewildered stare. Then, seeing the forces
now ranged against him--including his own belated prudence--were too
strong, he stumbled off. He hadn't really wanted to fight, only to
smash back, and now it was too late for that.

Gabe studied the newcomer curiously. "So, it's you again?"

The man in the gray suit smiled. "Who else in any world would stand up
for you?"

"I should think you'd have given up by now. Not that I mind having you
around, of course," Gabriel added too quickly. "You do come in useful
at times, you know."

"So you don't mind having me around?" The nondescript man smiled again.
"Then what are you running from, if not me? You can't be running from
yourself--you lost yourself a while back, remember?"

Gabe ran a hand through his thick blond hair. "Come on, have a drink
with me, fellow-man, and let's let bygones be bygones. I owe you
something--I admit that. Maybe we can even work this thing out."

"I drank with you once too often," the nondescript man said. "And
things worked out fine, didn't they? For you." His eyes studied the
other man's incredibly handsome young face, noted the suggestion of
bags under the eyes, the beginning of slackness at the lips, and were
not pleased with what they saw. "Watch yourself, colleague," he warned
as he left. "Soon you might not be worth the saving."

"Who was that, Gabe?" the girl asked.

He shrugged. "I never saw him before in my life." Of course, knowing
him, she assumed he was lying, but, as a matter of fact, just then he
happened to have been telling the truth.

       *       *       *       *       *

Once the illuminators were extinguished in Gabriel Lockard's hotel
suite, it seemed reasonably certain to the man in the gray suit, as
he watched from the street, that his quarry would not go out again
that night. So he went to the nearest airstation. There he inserted a
coin in a locker, into which he put most of his personal possessions,
reserving only a sum of money. After setting the locker to respond to
the letter combination _bodyguard_, he went out into the street.

If he had met with a fatal accident at that point, there would have
been nothing on his body to identify him. As a matter of fact, no real
identification was possible, for he was no one and had been no one for
years.

The nondescript man hailed a cruising helicab. "Where to, fellow-man?"
the driver asked.

"I'm new in the parish," the other man replied and let it hang there.

"Oh...? Females...? Narcophagi...? Thrill-mills?"

But to each of these questions the nondescript man shook his head.

"Games?" the driver finally asked, although he could guess what was
wanted by then. "Dice...? Roulette...? Farjeen?"

"Is there a good zarquil game in town?"

The driver moved so he could see the face of the man behind him in the
teleview. A very ordinary face. "Look, colleague, why don't you commit
suicide? It's cleaner and quicker."

"I can't contact your attitude," the passenger said with a thin
smile. "Bet you've never tried the game yourself. Each time it
happens, there's a ... well, there's no experience to match it at a
thrill-mill." He gave a sigh that was almost an audible shudder, and
which the driver misinterpreted as an expression of ecstasy.

"Each time, eh? You're a dutchman then?" The driver spat out of the
window. "If it wasn't for the nibble, I'd throw you right out of the
cab. Without even bothering to take it down even. I hate dutchmen ...
anybody with any legitimate feelings hates 'em."

"But it would be silly to let personal prejudice stand in the way of a
commission, wouldn't it?" the other man asked coolly.

"Of course. You'll need plenty of foliage, though."

"I have sufficient funds. I also have a gun."

"You're the dictator," the driver agreed sullenly.


II

It was a dark and rainy night in early fall. Gabe Lockard was in no
condition to drive the helicar. However, he was stubborn.

"Let me take the controls, honey," the light-haired girl urged, but he
shook his handsome head.

"Show you I can do something 'sides look pretty," he said thickly,
referring to an earlier and not amicable conversation they had held,
and of which she still bore the reminder on one thickly made-up cheek.

Fortunately the car was flying low, contrary to regulations, so that
when they smashed into the beacon tower on the outskirts of the little
town, they didn't have far to fall. And hardly had their car crashed
on the ground when the car that had been following them landed, and a
short fat man was puffing toward them through the mist.

To the girl's indignation, the stranger not only hauled Gabe out onto
the dripping grass first, but stopped and deliberately examined the
young man by the light of his minilume, almost as if she weren't there
at all. Only when she started to struggle out by herself did he seem to
remember her existence. He pulled her away from the wreck just a moment
before the fuel tank exploded and the 'copter went up in flames.

Gabe opened his eyes and saw the fat man gazing down at him
speculatively. "My guardian angel," he mumbled--shock had sobered him
a little, but not enough. He sat up. "Guess I'm not hurt or you'd have
thrown me back in."

"And that's no joke," the fat man agreed.

The girl shivered and at that moment Gabriel suddenly seemed to recall
that he had not been alone. "How about Helen? She on course?"

"Seems to be," the fat man said. "You all right, miss?" he asked,
glancing toward the girl without, she thought, much apparent concern.

"_Mrs._," Gabriel corrected. "Allow me to introduce you to Mrs. Gabriel
Lockard," he said, bowing from his seated position toward the girl.
"Pretty bauble, isn't she?"

"I'm delighted to meet you, Mrs. Gabriel Lockard," the fat man said,
looking at her intently. His small eyes seemed to strip the make-up
from her cheek and examine the livid bruise underneath. "I hope
you'll be worthy of the name." The light given off by the flaming
car flickered on his face and Gabriel's and, she supposed, hers too.
Otherwise, darkness surrounded the three of them.

There were no public illuminators this far out--even in town the
lights were dimming and not being replaced fast enough nor by the
newer models. The town, the civilization, the planet all were old and
beginning to slide downhill....

Gabe gave a short laugh, for no reason that she could see.

       *       *       *       *       *

There was the feeling that she had encountered the fat man before,
which was, of course, absurd. She had an excellent memory for faces and
his was not included in her gallery. The girl pulled her thin jacket
closer about her chilly body. "Aren't you going to introduce your--your
friend to me, Gabe?"

"I don't know who he is," Gabe said almost merrily, "except that he's
no friend of mine. Do you have a name, stranger?"

"Of course I have a name." The fat man extracted an identification
card from his wallet and read it. "Says here I'm Dominic Bianchi, and
Dominic Bianchi is a retail milgot dealer.... Only he isn't a retail
milgot dealer any more; the poor fellow went bankrupt a couple of weeks
ago, and now he isn't ... anything."

"You saved our lives," the girl said. "I'd like to give you some token
of my--of our appreciation." Her hand reached toward her credit-carrier
with deliberate insult. He might have saved her life, but only
casually, as a by-product of some larger scheme, and her appreciation
held little gratitude.

The fat man shook his head without rancor. "I have plenty of money,
thank you, Mrs. Gabriel Lockard.... Come," he addressed her husband,
"if you get up, I'll drive you home. I warn you, be more careful in the
future! Sometimes," he added musingly, "I almost wish you would let
something happen. Then my problem would not be any problem, would it?"

Gabriel shivered. "I'll be careful," he vowed. "I promise--I'll be
careful."

When he was sure that his charge was safely tucked in for the night,
the fat man checked his personal possessions. He then requested a taxi
driver to take him to the nearest zarquil game. The driver accepted the
commission phlegmatically. Perhaps he was more hardened than the others
had been; perhaps he was unaware that the fat man was not a desperate
or despairing individual seeking one last chance, but what was known
colloquially as a flying dutchman, a man, or woman, who went from
one zarquil game to another, loving the thrill of the sport, if you
could call it that, for its own sake, and not for the futile hope it
extended and which was its sole shred of claim to moral justification.
Perhaps--and this was the most likely hypothesis--he just didn't care.

Zarquil was extremely illegal, of course--so much so that there were
many legitimate citizens who weren't quite sure just what the word
implied, knowing merely that it was one of those nameless horrors so
deliciously hinted at by the fax sheets under the generic term of
"crimes against nature." Actually the phrase was more appropriate to
zarquil than to most of the other activities to which it was commonly
applied. And this was one crime--for it was crime in law as well as
nature--in which victim had to be considered as guilty as perpetrator;
otherwise the whole legal structure of society would collapse.

       *       *       *       *       *

Playing the game was fabulously expensive; it had to be to make it
profitable for the Vinzz to run it. Those odd creatures from Altair's
seventh planet cared nothing for the welfare of the completely alien
human beings; all they wanted was to feather their own pockets with
interstellar credits, so that they could return to Vinau and buy many
slaves. For, on Vinau, bodies were of little account, and so to them
zarquil was the equivalent of the terrestrial game musical chairs.
Which was why they came to Terra to make profits--there has never been
big money in musical chairs as such.

When the zarquil operators were apprehended, which was not frequent--as
they had strange powers, which, not being definable, were beyond the
law--they suffered their sentences with equanimity. No Earth court
could give an effective prison sentence to a creature whose life
spanned approximately two thousand terrestrial years. And capital
punishment had become obsolete on Terra, which very possibly saved the
terrestrials embarrassment, for it was not certain that their weapons
could kill the Vinzz ... or whether, in fact, the Vinzz merely expired
after a period of years out of sheer boredom. Fortunately, because
trade was more profitable than war, there had always been peace between
Vinau and Terra, and, for that reason, Terra could not bar the entrance
of apparently respectable citizens of a friendly planet.

The taxi driver took the fat man to one of the rather seedy locales in
which the zarquil games were usually found, for the Vinzz attempted to
conduct their operations with as much unobtrusiveness as was possible.
But the front door swung open on an interior that lacked the opulence
of the usual Vinoz set-up; it was down-right shabby, the dim olive
light hinting of squalor rather than forbidden pleasures. That was
the trouble in these smaller towns--you ran greater risks of getting
involved in games where the players had not been carefully screened.

The Vinoz games were usually clean, because that paid off better, but,
when profits were lacking, the Vinzz were capable of sliding off into
darkside practices. Naturally the small-town houses were more likely to
have trouble in making ends meet, because everybody in the parish knew
everybody else far too well.

The fat man wondered whether that had been his quarry's motive in
coming to such desolate, off-trail places--hoping that eventually
disaster would hit the one who pursued him. Somehow, such a plan seemed
too logical for the man he was haunting.

However, beggars could not be choosers. The fat man paid off the
heli-driver and entered the zarquil house. "One?" the small green
creature in the slightly frayed robe asked.

"One," the fat man answered.


III

The would-be thief fled down the dark alley, with the hot bright rays
from the stranger's gun lancing out after him in flamboyant but futile
patterns. The stranger, a thin young man with delicate, angular
features, made no attempt to follow. Instead, he bent over to examine
Gabriel Lockard's form, appropriately outstretched in the gutter. "Only
weighted out," he muttered, "he'll be all right. Whatever possessed you
two to come out to a place like this?"

"I really think Gabriel _must_ be possessed...." the girl said, mostly
to herself. "I had no idea of the kind of place it was going to be
until he brought me here. The others were bad, but this is even worse.
It almost seems as if he went around looking for trouble, doesn't it?"

"It does indeed," the stranger agreed, coughing a little. It was
growing colder and, on this world, the cities had no domes to protect
them from the climate, because it was Earth and the air was breathable
and it wasn't worth the trouble of fixing up.

The girl looked closely at him. "You look different, but you _are_ the
same man who pulled us out of that aircar crash, aren't you? And before
that the man in the gray suit? And before that...?"

The young man's cheekbones protruded as he smiled. "Yes, I'm all of
them."

"Then what they say about the zarquil games is true? There are people
who go around changing their bodies like--like hats?" Automatically she
reached to adjust the expensive bit of blue synthetic on her moon-pale
hair, for she was always conscious of her appearance; if she had not
been so before marriage, Gabriel would have taught her that.

       *       *       *       *       *

He smiled again, but coughed instead of speaking.

"But why do you do it? _Why!_ Do you like it? Or is it because of
Gabriel?" She was growing a little frantic; there was menace here
and she could not understand it nor determine whether or not she was
included in its scope. "Do you want to keep him from recognizing you;
is that it?"

"Ask him."

"He won't tell me; he never tells me anything. We just keep running. I
didn't recognize it as running at first, but now I realize that's what
we've been doing ever since we were married. And running from you, I
think?"

There was no change of expression on the man's gaunt face, and she
wondered how much control he had over a body that, though second- or
third- or fourth-hand, must be new to him. How well could he make it
respond? What was it like to step into another person's casing? But she
must not let herself think that way or she would find herself looking
for a zarquil game. It would be one way of escaping Gabriel, but not,
she thought, the best way; her body was much too good a one to risk so
casually.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was beginning to snow. Light, feathery flakes drifted down on her
husband's immobile body. She pulled her thick coat--of fur taken from
some animal who had lived and died light-years away--more closely about
herself. The thin young man began to cough again.

Overhead a tiny star seemed to detach itself from the pale flat disk
of the Moon and hurl itself upward--one of the interstellar ships
embarking on its long voyage to distant suns. She wished that somehow
she could be on it, but she was here, on this solitary old world in a
barren solar system, with her unconscious husband and a strange man who
followed them, and it looked as if here she would stay ... all three of
them would stay....

"If you're after Gabriel, planning to hurt him," she asked, "why then
do you keep helping him?"

"I am not helping _him_. And he knows that."

"You'll change again tonight, won't you?" she babbled. "You always
change after you ... meet us? I think I'm beginning to be able to
identify you now, even when you're ... wearing a new body; there's
something about you that doesn't change."

"Too bad he got married," the young man said. "I could have followed
him for an eternity and he would never have been able to pick me out
from the crowd. Too bad he got married anyway," he added, his voice
less impersonal, "for your sake."

She had come to the same conclusion in her six months of marriage, but
she would not admit that to an outsider. Though this man was hardly an
outsider; he was part of their small family group--as long as she had
known Gabriel, so long he must have known her. And she began to suspect
that he was even more closely involved than that.

"Why must you change again?" she persisted, obliquely approaching the
subject she feared. "You have a pretty good body there. Why run the
risk of getting a bad one?"

"This isn't a good body," he said. "It's diseased. Sure, nobody's
supposed to play the game who hasn't passed a thorough medical
examination. But in the places to which your husband has been leading
me, they're often not too particular, as long as the player has plenty
of foliage."

"How--long will it last you?"

"Four or five months, if I'm careful." He smiled. "But don't worry, if
that's what you're doing; I'll get it passed on before then. It'll be
expensive--that's all. Bad landing for the guy who gets it, but then
it was tough on me too, wasn't it?"

"But how did you get into this ... pursuit?" she asked again. "And why
are you doing it?" People didn't have any traffic with Gabriel Lockard
for fun, not after they got to know him. And this man certainly should
know him better than most.

"Ask your husband."

The original Gabriel Lockard looked down at the prostrate,
snow-powdered figure of the man who had stolen his body and his name,
and stirred it with his toe. "I'd better call a cab--he might freeze to
death."

He signaled and a cab came.

"Tell him, when he comes to," he said to the girl as he and the driver
lifted the heavy form of her husband into the helicar, "that I'm
getting pretty tired of this." He stopped for a long spell of coughing.
"Tell him that sometimes I wonder whether cutting off my nose wouldn't,
in the long run, be most beneficial for my face."

       *       *       *       *       *

"Sorry," the Vinzz said impersonally, in English that was perfect
except for the slight dampening of the sibilants, "but I'm afraid you
cannot play."

"Why not?" The emaciated young man began to put on his clothes.

"You know why. Your body is worthless. And this is a reputable house."

"But I have plenty of money." The young man coughed. The Vinzz
shrugged. "I'll pay you twice the regular fee."

The green one shook his head. "Regrettably, I do mean what I say. This
game is really clean."

"In a town like this?"

"That is the reason we can afford to be honest." The Vinzz' tendrils
quivered in what the man had come to recognize as amusement through
long, but necessarily superficial acquaintance with the Vinzz. His
heavy robe of what looked like moss-green velvet, but might have been
velvet-green moss, encrusted with oddly faceted alien jewels, swung
with him.

"We do a lot of business here," he said unnecessarily, for the whole
set-up spelled wealth far beyond the dreams of the man, and he was by
no means poor when it came to worldly goods. "Why don't you try another
town where they're not so particular?"

The young man smiled wryly. Just his luck to stumble on a sunny game.
He never liked to risk following his quarry in the same configuration.
And even though only the girl had actually seen him this time, he
wouldn't feel at ease until he had made the usual body-shift. Was
he changing because of Gabriel, he wondered, or was he using his own
discoverment and identification simply as an excuse to cover the fact
that none of the bodies that fell to his lot ever seemed to fit him?
Was he activated solely by revenge or as much by the hope that in the
hazards of the game he might, impossible though it now seemed, some day
win another body that approached perfection as nearly as his original
casing had?

He didn't know. However, there seemed to be no help for it now; he
would have to wait until they reached the next town, unless the girl,
seeing him reappear in the same guise, would guess what had happened
and tell her husband. He himself had been a fool to admit to her that
the hulk he inhabited was a sick one; he still couldn't understand
how he could so casually have entrusted her with so vital a piece of
information.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Vinzz had been locking antennae with another of his kind. Now they
detached, and the first approached the man once more. "There is, as it
happens, a body available for a private game," he lisped. "No questions
to be asked or answered. All I can tell you is that it is in good
health."

The man hesitated. "But unable to pass the screening?" he murmured
aloud. "A criminal then."

The green one's face--if you could call it a face--remained impassive.

"Male?"

"Of course," the Vinzz said primly. His kind did have certain ultimate
standards to which they adhered rigidly, and one of those was the
curious tabu against mixed games, strictly enforced even though it
kept them from tapping a vast source of potential players. There had
also never been a recorded instance of humans and extraterrestrials
exchanging identities, but whether that was the result of tabu or
biological impossibility, no one could tell.

It might merely be prudence on the Vinzz' part--if it had ever
been proved that an alien life-form had "desecrated" a human body,
Earthmen would clamor for war ... for on this planet humanity held
its self-bestowed purity of birthright dear--and the Vinzz, despite
being unquestionably the stronger, were pragmatic pacifists. It had
been undoubtedly some rabid member of the anti-alien groups active on
Terra who had started the rumor that the planetary slogan of Vinau was,
"Don't beat 'em; cheat 'em."

"It would have to be something pretty nuclear for the other guy to take
such a risk." The man rubbed his chin thoughtfully. "How much?"

"Thirty thousand credits."

"Why, that's three times the usual rate!"

"The other will pay five times the usual rate."

"Oh, all right," the delicate young man gave in. It was a terrific
risk he was agreeing to take, because, if the other was a criminal, he
himself would, upon assuming the body, assume responsibility for all
the crimes it had committed. But there was nothing else he could do.

       *       *       *       *       *

He looked at himself in the mirror and found he had a fine new body;
tall and strikingly handsome in a dark, coarse-featured way. Nothing to
match the one he had lost, in his opinion, but there were probably many
people who might find this one preferable. No identification in the
pockets, but it wasn't necessary; he recognized the face. Not that it
was a very famous or even notorious one, but the dutchman was a careful
student of the "wanted" fax that had decorated public buildings from
time immemorial, for he was ever mindful of the possibility that he
might one day find himself trapped unwittingly in the body of one of
the men depicted there. And he knew that this particular man, though
not an important criminal in any sense of the word, was one whom the
police had been ordered to burn on sight. The abolishing of capital
punishment could not abolish the necessity for self-defense, and the
man in question was not one who would let himself be captured easily,
nor whom the police intended to capture easily.

_This might be a lucky break for me after all_, the new tenant thought,
as he tried to adjust himself to the body. It, too, despite its obvious
rude health, was not a very comfortable fit. _I can do a lot with a
hulk like this. And maybe I'm cleverer than the original owner; maybe
I'll be able to get away with it._


IV

"Look, Gabe," the girl said, "don't try to fool me! I know you
too well. And I know you have that man's--the real Gabriel
Lockard's--body." She put unnecessary stardust on her nose as she
watched her husband's reflection in the dressing table mirror.

Lockard--Lockard's body, at any rate--sat up and felt his unshaven
chin. "That what he tell you?"

"No, he didn't tell me anything really--just suggested I ask you
whatever I want to know. But why else should he guard somebody he
obviously hates the way he hates you? Only because he doesn't want to
see his body spoiled."

"It _is_ a pretty good body, isn't it?" Gabe flexed softening muscles
and made no attempt to deny her charge; very probably he was relieved
at having someone with whom to share his secret.

"Not as good as it must have been," the girl said, turning and looking
at him without admiration. "Not if you keep on the way you're coursing.
Gabe, why don't you...?"

"Give it back to him, eh?" Lockard regarded his wife appraisingly.
"You'd like that, wouldn't you? You'd be _his_ wife then. That would be
nice--a sound mind in a sound body. But don't you think that's a little
more than you deserve?"

"I wasn't thinking about that, Gabe," she said truthfully enough, for
she hadn't followed the idea to its logical conclusion. "Of course I'd
go with you," she went on, now knowing she lied, "when you got your ...
old body back."

_Sure_, she thought, _I'd keep going with you to farjeen houses and
thrill-mills._ Actually she had accompanied him to a thrill-mill only
once, and from then on, despite all his threats, she had refused to go
with him again. But that once had been enough; nothing could ever wash
that experience from her mind or her body.

"You wouldn't be able to get your old body back, though, would you?"
she went on. "You don't know where it's gone, and neither, I suppose,
does he?"

"I don't want to know!" he spat. "I wouldn't want it if I could get
it back. Whoever it adhered to probably killed himself as soon as he
looked in a mirror." He swung long legs over the side of his bed.
"Christ, anything would be better than that! You can't imagine what a
hulk I had!"

"Oh, yes, I can," she said incautiously. "You must have had a body to
match your character. Pity you could only change one."

       *       *       *       *       *

He rose from the bed and struck her right on the mouth. Although he
hadn't used his full strength, the blow was painful nonetheless. She
could feel the red of her lipstick become mixed with a warmer, liquid
red that trickled slowly down her freshly powdered chin. She wouldn't
cry, because he liked that, but crumpled to the ground and lay still.
If, experience had taught her, she pretended to be hurt, he wouldn't
hit her again. Only sometimes it was hard to remember that at the
actual moment of hurt and indignity. He was too afraid of prison--a
tangible prison. And perhaps, to do him credit, he didn't want to
deface his own property.

He sat down on the edge of the bed again and lit a milgot stick. "Oh,
get up, Helen. You know I didn't hit you that hard."

"Did you have to beat him up to get him to change bodies?" she asked
from the floor.

"No." He laughed reminiscently. "I just got him drunk. We were friends,
so it was a cinch. He was my only friend; everybody else hated me
because of my appearance." His features contorted. "What made him think
he was so damn much better than other people that he could afford to
like me? Served him right for being so noble."

She stared at the ceiling--it was so old its very fabric was beginning
to crack--and said nothing.

"He didn't even realize what he had here--" Lockard tapped his broad
chest with complacence--"until it was too late. Took it for granted.
Sickened me to see him taking the body for granted when I couldn't take
mine that way. People used to shrink from me. Girls...."

She sat up. "Give me a milgot, Gabe."

He lighted one and handed it to her. "For Christ's sake, Helen, I
gave him more than he had a right to expect. I was too god-damn
noble myself. I was well-milled; I didn't have to leave half of my
holdings in my own name--I could have transferred them all to his. If
I had, then he wouldn't have had the folio to hound me all over this
planet or to other planets, if I'd had the nerve to shut myself up
on a spaceship, knowing he probably would be shut up on it with me."
He smiled. "Of course he won't hurt me; that's the one compensation.
Damage me, and he damages himself."

"But it's your life he saves, too," she reminded him.

"My life wouldn't ever have been in danger if it hadn't been for this
continual persecution--it's driving me out of this dimension! I planned
to start a new life with this body," he pleaded, anxious for belief
and, as a matter of fact, she believed him; almost everybody has good
intentions and there was no reason to except even such a one as Gabriel
Lockard, or whatever he was originally named.

"It was my appearance that got me mixed up," he went on. "Given half a
chance I could have straightened out--gone to Proxima Centauri, maybe,
and then out to one of the frontier planets. Made something of myself
up there. But nobody ever gave me a chance. Now, as long as he follows
me, there's nothing I can do except run and try to hide and know all
the time I can't escape--I'm already in the trap."

"What can he do if you stay and face him?"

"I don't know--that's the hell of it. But he's smart. Somehow he'll
lure me into another game. I don't know how, but that must be what he
has in mind. What else could it be?"

"What else indeed?" Helen asked, smiling up at the ceiling.

       *       *       *       *       *

The milgot vanished in his fingers and he took another. "It'd take time
for him to arrange any kind of private game set-up, though, and as long
as I keep on the move, he won't be able to create anything. Unless he
runs into a floating zarquil game." He smiled mirthlessly. "And he
couldn't. Too much machinery, I understand.... Lucky he doesn't seem to
have connections, the way I have," Lockard boasted. "I have connections
all over the god-damn planet. Transferred them when I transferred my
holdings."

She got up, seated herself on the vanity bench, and took up a brush,
which she ran absently over the pale hair that shimmered down to her
paler shoulders. "So we keep running all over the planet.... What would
you do if I left you, Gabriel?"

"Kill you," he said without hesitation. "Slowly. Even if I have to put
this precious hulk of mine in jeopardy. And you wouldn't like that.
Neither would your boy friend."

"Stop calling him my--"

"Wait a minute--maybe there is an escape hatch!" His blue eyes
sharpened unbecomingly. "He can't kill me, but there's nothing to stop
my killing him."

"How about the police?" She tried to speak calmly as she passed the
brush up and down, sometimes not even touching her hair. "The body you
have won't be any good to you with them looking for it. And you're not
a professional exterminator, Gabe--you wouldn't be able to get away
with it."

"I can hire somebody else to do the killing. Remember I still have
plenty of foliage. Maybe I didn't leave him exactly half of my
property, but, what the hell, I left him enough."

"How will you recognize him?" she asked, half-turning, fearfully.
"He'll have a new body, you know."

"You'll recognize him, Helen--you said you could." At that moment she
could have wrapped her own hair tightly around her white throat and
strangled herself; she was so appalled by her own witless treachery.

He dragged her to her feet. "Aah, moonbeam, you know I didn't mean to
hurt you. It's just that this whole crazy pattern's driving me out of
this world. Once I get rid of that life-form, you'll see, I'll be a
different man."

As his arms tightened around her, she wondered what it would be like, a
different man in the same body.


V

"What makes you think _I_ would do a thing like that?" the little
lawyer asked apprehensively, not meeting the bland blue eyes of the man
who faced him across the old-fashioned flat-top desk. It was an even
more outmoded office than most, but that did not necessarily indicate
a low professional status; lawyers were great ones for tradition
expressed in terms of out-of-date furniture. As for the dust that lay
all over despite the air-conditioning ... well, that was inescapable,
for Earth was a dusty planet.

"Oh, not you yourself personally, of course," Gabriel Lockard--as the
false one will continue to be called, since the dutchman had another
name at the moment--said. "But you know how to put me in touch with
someone who can."

"Nonsense. I don't know who gave you such libelous information, sir,
but I must ask you to leave my office before I call--"

"It was Pat Ortiz who gave me the information," Lockard said softly.
"He also told me a lot of other interesting things about you, Gorman."

Gorman paled. "I'm a respectable attorney."

"Maybe you are now; maybe not. This isn't the kind of town that breeds
respectability. But you certainly weren't sunny side up when Ortiz knew
you. And he knew you well."

The lawyer licked his lips. "Give me a chance, will you?"

Lockard flushed. "Chance! Everybody rates a chance but me. Can't you
see, I am giving you a chance. Get me somebody to follow my pattern,
and I promise you Ortiz won't talk."

Gorman slipped the plastic shells from his face and rubbed the pale
watery eyes underneath. "But how can I get you a man to do ... the
thing you want done? I have no connections like that."

"I'm sure you can make the right connections. Take your time about it,
though; I'm in no hurry. I'm planning to adhere to this locale for a
while."

"How about this man you want ... put out of the way?" Gorman suggested
hopefully. "How can you be sure he won't leave?"

Gabriel laughed. "He'll stay as long as I do."

The little lawyer took a deep breath. "Mr. Lockard, I'm sorry, but I'm
afraid I really cannot do anything for you."

Gabe rose. "Okay," he said softly. "If that's your pattern, I'll just
put a call through to Ortiz." He turned to go.

"Wait a minute!" the lawyer cried.

Lockard stopped.

"Well?"

Gorman swallowed. "Possibly I may be able to do something for you,
after all.... I just happened to have heard Jed Carmody is in town."

Gabriel looked at him inquiringly.

"Oh ... I thought you might have heard the name. He's a killer, I
understand, a professional exterminator ... on the run right now. But
this is his head-quarters--I'm told--and he probably would come here.
And he might be short on folio. Naturally, I've never had any dealings
with him myself."

"Naturally," Gabe mocked.

"But I'll see what I can do." Gorman's voice was pleading. "You'll
wait, Mr. Lockard, won't you? It may be a little while before I can
find out where he is. This isn't--" his voice thinned--"at all my type
of pattern, you know."

"I'll wait ... a reasonable length of time."

The door closed behind him. Descending pneumo tubes hissed outside.
The little lawyer rose and went to the window--a flat expanse of
transparent plastic set immovably into the wall of the building, an old
building, an old town, an old planet. As he watched the street below, a
faint half-smile curved his almost feminine mouth. He went back to the
desk and punched a code on the vidiphone.

       *       *       *       *       *

Gabriel crossed the street to the little cafe with the gold letters
FOR HUMANS ONLY embedded in the one-way glass front; this was
a town that adhered rigidly to the ancient privileges of the indigenous
species. He entered as the shrillness of a vidiphone bell cut through
the babble inside without in any way checking it. After a moment, his
eyes grew accustomed to the dimness and he could see his wife waiting
at a table near the entrance, daintily peeling a tigi fruit.

"Well," she asked as she put a plump pink section into her mouth, "did
you hire your killer?"

"Shhh, not so loud!" He threw himself into the chair next to hers. "Do
you want me to get into trouble...? And I wouldn't put it past you,"
he continued without waiting for an answer. "Remember, it's your boy
friend's body that gets into trouble."

"He's not my boy friend."

A waiter beckoned from the vidiphone booth to someone sitting in the
dark shadows at the rear of the restaurant.

"Where is he?" Gabriel exclaimed suddenly. "He must be here somewhere.
Tell me which he is, Helen?"

His hand gripped her arm cruelly, as he swung her around on her chair
to face each part of the room. "Is it that guy over there...? That
one...? That one?"

She could not repress a start of surprise as her eyes met those of the
thin-featured young man entering the vidiphone booth. He returned her
gaze with somber interest.

Gabe relaxed. "So that's the one, eh? Not very formidable. Looks the
way he always should have looked." He lit a milgot. "I'll get Gorman to
tip off the zarquil boys--only one game in this parish, I'm told--that
that life-form's not to be allowed to play; I'll make any loss good
out of my own pocket. That'll keep him onstage for the nonce. He won't
leave to get himself fixed up somewhere else as long as I stay. And I'm
going to stay ... to the bitter end." He smiled lovingly to himself.

_But it's not the right man_, Helen thought gladly. _He did manage to
change, after all. Gabe has the wrong man._ She felt a little sorry
for the unknown and doomed individual who inhabited the delicate,
angular body, but it was so close to death anyhow that the immediate
threat didn't matter. And Gabriel--the real Gabriel--was safe.


VI

The emaciated young man entered Gorman's office and locked the door
behind him with an electroseal. "Disembodiment," he identified himself.

"So you did get a new body, Jed," the lawyer remarked affably. "Very
good packaging. Makes you look like a poet or something."

"Good as a disguise, maybe, but one hell of a lousy hulk." The young
man hurled himself into the chair by the desk. Even Gorman winced at
the cruel treatment accorded such obvious fragility. "Gimme a milgot,
Les. This thing--" he indicated his body with contempt--"is shot to
Polaris. Won't last more than a few months. Some bargain I got."

Gorman lit a stick himself. "The guy who got your body didn't get such
a bargain either," he murmured through a cloud of purple smoke.

"At least he'll live. If he's lucky. I wish he'd hurry and get himself
picked up, though, so I could collect the folio and jet off. Can't go
after it now. Hounds will be sniffing after anybody gravitating around
the place where I've stashed it until they're sure they have me. They
don't know where the money is exactly, of course, or they'd soak it up,
but they've got an idea of the general sector."

"Want me to pick it up for you, Jed?" the lawyer asked, his pale,
flickering eyes brushing across the young man's dark intense ones.

"Oh, sure. All I need is for you to know where it is and all I'd see
would be your rocket trail." The young man leaned across the expanse of
littered steel. "Or _do_ you know where it is, Les?" he asked softly.
"Do you know where it is and are you just hibernating until I'm safely
out of the way?"

In spite of himself, Gorman could not help moving back. "Don't be a
fool, Jed," he said in a voice that was several tones higher. "If I
knew where it was ... well, you're not very frightening in your present
embodiment, you know."

"Don't be too sure of that, Gorman. And you were always yellow; anybody
could frighten you." He began to laugh shrilly. "Hey, that's good. Get
it? Any body, see?"

The lawyer did not join in the mirth. "How are you fixed for cash?" he
asked abruptly.

       *       *       *       *       *

The young man's face split in a sardonic grin. "Why do you think I
risked public communion with a darkside character like you, Les? I shot
my wad making the shift. I could use a little loan. You know I have
millions stashed away," the young man said angrily as Gorman remained
silent. "I'll pay you as soon as the hounds take the chump who's
leasing my hulk."

"Maybe you can earn some money." Gorman toyed with a paperweight. "Did
you get a look at that big blond guy in the cafe--the one I told you
about on the phone?"

"Yeah. Nice life-form he had with him. I wouldn't mind being in that
body."

"Seems he wants somebody exterminated. And I told him I heard Jed
Carmody was in the parish and might be interested."

The young man sprang to his feet, furious. "You _what_?"

"Turn your antigravs off. I told him Jed Carmody was in the parish. Are
you Jed Carmody?"

The other sat down and exhaled heavily. "You're on course--I'm nobody
just now."

"Any identification come with the package?"

"Naah, what'd you expect...? But why tell anyone that Jed Carmody's
hitting the locality?"

"I thought you might be interested in picking up a little free-falling
foliage."

The young man shook his head impatiently. "Risk having this hulk heated
up for a half-credit crime? Don't be an alien, Gorman. I'm going to hit
subsoil until this other life-form gets collected by the hounds."

"Thought you might like to do it to help me out," Gorman murmured.

The other man stared. "How do you fit into the pattern?" Gorman
shrugged. "Oh, I get it: this guy's putting the barometer on you?"

Gorman nodded.

"Bad landing, counselor. But you don't seriously expect...? Hey!" The
wide-set eyes glistened darkly. "I got it! Why don't you get this guy
who's got my hulk to make the flight? Send somebody out to magnetize
him like you thought he was the real Carmody, see?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Gorman looked hopeful for a moment; then shook his thin-haired head.
"No reason to think the man is an extralegal."

"Anyone who finds himself in my hulk damn well has to be if he wants
to stay out of the sardine box.... Look, what's the first thing he's
going to want to do when he finds out what he's been stuck with? Go to
another parish and hop hulks, right? And he'll need plenty of foliage
to do it."

"Maybe he has money," Gorman suggested wearily.

"No fuel lost finding out." The young man rubbed his hands together
gleefully. "If he takes on the flight, though, see that he gets my
flash, huh? Rosy up the picture."

"Maybe he can kill whoever this Lockard has in mind without getting
picked up by the police. Such things have happened; otherwise you
wouldn't have been able to run around loose so long, Jed."

"An amateur? Not a chance! Besides, just to make sure, little...." He
stopped in the act of tapping his chest. "Say, I don't have a name, do
I? What's a good epithet for me, Les? Something with class."

The lawyer studied the pale, bony face for a moment or two. "How about
John Keats?" he suggested. "Simple and appropriate."

The other man thought. "Yeah, I like that. John Keats. Plain, but not
like John Smith. Subtle. I'll buy it. Okay, so you think I'm going
to take my view-finder off the fake Carmody? I'm going to adhere to
that life-form closer than Mary's lamb. So when he knocks off whoever
the other guy wants novaed, I can yell doggie. Then the hounds get
him--with my flash on him and all, they'll never have the nebula of
a notion that they don't have all of me.... I pick up the foliage
and rock out to some place where I can buy me a new jewel case, no
questions asked. Don't fret, Gorman--you'll get your nibble. I've never
played the game with you, have I?"

Instead of answering, Gorman asked a question of his own. "Kind of hard
on the other guy, isn't it?"

"He rates it for sticking me with a piece of statuary like this. Look
at it this way, Les--in his own hulk he would've died; this way he's
got a chance to live. Yeah, get him to make the flight, Les. You can
charm the juice out of a lemon when you want to; it's your line of
evil. And don't let on you know he's not the genuine article."

"I won't," Gorman sighed. "I only hope I can persuade him to take on
the flight. Don't forget it's important to me too, Jed--uh, John."

"Make planetfall, then," John Keats said. "So long, Les."

"Good-by, Johnny."


VII

Helen was brushing her long creamy hair at the dressing table when
there came a tap at the door to the living room of the suite--a tap
so light that it could have been someone accidentally brushing past in
the corridor outside. Gabriel sprang up from the bed where he had been
lolling, watching her and stood for a moment poised on the balls of his
feet, until the knock was repeated more emphatically. He started toward
the other room.

"But who could be knocking at the door at this hour?" she asked. "It's
almost one.... Gabe, do be careful."

He halted and looked back at her suspiciously. "Why do you say that?
You know you don't care what happens to me?" That last was a question
rather than a statement and had a plaintive quaver which failed to
touch her. Once she had still been able to feel some compassion; now,
nothing he said or did could arouse more than fear and disgust.

"If somebody knocks you over the head when you open the door," she
murmured, smiling at her own image, "then who will be there to protect
me?"

A choked sound came from the back of the man's throat. He turned toward
her, his fists clenched. She braced herself for the blow, but then the
knock came for the third time and her husband reluctantly continued
on into the living room, letting the door shut behind him. She rose
and pushed it open a little. She had a pretty good idea of who might
be expected, but was not especially perturbed, for she knew the real
Gabriel Lockard, in whatever guise he might be now, was safe from her
husband. And she was curious to see what the exterminator looked like.

The door to the corridor was out of her line of vision, but she could
hear it as it opened. "Lockard?" a deep, husky voice whispered. "Gorman
sent me."

"Come in, Mr. Carmody. You _are_ Carmody?"

"Shhh," the husky voice warned. "If you get me into trouble, I'm not
going to be able to complete your pattern for you, am I?"

"Sorry--I wasn't thinking. Come on in."

A heavy tread shook the ancient floorboards, and presently the man
responsible for it came into the girl's sight. He was a huge creature,
bigger even than Gabriel, with dark hair growing low to a point on his
forehead, and a full-lipped sensual face. Then, as he spoke, as he
moved, she knew who he was. She pressed close against the wall of the
bedroom, her slender shoulders shaking, her handkerchief stuffed into
her mouth, so that the sound of her wild, irrepressible laughter would
not reach her husband's ears.

"Sit down, Carmody," Gabriel said cordially, as he handed the newcomer
a glass, "and make yourself comfortable." There was a brief, rather
awkward silence. "Well," Gabriel went on, with a smile that would have
been thoroughly ingratiating to anyone who hadn't known him, "I don't
suppose I have to cruise around the asteroids with you?"

"No," Carmody replied, looking speculatively toward the bedroom door.
"No, you don't."

       *       *       *       *       *

Gabriel followed the direction of his gaze. "Worried about somebody
overhearing? There's only my wife in there. She's listening, all right,
but she won't talk. Come in, Helen."

Carmody rose automatically as she came in, his dark eyes following
every line of her long, smooth body in its close-fitting, though
opaque, negligee of smoke-gray silk--a fabric which, through extreme
scarcity, had come into fashion again.

"Sit down," Gabriel ordered brusquely. "We're not formal here."

Carmody sat, trying not to stare at the girl. She began to mix herself
a drink. "Moonbeam," her husband said, "you won't tell anybody about
this little peace conference, will you?"

"No," she said, looking at Carmody. "I won't talk." She lifted her
glass. "Here's to murder!"

"Helen," Gabriel insisted, unable to rationalize the vague uneasiness
that was nagging at him, "you won't dare say anything to anybody?
Because, if you do, you'll regret it!"

"I said I wouldn't talk. Have I ever broken my word?"

"You've never had the chance." But it would be incredible that she
should have the temerity to betray him. After all, she was his wife.
She should stick to him out of gratitude and self-interest, for he was
rich, at least, and he wasn't exactly repulsive. And he'd been good to
her. All men lost their tempers at times.

"Let's get down to business, huh?" Carmody said harshly. "Whom do you
want knocked off?"

"I don't know his name," Gabriel replied, "but I can describe him."

After he had finished doing so, there was a small pause. Carmody was
silent. Helen turned back to the bar; her face was concealed from the
men. Her body shook a little. Lockard thought she was crying, and
wondered again whether his confidence in her was entirely justified.

"I think maybe I know the guy," Carmody went on. "Only been around
the--the parish a couple of days, if it's the life-form I mean."

"Must be the one," Lockard told him. "Think you can do it?"

"A cinch," Carmody assured him.

       *       *       *       *       *

As Helen Lockard emerged from the door marked _Females; Human and
Humanoid_, and rounded the turn in the corridor, a brawny arm reached
out of a vidiphone booth and yanked her inside. The girl gave a
startled cry, then relaxed. "Oh, it's you; you gave me a turn."

"You're not afraid? You know who I am, then?"

She nodded. "You're the real Gabriel Lockard." His big body was
pressing hers in the close-fitting confines of the booth. In some ways
it could be considered more attractive than her husband's. "Why are you
hiding here?"

"I'm not hiding, I'm lurking," he explained. "Wouldn't do for me to
appear too openly. The police--that is, the hounds--are on Carmody's
trail. I don't want them to find me."

"Oh." She pulled away from him. She mustn't let her interest be aroused
in a body so soon to be discarded.

"I've been looking for an opportunity to talk to you since last night,"
he growled, the only way he could gentle a voice as deep as the
thick vocal cords of the body produced. "But your husband is always
around.... You haven't told him who I was, have you?"

She shook her head slowly, reproachfully. "I wouldn't do that. I
wouldn't have told him about the other one either, but I ... well,
I guess I jumped or something when I caught sight of him and Gabe
mistakenly picked it up."

There was a tense silence as they stood almost pressed against one
another. "It's easy to see how you got into Carmody's body," she went
on, speaking a little too rapidly, "but how did you happen to get into
this particular line of evil?"

"Simple--that lawyer your husband went to see sent scouts out to have
Carmody picked up. And they flushed me. Naturally I would have turned
down the job if he hadn't happened to mention for whom it was...."

"That other man is the real Carmody now, isn't he?" She looked up at
him. Her eyes were gray or green; he couldn't determine which. "So it
doesn't matter even if he does get killed."

"But how can he get killed?" the big man reminded her with a gentleness
completely out of keeping with the ferocity of his appearance. "I'm not
a killer, please believe me--I have never killed anybody and I hope I
never have to."

       *       *       *       *       *

She had never thought about who he was--who he had been--before
he started playing the game. Gabriel Lockard, of course. But what
had Gabriel Lockard been? Surely not the narco-filled, fear-ridden
dilettante the man--the body, at least--was now. He couldn't possibly
have been or the hulk wouldn't have stood up so well under the
treatment it was getting from its current tenant. But all that didn't
seem to matter. All she wanted was the rightful man in his rightful
body, and that seemed almost impossible of achievement.

"What do you intend to do?" she asked, almost sharply.

"I don't know," he said. "By agreeing to kill this--John Keats he calls
himself--I felt I had the situation in hand. And I suppose I have, in
a sense. But the end result is a stalemate. I've been following him
around just to make everything looks on course for your husband until I
decide what to do. Sometimes, though, I get the curious feeling that
Keats is following me."

"Maybe for the same reason you've been following Gabriel?" Helen
touched his arm gingerly; it was more muscular than her husband's.
"This isn't a bad body, you know--maybe he sets some store by it."

"But that doesn't make sense!" he said, impatiently shaking off her
hand, not wanting her to like this criminal's body that, despite its
superficial attractiveness, fitted him no more easily than any of the
others. "Logically, it seems to me, he should try to get as far away
from his own hulk as possible.... Duck! Here comes your husband!"

He blocked her with his wide body as Gabriel Lockard's swung past the
booth, its perfect features marred by a frown. "Okay," he whispered,
as Lockard rounded the corner, "rock back to your table and act angry
because he's late."

He watched until Gabriel had retraced his steps and gone back to the
hotel dining room; then sauntered in the same direction. From the next
booth, John Keats stared sullenly after the departing figure. He had
been straining his ears, but the booths were effectively soundproofed;
all he could learn was that the stranger had developed some kind of
quick understanding with Lockard's wife and, knowing the potentialities
of his former packaging, this saddened rather than surprised the young
man.

He punched Gorman's number without turning on the visual.
"Disembodied," he said curtly. "Look here, Gorman, I've been
wondering--just who is this life-form supposed to be sending to the
joyful planetoids?"

"I haven't any idea," Gorman's voice said curiously. "Didn't seem any
of my evil, so I didn't ask. And I don't suppose Lockard would have
told me. Why do you want to know?"

"Because I don't see him taking a fix on anybody except Lockard's wife
and I don't hold with exterminating females except maybe by accident.
Besides, I kind of radiate for that tigi myself."

The lawyer's voice definitely showed interest. "Isn't there anybody
else he could possibly be after?"

"Well--" John Keats gave a sick laugh--"there's only one other possible
flight pattern. It's kind of extradimensional, but sometimes I think
maybe he's after me."

There was a long pause. "Absurd," the little lawyer said thoughtfully.
"Absurd. He doesn't even know who you are."

Pale blood surfaced under the young man's transparent skin. "I never
thought of that, but you're wrong. He does. He's got to. It was a
private game." His voice thickened and he had to stop for coughing.
"When you told him he was Jed Carmody, naturally he could figure out
who was squatting in his hulk."

"But magnetizing him was your own idea, Johnny," Gorman pointed out
gently. "Besides, that's no reason he should be after you; what's the
percentage in it? And, anyhow, where does Lockard fit into this?" He
seemed to be asking the question of himself as much as of the other man.

"Yeah," John Keats muttered, "that's what I've got to find out."

"Me, too," Gorman half-whispered.

"What did you say?"

"I said tell me when you find out; I'm sort of curious myself."


VIII

"Look, Gorman," Carmody said, "I'm not working for you; I'm working for
Lockard. What's the idea of sending for me this hour of the night?"

"Then why did you come this hour of the night when I asked you to?" the
lawyer inquired, leaning back in his chair and smiling.

The big man hesitated and shrugged. "Can't say, myself. Curiosity,
maybe.... But you can hardly expect me to violate my employer's
confidence?"

Gorman laughed. "You get your ideas from the viddies, don't you? Only
don't forget that you're the villain, not the hero, of this piece,
fellow-man."

Carmody, completely taken aback, stared at him--the little alien
couldn't know! And, furthermore, he was mistaken--Carmody, Lockard,
the dutchman, had done nothing wrong, committed no crime, violated no
ethic. On the other hand, he had done nothing right either, nothing to
help himself or any other. "What do you mean?" he finally temporized.

"Tell me this--Lockard hired you to kill the man who goes under the
name of John Keats, didn't he?"

"Yes, but how did you know that?" He was beginning to have the same
primitive fear of Gorman that he had of the Vinzz; only it was more
natural for an extraterrestrial to have apparently supernatural powers.

"Keats told me--and Keats, of course, is the real Carmody."

"So you found out?"

"Found out!" Gorman laughed. "I knew it all along. Does a man keep any
secrets from his lawyer?"

"If he's smart, he does." Carmody absently beat his hand on the desk.
"This Keats isn't too smart, though, is he?"

"No ... he isn't a very bright guy. But it was his idea that this would
be a fine method of getting you out of the way. And not too bad an
idea, either.... You had to be disposed of, you know," he explained
winningly. "And how nice to have hounds do it for us. Of course we had
no idea of who your quarry was."

"I can see your point of view," Carmody said ironically. "But why tell
me now?" And then he thought he saw the answer. "Are you afraid I'll
really kill him?"

The lawyer shook his head and smiled back. "Afraid you really won't."
He placed the tips of his fingers together. "I am prepared to double
whatever Lockard is offering you to make sure that Keats, with Carmody
inside him, is definitely put out of the way forever."

       *       *       *       *       *

So even here there was no basis of trust--none of the reverse honor
that legend commonly assigned to extralegals. Carmody got up. Even
seated, he had towered above the lawyer. Standing, he was like a
larger-than-life statue of doom--of doom, Gorman nervously hoped,
pointing in the desired direction.

"And if I refuse?" Carmody asked.

Gorman moved his chair back uneasily. "I might persuade Keats that he
could risk one murder in his present shape, if it was to insure his
ultimate safety."

"Meaning it would be a good idea for him to kill me?"

"Meaning it would be an excellent idea for him to kill you."

"Look here, Gorman," Carmody said, in a low voice that gradually
increased in volume. He could no longer restrain the anger that had
been seething up in him for all the years of his wandering. "I've had
enough of all this, hiding, running, shifting bodies and now hiring out
as a killer. Because I'm an honest man. Maybe you've never seen one
before, so take a good look at me. You may never have the chance again."

"I am looking and I see Jed Carmody. Not my idea of the prototype of
honesty."

"But I don't feel like Jed Carmody."

"Tell that to the hounds." Gorman laughed uproariously. "By law, you're
responsible for Carmody's crimes. Of course, if they put you away
or--as they'd undoubtedly prefer--accidently exterminate you in the
line of duty, and _then_ suspect Carmody hulk-hopped, they might look
around some more. But there wouldn't be any percentage in that for you,
especially if you were dead."

"I know, I know," Carmody retorted impatiently. "You can't tell me
anything I haven't told myself." He paused for a moment. "This is a
good body, though," he added. "Almost as good as my old one."

Gorman raised his eyebrows. "You can't be referring to the corpus
currently going by the epithet of John Keats?"

"The name was your idea, I take it. No, that wasn't my original body."

"Oh, so you're a dutchman, eh? A thrill boy?" There was contempt, even
from such as Gorman. "Getting a lot of free falls out of all this, are
you?"

Carmody tried to ignore this, but he couldn't. It wasn't true, he told
himself; he had suffered years of playing the game and derived no
pleasure from those sufferings--no pleasure at all. But he would not
stoop to argue with Gorman. "Maybe I can get away with this body to one
of the frontier planets," he mused. "At least I can make a run for it;
at least that would be a worthwhile kind of running."

"Brave words!" the lawyer sneered. "But rather risky to put into
action. Don't you think the best thing to do would be just go ahead
with the pattern as set? How much did Lockard offer you?"

"Half a million credits."

Gorman sucked in his breath. "You're lying, of course, but I'll match
that. Carmody--Keats--has ten times that amount and maybe more hidden
away where I can lay my hands on it as soon as I'm sure he's where he
can't hurt me. It's worth half a million to me. And, in the remote
instance that you're telling the truth, you can't turn down a million
credits ... whoever you are, dutchman!"

"Oh, can't I?" Carmody went to the door; then turned. "It may interest
you to know that I'm worth a hundred times that amount and maybe more."

The lawyer laughed skeptically. "If you have enough money to buy your
way, then why are you doing this?"

Carmody frowned. "You wouldn't understand.... I'm not sure I understand
myself." The door slammed behind him. Descending pneumos hissed.

"Just talking with his elbows," Gorman said comfortingly to himself.
"He'll do it. He's got to do it." But he wasn't altogether convinced.


IX

As Carmody left the office building, John Keats' figure emerged from
the shadows of a nearby doorway. He looked up at the golden rectangle
of Gorman's window and then toward the direction in which Carmody had
gone; and bit his lip irresolutely. After a moment's reflection, he
chose to follow his old body. Somehow he didn't have much confidence in
Gorman any more; not that he'd ever really trusted him. In their line
of evil you couldn't afford to trust anybody. He had made a mistake.
But it could still be rectified.

If the big man was aware of his tracker, he did not seem to care.
He moved purposefully in the direction of the hotel, scorning the
helicabs that swooped down to proffer their services, striding through
the brilliantly lit avenues gay with music and the dark alleys mournful
with the whine of the farjeen wires as if they were all the same.

The hotel was on one of the avenues, because the Lockards always had
only the best of whatever there was to be had. Carmody crossed the
almost deserted lobby in swift strides and took the pneumo to the
seventh floor. Knowing that his body could have only one objective in
that place, Keats took the stairs to the basement.

Carmody sprang out of the pneumo exit and ran down the corridor to bang
lustily on the intricately embossed metal door of the Lockards' suite.
After a moment, the girl, again in negligee, opened it. Her green-gray
eyes widened when she saw who the late visitor was, and she put a
finger to her lips. "Shh, Gabe's asleep; let's not wake him unless it's
necessary." She closed the door softly behind him. "What is it ... Jed?"

He was so choked with excitement that he could hardly get the words
out. "Helen; will you make a break with me for Proxima Centauri? They
won't ask any questions there, if we can get there. And from Proxima we
can go--"

"But your body?"

"The hell with my body." He gripped her arms with powerful hands. "You
mean much more to me than that worthless hulk."

"But, Jed, Gabe'll never let us go...." Proxima Centauri--that had been
Gabriel's dream, too....

His hands pressed so hard into her flesh, she knew there would be
bruises on her skin; was she always doomed to fall in love with men who
would leave marks on her? "Let him try to stop us. I'm bigger than he
is, now."

She looked up at him. "You always were, darling. But he has influence,
though he wouldn't need it; he could simply set the police on you."

"That's the chance we're going to have to take.... But perhaps I'm
asking too much. I haven't the right to ask you to take such risks," he
added bitterly. "I was thinking only of myself, I see, not of you."

"Oh, no, Jed!"

       *       *       *       *       *

"Who're you talking to, Helen?" a drowsy voice asked from the bedroom.
It was followed by the comely person of Gabriel himself, fastening his
dressing gown. "Oh, hello, Carmody." His face lighted up avidly, all
sleepiness vanishing like a spent milgot. "Did you do it already?"

"No, I didn't. And, what's more, I'm not going to do it!"

Lockard looked astonished. "But what's wrong? You said you would."

Carmody sighed. "Yes, I know I did. I was stalling. That's what I've
always done--stalled, put things off, hesitated to make decisions.
Well, I've made my decision now."

"You're not afraid of him?" Lockard said in a voice that was meant to
be taunting and emerged as querulous. "A little pipsqueak like that
Keats? Or maybe half a million credits isn't enough for you? Is that
it?"

That was enough for the man whose emaciated body was torturedly cramped
in the air-conditioning vent and further agonized by the strain of
repressing the cough that sought to tear its way out of his chest. He
had found out what he wanted to know and, as he inched his way back
down to the basement, he was already making plans for getting even with
all those he now knew to be enemies. It had been a conspiracy against
him from the start; the hounds probably weren't even aware that he
was in town. It was Gorman who had told him they knew of his general
whereabouts--Gorman, the good friend who had suggested he change
bodies, knowing that whatever hulk he wound up with was bound to be
more vulnerable than his primal form. And Gorman would pay....

"More than enough," Carmody replied, as unaware of the fact that he had
lost one-third of his audience as he had been that he was addressing
three rather than two listeners. "Only I'm not a killer."

"But I understood you were supposed to be a professional exterminator?"

"Jed Carmody is a killer. Only I'm not Jed Carmody."

Lockard moved backward and stared at the still bigger man.

Lockard retreated still further. "You--you're him! You were all along!"
He whirled on his wife. "And you knew, you double-crosser! Knew and
didn't tell me! By God, I'll break every bone in your body!"

"Lay a hand on her and I'll break every bone in _my_ body!" Lockard
stopped where he was. "It doesn't mean anything to me any more, you
see," Carmody explained. "I wanted it when I didn't have anything
else. But now I have Helen. I could kill you, you know. As Carmody, an
acknowledged exterminator, I have nothing to lose. But I'm letting you
live, as a hostage for Helen.... And, besides, as I've been busy trying
to convince everybody all evening, I am _not_ a murderer." He turned to
the girl. "_Will_ you come with me to Proxima, Helen?"

"Y-yes, Jed," she said, looking apprehensively at her husband.

"Gather your packs. I'm going to the air office to make the
arrangements." Carmody consulted his chronometer. "It's three o'clock.
I should be back by eight or so. Get some sleep if you can."

Her wide frightened eyes turned again toward her husband.

"Here." Jed tossed her the gun Gorman had given him. "If he tries
anything, use it."

"Yes, Jed. But...."

"Don't worry; I have another one."

The door slammed behind him. "Gimme that gun, you little tramp!"
Lockard snarled, twisting it out of her flaccid hand.


X

Carmody marched out of the hotel and turned left in the direction of
the airstation which stayed open all night. He had walked a short
distance when suddenly a high voice came out of the darkness behind
him, "Not so fast, Mr. ... Carmody," and a hard knob was pressed in his
back.

"Mr. Keats, I believe," Carmody said, wondering why he wasn't
frightened.

"Right." The other coughed at some length. "You thought you were pretty
smart, didn't you, foisting me off with a hulk that wasn't only
shopworn but hot?"

"Your intentions weren't exactly noble either, were they, Mr. Keats?"

"I want my frame back!"

Suddenly the idea came to Carmody, and so wonderful it was he could
hardly throttle his voice down to calmness. "Shooting me won't help you
get it back. In fact, it might make it rather difficult."

"You have your choice between going back to the zarquil house with me
and switching or getting your current insides burned out."

Carmody exhaled a small hissing sigh that he hoped would not be
recognized as obvious relief to the man behind him. "You'll have to
pay. I haven't enough folio on me."

"I'll pay; I'll pay," the voice snarled. "I always pay. But you'll come
peacefully?" he asked in some surprise.

"Yes. Matter of fact, I'll be glad to get out of this body. No matter
how much I try, somehow I can never manage to keep it clean.... Gently,
now, you don't want to muss up a body you're planning to occupy
yourself, now do you?"

"This is too easy," Keats' voice murmured dubiously. "Maybe it's
another trap...."

"You're always going to imagine traps, Mr. Exterminator, whether
they're there or not. You and Lockard both--people who run must have
something to run from, and half the time it's not there and half the
time, of course, it is; only you never know which is which--"

"You talk too much," the man behind him snarled. "Shut up and keep
moving."

"Back again?" the Vinzz at the door asked. The present Carmody was a
little startled. Somehow he had thought of the Vinzz as too remote from
humanity to be able to distinguish between individual members of the
species. "I'm afraid neither of you is qualified to play."

"No reason why we shouldn't have a private game, is there?" John Keats
demanded belligerently.

The Vinzz' tendrils quivered. "In that case, no, no reason at all. If
you want to be so unsporting and can afford it. It will cost you a
hundred thousand credits each."

"But that's twice what I had to pay last week!" Keats protested angrily.

The Vinzz shrugged an antenna. "You are, of course, at liberty to take
your trade elsewhere, if you choose."

"Oh, hell," the temporarily poetic-looking killer snarled. "We're stuck
and you know it. Let's get it over with!"

       *       *       *       *       *

It was odd to come out of unconsciousness back into the thin young
man's body again. More uncomfortable than usual, because the criminal's
body had been in such splendid physical condition and this one so
poor--now worse than before, because it had been worked far beyond its
attenuated capabilities. The individuality that had originally been
Gabriel Lockard's, formerly housed in Jed Carmody's body, now opened
John Keats' eyes and looked at the Vinzz who stood above him.

"The other human has been told you awakened before him and have already
departed," the Vinzz explained. "He has violence in his heart and we do
not care for violence on our doorstep. Bad for business."

"Has he gone already?"

The Vinzz nodded.

"How long has he been gone?" He scrambled to his feet and investigated
the clothing he wore. Carmody had been in too much of a hurry to clean
himself out. There was some money left, a container of milgot sticks,
and a set of electroseals.

"He has just left." The extra-terrestrial's eyes flickered in what
might have been surprise. "Don't you wish to avoid him?"

"No, I must go where he goes."

The Vinzz shrugged. "Well, it's your funeral in the most literal sense
of the word." He sighed as the young man plunged out into the darkness.
"But, from the objective viewpoint, what a waste of money!"

The massive, broad-shouldered figure of Jed Carmody was still visible
at the end of the street, so the thin man slowed down. He wanted to
follow Carmody, to keep close watch on where he was going and, if
necessary, guide him in the right direction, though he didn't think
he'd have to do that. But he had no intention of overtaking him.
Carmody might not want openly to use the gun the former tenant had so
carefully left him, but with his physique he could break the fragile
body of John Keats in two, if he so desired, and he probably did.

Meanwhile Carmody--the real Carmody--having been deprived of an
immediate revenge, had begun to realize how much better the situation
was as it now stood. If he killed Keats out of hand, he might miss out
on half a million credits, because it was his custom to get cash in
advance for all his flights, and this was his flight pattern now. He
wouldn't trust that Lockard life-form to defoliate after the job was
done.

Of course he himself had plenty of money stashed away, but every half
million helped. It would be no trouble to find the sickly Keats later.
And there was no reason the hounds should get him--Carmody--after all,
the other had been rocketing around in his body and he hadn't been
caught. Carmody had allowed himself to be stampeded into panic. He
smiled. Gorman wouldn't ever be able to chart any pattern like that, or
like anything, again. Fortunately there was no permanent harm done, and
a half million credits to cover the zarquil losses, with a nice profit
left over. Maybe he could even beat Lockard up to a million; that one
was obviously a coward and a fool. A few threats should be enough to
get him to hand over.

Carmody paused for a moment outside the hotel. It still took some nerve
to walk boldly into the brightly lit lobby.

       *       *       *       *       *

The automatic doors slid open as he entered. At the same time, the
pneumo gates lifted and Gabe Lockard came out, dragging a heavily
veiled Helen, their luggage floating behind them. Both stopped as they
caught sight of the killer; Lockard paled--Helen gasped.

_Too bad I have to leave her in the tentacles of this low life-form_,
Carmody thought with regret, but there was no help for it. He
approached them with what he thought was an ingratiating smile. "Mr.
Lockard, I've decided to give you another chance."

It was an unhappy choice of word. "Oh, you have, have you!" the big
blond man yelled. "I thought I did have another chance. And now you've
spoiled that, too!"

"What do you mean by that?" Carmody demanded, his thick dark brows
almost meeting across his nose.

"I figured on getting away before you came back," Gabriel babbled in a
frenzy, "but you'd have found me anyway. You always find me. I'm sick
of this running. There's only one way to stop you, only one way to be
sure that, whatever happens to me, you won't be around to enjoy it."

"Listen, Lockard, you're making a mistake. I--"

"The only mistake I made was in hiring somebody else to do the job I
should have done myself."

He pulled out the gun--Carmody's own gun--and fired it. He wasn't a
good shot, but that didn't matter. He had the flash on full blast and
he pumped and pumped and pumped the trigger until the searing heat
rays had whipped not only the killer's astonished body but all through
the lobby. The few people still there rushed for cover as rug, chairs,
potted palms were shriveled by the lancing holocaust. There was a
penetrating odor of burning fabric and frond and flesh.

Helen let out a wail as Carmody, more ash than man, fell to the
charred carpet. "Gabe, Gabe, what have you done!"

The gun dropped from his hand to rejoin its owner. His face crumpled.
"I didn't really mean to kill ... only to scare him.... What'll I do
now?"

"You'll run, Mr. Lockard," John Keats' body said as he entered the
devastated lobby. "You'll run and run and run. He's dead, but you'll
keep on running forever. No, not forever--I apologize--some day you'll
get caught, because the hounds aren't amateurs like you and ...
him...." He pointed to the crumbling, blackened corpse, keeping his
hand steady with an effort for, God knew, he was the biggest amateur of
them all.

Lockard licked his lips and gazed apprehensively around. Frightened
faces were beginning to peer out from their places of concealment.
"Look, Carmody," he said in a low, stiff voice, "let's talk this over.
But let's get out of here first before somebody calls the hounds."

"All right," the thin man smiled. "I'm always willing to talk. We can
go over to Gorman's office. They won't look for us there right away."

"How'll we get in?"

"I have a 'seal," Keats said. Surely one of the electroseals he carried
must belong to Gorman's office. It was a chance he'd have to take.


XI

Keats had to try five different seals before he found the one that
opened the lawyer's office. He was afraid his obvious lack of
familiarity would arouse Lockard's suspicions, but the big man was too
much preoccupied with his own emotions.

An unpleasantly haunting aroma of cooked meat seeped out from inside.
"For Christ's sake, Carmody, hurry!" Lockard snarled, and gave a sigh
of relief as the door swung open and the illuminators went on, lighting
the shabby office. Gorman was there. His horribly seared body lay
sprawled on the dusty rug--quite dead.

"You--you killed him?" Gabriel quavered. The sight of murder done by
another hand seemed to upset him more than the murder he himself had
just committed.

The thin man gave a difficult smile. "Carmody killed him." Which was
undoubtedly the truth. "The gun that did it is in his pocket. I had
nothing to do with it." His eyes sought for the ones behind the veil.
He wanted the girl who stood frozenly by the door to know that this, at
least, was the truth.

Gabriel also stayed near the door, unable to take his eyes off the
corpse. In death Carmody and Gorman, the big man and the small man, had
looked the same; each was just a heap of charred meat and black ash. No
blood, no germs--all very hygienic. "You're smart, Carmody," he said
from taut lips. "Damn smart."

"I'm Keats, not Carmody! Remember that." He dropped into the chair
behind the desk. "Sit down, both of you." Only Gabriel accepted the
invitation. "Why don't you take that thing off your face, Mrs. Lockard?
You aren't hiding from anybody, are you?"

Gabriel gave a short laugh. "She's hiding her face from everybody. I
spoiled it a little for her. She was going to sell me out to ... the
guy in your body."

Keats' hand tightened on the arm of his chair. Lose his temper now and
he lost the whole game. "It was a good body," he said, not looking at
the thing on the rug, trying not to remember the thing on the rug on
the other side of town. "A very good body." Through the veil, Helen's
shadowy eyes were fixed on his face. He wanted to see what Lockard
had done to her, but he couldn't tear off the veil, as he longed to
do; he was afraid of the expression that might be revealed on her
face--triumph when there should have been anguish; anguish when there
should have been triumph.

"Not as good as the one I have here." Lockard thumped his own chest,
anxious to establish the value of the only ware he had left.

"Matter of opinion," Keats said. "And mine was in better shape."

"This one isn't in bad condition," Gabriel retorted defensively. "It
could be brought back to peak in short order."

"You won't have much opportunity to do it, though. But maybe the
government will do it for you; they don't pamper prisoners, I
understand, especially lifers."

       *       *       *       *       *

Gabriel whitened. "You're an extralegal, Carmody--Keats," he whined.
"You know your course. You know how to hide from the hounds.... I'm
a--a respectable citizen." He spread his hands wide in exaggerated
helplessness. "Strictly an amateur, that's what I am--I admit I've been
playing out of my league."

"So?"

"I'm worth a lot of money, Keats, a hell of a lot. And half of it can
be yours, if you ... change bodies with me."

Keats' angular face remained expressionless, but there was a sharp cry
from the girl--a cry that might have been misunderstood as one of pain,
but wasn't.

Gabriel turned toward her, and his upper lip curled back over his
teeth. "I'll throw her in to the bargain. You must have seen her when
she wasn't banged up so you know she's not permanently disfigured.
Isn't she worth taking a risk for?"

Keats shrugged. "If the hounds pull you down, she'll be a legal widow
anyway."

"Yes, but you'd have no ... chance with her in the body you now
have.... No chance," he repeated. His voice broke. "Never had a chance."

"Go ahead, feel sorry for yourself," the other man said. "Nobody else
will."

Gabriel's face darkened, but he also had to control his temper to gain
what he fancied were his own ends. "You won't deny that this hulk is
better than the one you have now?"

"Except that there's one thing about the head that I don't like."

Gabriel stared in bewilderment. His body was beyond criticism. "What is
it you don't like about the head?"

"There's a price on it now."

Gabriel pressed his spine against the back of the chair. "Don't play
the innocent, Carmody. You've killed people, too."

"Well, sure, but not out in the open like that. You know how many
people saw you blast him? Too many. If you're going to exterminate
somebody, you do it from a dark doorway or an alley--not in a
brilliantly lit hotel lobby, and you blast him in the back. But there's
no use giving you lessons; it's not likely you'll ever be able to use
them where you're going."

Gabriel suddenly sagged in his chair. He looked down at the floor. "So
you won't do it?"

Keats grew apprehensive. He hadn't expected the big man to give in to
despair so soon--it might spoil all his plans and leave him trapped
in this sick unwanted body. He lit a milgot. "I didn't say that," he
pointed out, trying to sound unconcerned. "Matter of fact, I might even
consider your proposition, if...."

There was hope in Lockard's eyes again. It made Keats a little sick to
think of the game he had to play with the other; then he thought of
the game the other had played with him, the game the other had played
with his wife, and the faint flickering of compassion died out in him.
"What do you want?" Gabriel asked.

Keats took a moment before he answered. "I want _all_ of what you've
got."

Gabriel uttered an inarticulate sound.

"You can't take it with you, colleague. If we hulk-hop, it's got to be
tonight, because the hounds will be baying on your trail any moment.
You wouldn't have the chance to transfer the property to my name and,
if you take my word that I'll hand over half afterward, you're just
plain out of this dimension.... Think of it this way, Lockard--what's
worth more to you, a couple of lousy billions or your freedom?"

"All right, Carmody," Lockard said dully, "you're the dictator."


XII

The Vinzz' eyes flickered in astonishment. "_Another_ private game?
However...." he shrugged eloquently. "It will cost you a hundred
thousand credits each, gentlemen."

"No discount for a steady customer?" Keats inquired lightly, though he
was trembling inside.

The Vinzz' tendrils quivered. "None. You ought to be glad I didn't
raise the price again."

"Why didn't you?" he couldn't help asking.

The Vinzz looked steadily into the man's eyes. "I don't know," it
answered at last. "Perhaps I have been so long on this planet that I
have developed a sentimental streak.... In any case, I am going back to
Vinau the day after tomorrow...."

"For God's sake," Lockard, his senses so confused with fear and
apprehension that he was able to catch only fragments of their talk,
screamed, "pay him what he asks and don't haggle!"

"All right," Keats agreed. "The lady will wait for me here," he told
the Vinzz.

The extraterrestrial quivered indecisively. "Most irregular," it
murmured. "However, I cannot refuse a slight favor for such an old
customer. This way, madam."

       *       *       *       *       *

Gabriel Lockard opened Gabriel Lockard's eyes.

"Well," the Vinzz who stood above him lisped, "how does it feel to be
back in your own body again?"

Gabriel got up and stretched. He stretched again, and then an
expression of wonderment came over his handsome features. "I feel ...
exactly the way I felt in ... any of the others," he said haltingly.
"I'm not comfortable in this one either. It's not right--it doesn't
fit. My own body...."

"You've grown out of it," the green one told him, not unkindly. "But
you will be able to adjust to it again, if you'll give it a chance...."

"There's that word again." Gabriel winced. "I'm beginning to respond
to it the way my ... predecessor did. Do we ever really get another
chance, I wonder?"

"Take my advice." The Vinzz' face became almost human. "This is
costing my people money, but we've made enough out of you and
your--shall we say?--friends. It is a shame," it murmured, "to prey
upon unsophisticated life-forms, but one must live. However, I'll tell
you this: The compulsion will come over you again and again to play
the game--your body will torment you unbearably and you will long for
relief from it, but you must conquer that desire or, I warn you, you
will be lost to yourself forever. It's a pattern that's enormously
difficult to break, but it can be broken."

Gabriel smiled down at the little green creature. "Thanks, colleague.
I'll remember that advice. And I'll take it."

"The other is still asleep," the Vinzz told him. "This time I thought
it best to let you awaken first. Good-by, and ... good luck."

"Thanks, fellow-man," Gabriel said. The Vinzz' tendrils quivered.

       *       *       *       *       *

Helen awaited him in an anteroom, her veil flung back so that he could
see her poor, marred face. Anger rose hotly in him, but he pushed it
down. Her suffering had not been meaningless and revenge was already
consummated.

"Gabriel!" Her voice was taut. "... Jed!"

"Gabriel," he smiled. "The genuine, original Gabriel--accept no
substitutes."

"I'm so glad." Her lips formed the words, for she had no voice with
which to make them.

"Come." He took her arm and led her out into the quiet street. It
was almost daylight and the sky was a clear pearl gray. Again a star
detached itself from the translucent disk of the Moon and sped out into
the Galaxy.

_Soon_, he thought, _we'll be on a starship like that one, leaving this
played-out planet for the new worlds up in the sky._

"You're going to let Gabe--the other Gabriel--go?" she asked.

He bent his head to look at her swollen face. "You're free, Helen; I
have my body back; why should we concern ourselves with what happens to
him? He can't hurt us any more."

"I suppose you're right," she muttered. "It seems unfair...." She
shivered. "Still, you have no idea of the things he did to me--the
things he made me do...." She shivered again.

"You're cold. Let's get started."

"But where are we going?" She placed her hand on his arm and looked up
at him.

"Back to the hotel to pick up your luggage. And then--I still think
Proxima is a good idea, don't you? And then perhaps farther out still.
I'm sick of this old world."

"But, Je--Gabriel, you must be mad! The police will be waiting for you
at the hotel."

"Of course they'll be waiting, but with a citation, not handcuffs."

She looked at him as if he had gone extradimensional. He laughed. "What
your ex-husband didn't know, my dear, was that there was a reward out
for Jed Carmody, _dead or alive_."

Her face was blank for a moment. "A reward! Oh, G-G-G-Gabriel!" The
girl erupted into hysterical laughter.

"Shhh, darling, control yourself." He put his arm around her,
protectively, restrainingly. "We'll be conspicuous," for already the
Sun's first feeble rays were beginning to wash the ancient tired
streets with watery gold. "Think of the reward we're going to get--five
thousand credits, just for us!"

She wiped her eyes and pulled down her veil. "Whatever will we do with
all that money!"

"I think it would be nice if we turned it over to the hotel," he
smiled. "I made rather a shambles of their lobby when, pursuant to my
duty as a solar citizen, I exterminated the killer Carmody. Let's give
it to them and leave only pleasant memories behind us on our journey
to the stars." And he couldn't help wondering whether, if things got
really tough, somewhere up in those stars he could find another zarquil
game.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Bodyguard, by Christopher Grimm

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BODYGUARD ***

***** This file should be named 50988.txt or 50988.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/0/9/8/50988/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
