The Project Gutenberg EBook of Shamar's War, by Kris Neville

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: Shamar's War

Author: Kris Neville

Release Date: January 29, 2016 [EBook #51072]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SHAMAR'S WAR ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                             SHAMAR'S WAR

                            BY KRIS NEVILLE

                         ILLUSTRATED BY GUINTA

           [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from
                 Galaxy Science Fiction February 1964.
         Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
         the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]




                   He was Earth's secret weapon, as
                   deadly as a sword--and two-edged!


I


The year was 2346, and Earth, at the time, was a political democracy.

The population was ruled by the Over-Council and, in order of
decreasing importance, by Councils, and Local Councils. Each was
composed of representatives duly apportioned by popular vote between
the two contending parties. Executive direction was provided by a
variety of Secretaries, selected by vote of the appropriate Councils.
An independent Judiciary upheld the laws.

A unified Earth sent colonists to the stars. Back came strange tales
and improbable animals.

Back, too, came word of a burgeoning technological civilization on the
planet Itra, peopled by entirely humanoid aliens.

Earth felt it would be wise for Itra to join in a Galactic Federation
and accordingly, submitted the terms of such a mutually advantageous
agreement.

The Itraians declined....

       *       *       *       *       *

Space Captain Merle S. Shaeffer, the youngest and perhaps the most
naive pilot for Trans-Universe Transport, was called unexpectedly to
the New York office of the company.

When Capt. Shaeffer entered the luxurious eightieth story suite, Old
Tom Twilmaker, the President of TUT, greeted him. With an arm around
his shoulder, Old Tom led Capt. Shaeffer to an immense inner office and
introduced him to a General Reuter, identified as the Chairman of the
Interscience Committee of the Over-Council.

No one else was present. With the door closed, they were isolated in
Olympian splendor above and beyond the affairs of men. Here judgments
were final and impartial. Capt. Shaeffer, in the presence of two of the
men highest in the ruling councils of Earth, was reduced to incoherent
awe.

General Reuter moved about restlessly. Old Tom was serene and beatific.

When they were seated, Old Tom swiveled around and gazed long
in silence across the spires of the City. Capt. Shaeffer waited
respectfully. General Reuter fidgetted.

"Some day," Old Tom said at last, "I'm going to take my leave of this.
Yes, gentle Jesus! Oh, when I think of all the souls still refusing
to admit our precious Savior, what bitterness, oh, what sorrow is my
wealth to me! Look down upon the teeming millions below us. How many
know not the Lord? Yes, some morning, I will forsake all this and go
out into the streets to spend my last days bringing the words of hope
to the weary and oppressed. Are you a Christian, Merle?"

General Reuter cracked his knuckles nervously while Capt. Shaeffer
muttered an embarrassed affirmative.

"I am a deeply religious man," Old Tom continued. "I guess you've heard
that, Merle?"

"Yes sir," Capt. Shaeffer said.

"But did you know that the Lord has summoned you here today?" Old Tom
asked.

"No, sir," Capt. Shaeffer said.

"General Reuter, here, is a dear friend. We've known each other, oh,
many years. Distantly related through our dear wives, in fact. And we
serve on the same Board of Directors and the same Charity Committees....
A few weeks ago, when he asked me for a man, I called for your file,
Merle. I made discreet inquiries. Then I got down on my knees and
talked it over with God for, oh, it must have been all of an hour. I
asked, 'Is this the man?' And I was given a sign. Yes! At that moment,
a shaft of sunlight broke through the clouds!"

       *       *       *       *       *

General Reuter had continued his nervous movements throughout the
speech. For the first time, he spoke. "Good God, Tom, serve us a
drink." He turned to Capt. Shaeffer. "A little drink now and then helps
a man relax. I'll just have mine straight, Tom."

Old Tom studied Capt. Shaeffer. "I do not feel the gentle Master
approves of liquor."

"Don't try to influence him," General Reuter said. "You're embarrassing
the boy."

"I--" Capt. Shaeffer began.

"Give him the drink. If he doesn't want to drink it, he won't have to
drink it."

Sighing, Old Tom poured two bourbons from the bar in back of his desk
and passed them over. Martyrdom sat heavily upon his brow.

After a quick twist of the wrist and an expert toss of the head,
General Reuter returned an empty glass. "Don't mind if I do have
another," he said. He was already less restless.

"How's your ability to pick up languages?" General Reuter asked.

"I learned Spanish and Russian at TUT PS," Capt. Shaeffer said
apologetically. "I'm supposed to have a real high aptitude in
languages, according to some tests I took. In case we should meet
intelligent aliens, TUT gives them."

"You got no association with crackpot organizations, anything like
that?" General Reuter asked. "You're either a good Liberal-Conservative
or Radical-Progressive, aren't you? I don't care which. I don't believe
in prying into a man's politics."

"I never belonged to anything," Capt. Shaeffer said.

"Oh, I can assure you, that's been checked out very, very thoroughly,"
Old Tom said.

The General signaled for another drink. With a sigh of exasperation,
Old Tom complied.

"Bob," Old Tom said, "I really think you've had enough. Please, now.
Our Master counsels moderation."

"Damn it, Tom," the General said and turned back to the space pilot.
"May have a little job for you."

Old Tom shook his head at the General, cautioning him.

"Actually," the General said, ignoring the executive, "we'll be sort of
renting you from TUT. In a way you'll still be working for them. I can
get a million dollars out of the--"

"Bob!"

"--unmarked appropriation if it goes in in TUT's name. No questions
asked. National Defense. I couldn't get anywhere near that much for
an individual for a year. It gives us a pie to slice. We were talking
about it before you came in. How does a quarter of a million dollars a
year sound to you?"

"When it comes to such matters," Old Tom interjected hastily, "I think
first of the opportunities they bring to do good."

The General continued, "Now you know, Merle. And this is serious. I
want you to listen to me. Because this comes under World Security laws,
and I'm going to bind you to them. You know what that means? You'll be
held responsible."

"Yes, sir," Merle said, swallowing stiffly. "I understand."

"Good. Let's have a drink on that."

       *       *       *       *       *

"Please be quiet, General," Old Tom said. "Let me explain. You see,
Merle, the Interscience Committee was recently directed to consider
methods for creating a climate of opinion on Itra--of which I'm sure
you've heard--which would be favorable to the proposed Galactic
Federation."

"Excuse me," General Reuter said. "They don't have a democracy, like
we do. They don't have any freedom like we do. I have no doubt the
average whateveryoucallem--Itraians, I guess--the average gooks--would
be glad to see us come in and just kick the hell out of whoever is in
charge of them."

"Now, General," Old Tom said more sharply.

"But that's not the whole thing," the General continued. "Even fit were
right thing to do, an' I'm not saying isn't--right thing to do--there's
log-lo-lo-gistics. I don't want to convey the impresh, impression that
our Defense Force people have been wasting money. Never had as much as
needed, fact. No, it's like this.

"We have this broad base to buil' from. Backbone. But we live in
a democracy. Now, Old Tom's Liberal-Conservative. And me, I'm
Radical-Progresshive. But we agree on one thing: importance of strong
defense. A lot of people don' understan' this. Feel we're already
spendin' more than we can afford. But I want to ask them, what's more
important than the defense of our planet?"

"General, I'm afraid this is not entirely germane," Old Tom said
stiffly.

"Never mind that right now. Point is, it will take us long time to get
the serious nature of the menace of Itra across to the voters. Then,
maybe fifteen, twenty years.... Let's just take one thing. We don't have
anywhere near enough troop transports to carry out the occupation of
Itra. You know how long it takes to build them? My point is, we may not
have that long. Suppose Itra should get secret of interstellar drive
tomorrow, then where would we be?"

Old Tom slammed his fist on the desk. "General, please! The boy isn't
interested in all that."

The General surged angrily to his feet. "By God, that's what's wrong
with this world today!" he cried. "Nobody's interested in Defense.
Spend only a measly twenty per cent of the Gross World Product on
Defense, and expect to keep strong! Good God, Tom, give me a drink!"
Apparently heresy had shocked him sober.

Old Tom explained, "The General is a patriot. We all respect him for
it."

"I understand," Capt. Shaeffer said.

General Reuter hammered his knuckles in rhythm on the table. "The
drink, the drink, the drink! You got more in the bottle. I saw it!"

Old Tom rolled his eyes Heavenward and passed the bottle across. "This
is all you get. This is all I've got."

The General held the bottle up to the light. "Should have brought my
own. Let's hurry up and get this over with."

Old Tom smiled the smile of the sorely beset and persecuted and said,
"You see, Merle, there's massive discontent among the population of
Itra. We feel we should send a man to the planet to, well, foment
change and, uh, hasten the already inevitable overthrow of the despotic
government. That man will be strictly on his own. The Government will
not be able to back him in any way whatsoever once he lands on Itra."

The General had quickly finished the bottle. "You she," he interrupted,
"there's one thing they can't fight, an' that's an idea. Jus' one man
goes to Itra with the idea of Freedom, that's all it'll take. How
many men did it take to start the 'Merican Revolution? Jefferson. The
Russian Revolution? Marx!"

"Yes," Old Tom said. "One dedicated man on Itra, preaching the ideas of
Liberty--liberty with responsibility and property rights under one God.
That man can change a world." Exhausted by the purity of his emotions,
Old Tom sat back gasping to await the answer.

"A quarter of a million dollars a year?" Capt. Shaeffer asked at length.


II

The Itraians spoke a common language. It was somewhat guttural and
highly inflected. Fortunately, the spelling appeared to be phonetic,
with only forty-three characters being required. As near as anyone
could tell, centuries of worldwide communication had eliminated
regional peculiarities. The speech from one part of Itra was not
distinguishable from that of another part.

Most of the language was recovered from spy tapes of television
programs. A dictionary was compiled laborously by a special scientific
task force of the Over-Council. The overall program was directed
and administered by Intercontinental Iron, Steel, Gas, Electricity,
Automobiles and Synthetics, Incorporated.

It took Shaeffer just short of three years to speak Itraian
sufficiently well to convince non-Itraians that he spoke without accent.

The remainder of his training program was administered by a variety
of other large industrial concerns. The training was conducted at a
Defense Facility.

At the end of his training, Shaeffer was taken by special bus to the
New Mexican space port. A ship waited.

The car moved smoothly from the Defense Force Base, down the broad
sixteen-lane highway, through the surrounding slum area and into Grants.

Sight of the slums gave Shaeffer mixed emotions.

It was not a feeling of superiority to the inhabitants; those he had
always regarded with a circumspect indifference. The slums were there.
He supposed they always would be there. But now, for the first time
in his life, he could truly say that he had escaped their omnipresent
threat once and for all. He felt relief and guilt.

During the last three years, he had earned $750,000.

As a civilian stationed on a Defense Force Base, he had, of course,
to pay for his clothing, his food and his lodging. But the charge was
nominal. Since he had been given only infrequent and closely supervised
leaves, he had been able to spend, altogether, only $12,000.

Which meant that now, after taxes, he had accumulated in his savings
account a total of nearly $600,000 awaiting his return from Itra.

       *       *       *       *       *

Shaeffer's ship stood off Itra while he prepared to disembark.

In his cramped quarters, he dressed himself in Itraian-style clothing.
Capt. Merle S. Shaeffer became Shamar the Worker.

In addition to his jump equipment, an oxygen cylinder, a face mask and
a shovel, he carried with him eighty pounds of counterfeit Itraian
currency ... all told, forty thousand individual bills of various
denominations. Earth felt this would be all he needed to survive in a
technologically advanced civilization.

His plan was as follows:

1. He was to land in a sparsely inhabited area on the larger masses.

2. He was to procure transportation to Xxla, a major city, equivalent
to London or Tokyo. It was the headquarters for the Party.

3. He was to establish residence in the slum area surrounding the
University of Xxla.

4. Working through student contacts, he was to ingratiate himself with
such rebel intellectuals as could be found.

5. Once his contacts were secure, he was to assist in the preparation
of propaganda and establish a clandestine press for its production.

6. As quickly as the operation was self-sufficient, he was to move on
to another major city ... and begin all over.

The ship descended into the atmosphere. The bell rang. Shamar the
Worker seated himself, put on his oxygen mask and signaled his
readiness. He breathed oxygen. The ship quivered, the door fell away
beneath him and he was battered unconscious by the slipstream.

Five minutes later, pinwheeling lazily in free fall, he opened
his eyes. For an instant's panic he could not read the altimeter.
Then seeing that he was safe, he noted his physical sensations. He
was extremely cold. Gyrating wildly, he beat his chest to restore
circulation.

He stabilized his fall by stretching out his hands. He floated with no
sensation of movement. Itra was overhead, falling up at him slowly. He
turned his back to the planet and checked the time. Twelve minutes yet
to go.

He spent, in all, seventeen minutes in free fall. At 2000 feet, he
opened his parachute. The sound was like an explosion.

He floated quietly, recovering from the shock. He removed his oxygen
mask and tasted the alien air. He sniffed several times. It was not
unpleasant.

Below was darkness. Then suddenly the ground came floating up and hit
him.

The terrain was irregular. He fought the chute to collapse it, tripped,
and twisted his ankle painfully.

The chute lay quiet and he sat on the ground and cursed in English.

At length he bundled up the chute and removed all of the packages of
money but the one disguised as a field pack. He used the shovel to
dig a shallow grave at the base of a tree. He interred the chute, the
oxygen cylinder, the mask, the shovel and scooped dirt over them with
his hands.

He sat down and unlaced his shoe and found his ankle badly swollen.
Distant, unfamiliar odors filled him with apprehension and he started
at the slightest sound.

Dawn was breaking.


III

Noting his bearings carefully, he hobbled painfully westward, with
thirty pounds of money on his back. He would intersect the major
North-South Intercontinental highway by at least noon.

Two hours later, he came to a small plastic cabin in a clearing at the
edge of a forest.

Wincing now with each step, he made his way to the door. He knocked.

There was a long wait.

The door opened. A girl stood before him in a dressing gown. She
frowned and asked, "_Itsil obwatly jer gekompilp?_"

Hearing Itraian spoken by a native in the flesh had a powerful
emotional impact on Shamar the Worker.

Stumblingly, he introduced himself and explained that he was camping
out. During the previous night he had become lost and injured his
ankle. If she could spare him food and directions, he would gladly pay.

With a smile of superiority, she stepped aside and said in Itraian,
"Come in, Chom the Worker."

He felt panic, but he choked it back and followed her. Apparently he
had horribly mispronounced his own name. It was as though, in English
he had said Barchestershire for Barset. He cursed whatever Professor
had picked that name for whatever obscure reason.

"Sit down," she invited. "I'm about to have breakfast. Eggs and
bacon--" the Itraian equivalent--"if that's all right with you. I'm
Garfling Germadpoldlt by the way, although you can call me Ge-Ge."

The food was quite unpleasant, as though overly ripe. He was able to
choke down the eggs with the greatest difficulty. Fortunately, the hot
drink that was the equivalent of Earth coffee at the end of the meal,
was sufficiently spicy to quiet his stomach.

"Good coffee," he said.

"Thank you. Care for a cigarette?"

"I sure would."

He had no matches, so she lit it for him, hovering above him a moment,
leaving with him the fresh odor of her hair.

The taste of the cigarette was mild. Rather surprisingly, it
substituted for nicotine and allayed the sharp longing that had come
with the coffee.

"Let's look at your ankle," she said. She knelt at his feet and began
to unlace the right shoe. "My, it's swollen," she said sympathetically.

He winced as she touched it and then he reddened with embarrassment. He
had been walking across dusty country. He drew back the foot and bent
to restrain her.

Playfully she slapped his hand away. "You sit back! I'll get it. I've
seen dirty feet before."

She pulled off the shoe and peeled off the sock. "Oh, God, it is
swollen," she said. "You think it's broken, Shamar?"

"Just sprained."

"I'll get some hot water with some MedAid in it, and that'll take the
swelling out."

When he had his foot in the water, she sat across from him and arranged
her dressing gown with a coquettish gesture. She caught him staring
at the earring, and one hand went to it caressingly. She smiled that
universal feminine smile of security and recklessness, of invitation
and rejection.

"You're engaged," he noted.

She opened her eyes wide and studied him above a thumbnail which she
tasted with her teeth. "I'm engaged to Von Stutsman--" as the name
might be translated--"perhaps you've heard of him? He's important in
the Party. You know him?"

"No."

"You in the Party?" she said. She was teasing him now. Then, suddenly:
"Neither am I, but I guess I'll have to join if I become Mrs. Von
Stutsman."

They were silent for a moment.

Then she spoke, and he was frozen in terror, all thoughts but of
self-preservation washed from his mind.

"Your accent is unbelieveably bad," she said.

"I'm from Zuleb," he said lamely, at last.

"Meta--Gelwhops--or even Karkeqwol, that makes no difference. Nobody on
Itra speaks like you do. So you must be from that planet that had the
Party in a flap several years ago--Earth, isn't it?"

He said nothing.

"Do you know what they'll do when they catch you?" she asked.

"No," he said hollowly.

"They'll behead you."

       *       *       *       *       *

She laughed, not unkindly. "If you could see yourself! How ridiculous
you look, Shamar. I wonder what your real name is, by the way? Sitting
with a foot in the water and looking wildly about. Here, let me fix
more coffee and we can talk."

She called cheerily over her shoulder, "You're safe here. No one will
be by. I'm not due back until Tuesday."

She brought him a steaming mug. "Drink this while I dress." She
disappeared into the bedroom. He heard the shower running.

He sat waiting, numb and desperate, and drank the coffee because it was
there. His thoughts scampered in the cage of his skull like mice on a
treadmill.

When Ge-Ge came back, he had still not resolved the conflict within
him. She stood barefoot upon the rug and looked down at him, hunched
miserably over the pan of water, now lukewarm.

"How's the foot?"

"All right."

"Want to take it out?"

"I guess."

"I'll get a towel."

She waited until he had dried the foot and restored the sock and shoe.
The swelling was gone. He stood up and put his weight on it. He smiled
wanly. "It's okay now. It's not broken, I guess."

She gestured him to the sofa. He complied.

"What's in the field pack?" she asked. "Money? How much?" She moved
toward it. He half rose to stop her, but by then she had it partly
open. "My," she said, bringing out a thick sheaf of bills. She rippled
them sensuously. "Pretty. Very, very pretty." She examined them for
texture and appearance. "They look good, Shamar. I'll bet it would cost
ten million dollars in research on paper and ink and presses to do this
kind of a job. Only another government has got that kind of money to
throw around." She tossed the currency carelessly beside him and came
to sit at his side.

She took his hand. Her hand was warm and gentle. "Tell me, Shamar," she
said. "Tell me all about it."

So this is how easily spies are trapped in real life, Shamar told
himself with numb disbelief.

The story came out slowly and hesitantly at first. She said nothing
until he had finished.

"And that's all? You really believe that, don't you? And I guess
your government does, too. That all we need is just some little idea
or something." She turned away from him. "But of course, that's
neither here nor there, is it? I never imagined an adventurer type
would look like you. You have such a soft, honest voice. As a little
girl, I pictured myself being carried off by a tanned desert sheik on
a camel; and oh, he was lean and handsome! With dark flashing eyes
and murderously heavy lips and hands like iron! Well, that's life, I
guess." She stood and paced the room. "Let me think. We'll pick up a
flyer in Zelonip when we catch the bus next Tuesday. How much does the
money weigh?"

"Eighty pounds."

"I can carry about 10 pounds in my bag. You can take your field pack.
How much is in it? Thirty pounds? That'll leave about forty which we
can ship through on extra charges. Then, when we get to Xxla, I can
hide you out in an apartment over on the East side."

"Why would you run a risk like that for me?" he asked.

       *       *       *       *       *

She brushed the hair from her face. "Let's say--what? I don't really
think you can make it, because it's so hopeless. But maybe, just maybe,
you might be one of the rare ones who, if he plays his cards right, can
beat the system. I love to see them licked!

"Well, I'm a clerk. That's all. Just a lowly clerk in one of the Party
offices. I met Von Stutsman a year ago. This is his cabin. He lets me
use it.

"He's older than I am; but there's worse husband material. But then
again, he's about to be transferred to one of the big agricultural
combines way out in the boondocks where there's no excitement at all.
Just little old ladies and little old men and peasants having children.

"I'm a city girl. I like Xxla. And if I marry him, all that goes up the
flue. I'll be marooned with him, God knows where, for years. Stuck,
just stuck.

"Still--he is Von Stutsman, and he's on his way up. Everyone says that.
Ten, twenty years, he'll be back to Xxla, and he'll come back on top.

"Oh ... I don't know what I want to do! If I marry him, I can get all
the things I've always wanted. Position, security. He's older than I
am, but he's really a nice guy. It's just that he's dull. He can't talk
about anything but Party, Party, Party.

"That's what I came out to this cabin for. To think things over, to try
to get things straightened out. And then you came along. Maybe it gives
me a chance for something exciting before I ship off to the boondocks.
Does that make sense to you?

"I'll get married and sit out there, and I'll turn the pages of the
Party magazine and smile sweetly to myself. Because, you see, I'll
always be able to lean forward and say, 'Dear? Once upon a time, I
helped hide an Earth spy in Xxla.' And that'll knock that silly and
self-satisfied look off his face for once.... Oh, I don't know! Let me
alone!" With that, she fled to the bedroom and slammed the door behind
her.

He could hear her sobbing helplessly.

In the afternoon, she came out. He had fallen asleep. She shook him
gently to waken him.

"Eh? Oh! Huh?" He smiled foolishly.

"Wash up in there," she told him. "I'm sorry I blew up on you this
morning. I'll cook something."

When he came back, she was serving them their dinner on steaming
platters.

"Look, Ge-Ge," he said over coffee. "You don't like your government.
We'll help you out. There's this Galactic Federation idea." He
explained to her the cross-fertilization of the two cultures.

"Shamar, my friend," she said, "did you see Earth's proposal? There was
nothing in it about giving us an interstellar drive. We were required
to give Earth all transportation franchises. The organization you used
to work for was to be given, as I remember it, an exclusive ninety-nine
year right to carry all Earth-Itra commerce. It was all covered in the
newspapers, didn't you see it?"

Shamar said, "Well, now, I'm not familiar with the details. I wasn't
keeping up with them. But I'm sure these things could be, you know,
worked out. Maybe, for Security reasons, we didn't want to give you the
interstellar drive right off, but you can appreciate our logic there.
Once we saw you were, well, like us, a peace-loving planet, once you'd
changed your government to a democracy, you would see it our way and
you'd have no complaints on that score."

"Let's not talk politics," she said wearily. "Maybe it's what you say,
and I'm just naturally suspicious. I don't want to talk about it."

"Well, I was just trying to help--"

The sentence was interrupted by a monstrous explosion.

"Good God!" Shamar cried. "What was that?"

"Oh, that," Ge-Ge said, shaking off the effects. "They were probably
testing one of their damned automated factories to see if it was
explosion proof and it wasn't."


IV

During the week alone in the cabin, Ge-Ge fell in love with Shamar.

"Oh, my God!" she cried. "What will I do when they catch you? I'll die,
Shamar! I couldn't bear it. We'll go to Xxla, we'll hide away as quietly
as two mice, somewhere. We won't go out. The two of us, alone but
together, behind closed doors and drawn shades. Nobody will ever know
about us. We'll be the invisible people."

Shamar protested. "I don't see how we can ever be secure until
something's done about your government. As long as you don't reach some
kind of agreement with Earth, I'll be an outlaw. I'll be afraid any
minute they'll tap my shoulder and come and take me away. I don't think
we could hold up under that. We'd be at each other in no time."

She wept quietly.

The last day in the cabin, they went out and dug up the rest of the
money. The trip to Xxla took place without incident. Ge-Ge rented an
apartment for him, and he safely checked in. She went shopping for food
and clothing.

Thereafter she came nearly every evening. They would eat and she would
reveal the inconsequential details of the office regime to which she
was daily exposed. After dinner, they would sit in the living room and
practice Itraian and neck a little. Then she would go home.

One day, after a month of this routine, she threw herself into his
arms and sobbed, "I gave Von Stutsman back his earring today. It was
the only fair thing to do. I'm afraid he knows about us. He's had me
watched. I know he has. I admitted it was another man."

Shamar held her tensely.

She broke away. "You were born in Zuleb, you suffered amnesia, you woke
up in a ditch one morning without papers. You've been an itinerant
worker since. Things like that happen all the time. You hit a big
lottery ticket a few months ago. I told him that. How can he check it?"

"You told him I didn't have any papers?"

"Millions of people don't have any papers--the drifters, people that
do casual labor, the people that don't work at all. The thing is,
without papers he doesn't have any way to check on you. Oh, you should
have seen his face when I gave him back his earring. He was absolutely
livid. I didn't think he had it in him. I suppose I'll have to quit my
job now. Oh, if you only had papers so we could be married!"

Ge-Ge's mood, that evening, alternated between despair and optimism. In
the end, she was morose and restless. She repeated several times, "I
just don't know what's going to happen to us."

"Ge-Ge," he said, "I can't spend my life in this apartment I've got to
get out."

"You're mad." She faced him from across the room. She stood with her
legs apart, firmly set. "Well, I don't care what happens any more. I
can't stand things to go on like they are. I'll introduce you to some
people I know, since you won't be happy until I do. But God help us!"

       *       *       *       *       *

After approving his accent, which had improved under her tutelage,
Ge-Ge took him to a party the following Saturday.

The party was held in an ill-lighted railroad flat. People congregated
cross-legged on the bare floor.

Shamar listened to a man complaining that citizens were being taxed
beyond all endurance to support the enforced automation program. "They
aren't interested in building consumer goods. They're interested in
building factories to build consumer goods and blow them up testing
them. Or the factories are always obsolete just as soon as they finish
them, and they can't phase into their new production setup and Hundred
Year Plan."

Ge-Ge whispered a warning to him to beware of spies.

"Spies?"

"The Party," she said, drawing him to one side.

"But--but--you mean the Party just lets people talk like this?"

"Whatever harm does it do?" she asked. "Everybody benefits from talking
out their aggressions. Now, have another drink and relax, and Shamar,
be careful! Nobody minds local crackpots, but nobody wants _foreign_
crackpots!"

She led him to another drink and left him standing with the host.

"Nice party," Shamar said.

"Thank you," the host said. "I find it very invigorating. As long as
there's still people that think and that criticize on this planet, I
feel there's hope, don't you? This is your first time? I don't recall
your face. I have a study group that meets Wednesday nights. You're
welcome to come. We have very stimulating discussions about government
and politics. Please do come, any time you can. Just drop in any time
after eight. What was your name again?"

"Shamar the Worker."

"Interesting name," the host said. "Another drink?"

Later, Shamar found himself in an intense conversation with a bearded
youth of perhaps seventeen.

"A guy's responsible for his own conduct, right? Right! I'm responsible
for _their_ conduct? Each man goes to hell in his own way, right?
Right! I don't want anything to do with them. You can't do anything
about it, man, that's what I'm telling you. I don't seem to be getting
through. Don't you see, it's a machine...."

"But if everybody joined the Party," Shamar suggested.

"So everybody joins? So what's new? Okay, you vote in the Party
elections. What do you get? You get these two guys running for office:
one is slightly left of center and one is slightly right of center. And
both are four-square for the Automated Factory Program. Just suppose
you did get a radical--suppose they accidentally let one slip through?
He goes off and they argue him into line, and when he comes back, you
say, 'Like, man, what happened?' And so he tells you, 'Well, I couldn't
do anything about it.' That's just what I'm telling you."

"I can't see that," Shamar said. "I just don't believe that."

       *       *       *       *       *

At another time, Shamar tried to explain free elections to a female. He
was informed, "Man, just give me a way to cast a vote against all those
crumbs--and then I'll think twice about all this guff you're peddling."

A sober, scholarly man told him, "Join the Party? Whatever for? You
join the Party and you're expected to spend all your free evenings at
rallies and meetings and speeches and in ceremonial parades in honor of
the ground breaking for a new automated factory. No, thank you."

Another told him, "You need a lesson in economics, son. What do you
mean by free society? The only way you can run an industrial society
is to limit production. If you produce enough for everybody, the
government would produce itself out of business. Look here. The
Party has millions of tabulating machines of one kind or another
clicking happily away day and night arranging production to fit income
distribution. They've never been known to goof and produce a surplus
of anything. Why, damn it, if every man, woman and child in the world
went out to buy a pound of nails apiece, the shortage of nails would be
fantastic. But would they produce more nails? You know they wouldn't.
'So you want more nails?' they'd say. 'Well, damn you, work for them!'
And the price would go up. See what I mean, son? They'd have another
stick to beat us with."

Later, Shamar found himself seated on the floor across from an
aesthetic in his late thirties. "You see, my friend, force and violence
never accomplish their stated ends. We must stand firmly on the
principle of non-violence."

"But that's taking it laying down," Shamar protested.

"No! Sometimes I think it goes to the very core of human existence.
Perhaps this is the central import of all philosophy: the way things
are done is more important than the ends that are obtained."

At that point, Ge-Ge arrived breathlessly. "Shamar, quickly! We must
go!"

"Huh? I'm having this interesting little talk--"

She tugged him from the floor. Baffled, he followed her. As he did so,
the fighting broke out in the far corner of the room.

"Quickly!" she said. "Let's get out of here before the police come."

They fought their way, hand in hand, to the door. There they paused for
a moment to look back.

"It's a couple of rival socialist parties fighting," she explained
breathlessly.

"What about?"

"God knows. Hurry."

They were in the street. "Don't run, walk," she cautioned. After a
block, she said, "I didn't even need to watch you at the end. Everybody
got so drunk nobody noticed you much."

"Even the spies?"

"Oh, they always get the drunkest."

The siren sounded.

"Let's hurry."

When they arrived at Shamar's apartment, she asked, "Well, what did you
think of the party?"

"It was an education," he said after a moment.


V

The following week Shamar spent many hours walking the streets of Xxla.
He tried to convince himself that the people he had met at the party
were not representative.

They were.

Friday night Ge-Ge announced "Shamar, I can't stand much more of this!
What's going to happen? What is Von Stutsman going to do? He's onto
something. I sometimes wish--oh, God!--I sometimes wish something would
happen so we'd know where we stand, so we'd know what to do!" He tried
to put an arm around her, but she brushed it away. "Don't! Let me
alone!"

She retired to the other side of the room. For a moment, and for no
reason, the hostility in the air between them was like ice and fire.

"I'm sorry," Ge-Ge said curtly.

"That's all right," Shamar said, his voice cold and distant.

"Let's talk about something else."

They were silent for a minute. Then he said, "I wanted to ask you. Of
all the people I talked to, I couldn't find anyone who seemed to give
a damn, one way or the other, about Earth. Why is that? You'd think
they'd be at least talking about Earth."

"Why should they be? We've got our own problems."

At that point, the police arrived and took Shamar the Worker away.

       *       *       *       *       *

They put him in a cell in which there were already three other
prisoners.

"What you in for, buddy?"

Shamar studied the prisoner for a moment without answering. His
companions looked up.

"No visible means of support," Shamar said.

"I'm Long John Freed."

Shamar nodded.

"They're trying to hook you for evading the productivity tax, huh?"

Shamar declined comment.

Freed settled back on his bunk. "I say take them for all you can. Now,
look, you're a little guy. So they bleed us white. Take a factory
manager or an important Black Market operator--you think they pay
taxes? You can bet they don't. It's a racket. The poor pay and pay
because they can't hire fancy lawyers to lie for them; and the rich
take and take. I don't see why the Party puts up with it."

Freed shifted his position. "Say what you will about the Party--and
I know it's got it's faults--still, there are dedicated men in it. I
may be a small-time crook, but I'm as patriotic as the next man. The
Party's done a lot of good.

"First time for you? How old are you, twenty-seven or so? First time,
they usually try to recruit you for the Factory Force.

"It's not such a bad racket. When you start out, they toss you in with
lots of kids--usually the draftees. You get six weeks pick-and-shovel,
and you're really dragging when you finish that. Then comes specialist
school.

"Try to get in as an electrician or plumber. Plasterers or bricklayers
have to work too hard. Carpentry's not bad--I'd hold out for
cabinet-making, rather than rough carpentry, if I had to go into
that. Then there's real specialties. Tile laying. You have to have a
personality for that, or you'd go nuts. Demolition's not too bad; you
blow up obsolete factories. That would have been right down my alley."

Freed was silent a moment, then he resumed:

"Sometimes I may talk like a radical, and maybe I am a little of a
radical, I don't know. You look at the overall picture, things ain't
too bad. I've known a lot of thieves and petty crooks in my time. As a
class, for pure patriotism, I'll stack them up against anybody you can
name; and in a way, you know, I'm kind of proud of that.... Well, let's
shut up and get some shut-eye."

       *       *       *       *       *

When finally he slept, Shamar dreamed that the Party was a vast,
invulnerable pyramid resting on the shifting base of the population. It
was constructed to dampen out vibrations. The bottom quivered, and the
quiver ran upward a few inches and was absorbed. The top of the pyramid
remained stable, fixed and motionless, indifferent even to its own
foundation. The pyramid was built like an earthquake-proof tower. It
was built to last. The Party was built to govern. It need only devote
itself to its own preservation. Any other issue was secondary.

It was an organic machine. The gears were flesh and blood. The people
on top were maintenance engineers. Their job was to go around with an
oil can that they could squirt when necessary to keep friction to a
minimum.

He awakened the following morning ravenously hungry and was hugely
disappointed by breakfast. Even discounting his somewhat biased
viewpoint, the food was inedible.

Freed accepted Shamar's share eagerly with the comment, "It'll taste
better after you miss a few meals. It always does."

An hour later, the jailer came to open the cell.

"Shamar the Worker? Get your stuff. We're going."

Ge-Ge was waiting in the reception room. Her hair had been especially
waved for the occasion. She wore a suit newly pressed and gleaming. She
had tears in her eyes.

She fled to his arms. "Darling!" she cried, caressing his face with
childlike wonder. "Was it awful? Did they beat you?"

"I'm fine."

"Darling, we're going to get you out on bail. I've made all the
arrangements. We just have to go to the Judge's chambers for a minute,
and they'll let you go. Thank God you're going to be out of this
horrible place, at least for a little while."

The jailer brought Shamar's belt and his bag of possessions. Shamar
signed a receipt for them and they went to the Judge.

The Judge said, "Please be seated." He had a resonant and friendly
voice. He went to his desk and sat down.

Ge-Ge and Shamar seated themselves before him.

"Ah, you young people," he said. "Now, you must be Shamar the Worker,
and you--"

"Garfling Germadpoldlt."

"Of course." He turned to Shamar. "I hate to see a fine young person
like you in trouble, Shamar. It seems to me such a waste. Man and boy,
for sixty years I've been a dedicated worker for the Party. Oh, Shamar,
when I think of that glorious paradise to come--that time of wealth
and plenty for all--that time when the riches and abundance of Mother
Itra will, from Automation, overflow alike the homes of the rich and
poor...."

They waited.

He continued. "Here I sit, year after year, Garfling and Shamar,
judging my fellow men. Judging poor creatures who do not live the
Dream. I sometimes feel that this is not the way. I sometimes feel my
job is out there on the street corners, preaching the Dream, awakening
the souls, telling the story of love and beauty and abundance in the
life to come.

"Ah, me. But the world is not yet perfect, is it? And man's
understanding is imperfect. Here you are before me today, Shamar, with
no visible means of support and no record of having paid productivity
taxes. Oh, what a grim and fearful picture! In all your life have you
ever once thought of your obligation to the future? You have failed
yourself; you have failed the Party; and failed the future.

"Yet--in a larger sense--although this in no way militates against your
own guilt--have we not failed you? How have we permitted a human soul
to degrade himself to the point where we must punish him?"

Abruptly, the Judge stood up. "Well, I've done the best I can. I remand
you to the custody of Miss Germadpoldlt. Your trial will be set at a
later date. You are not to leave Xxla without permission of this court.
And I hope my lecture today has fallen on fertile soil. It is not too
late to correct your ways. And I may say, if I am the one who hears
your case, your conduct between now and the trial may have some bearing
on the outcome."

       *       *       *       *       *

They took a taxi back to his apartment. Ge-Ge trembled violently most
of the way and nestled against him; they murmured their affection.

After he had been fed, she said nervously, "It was Von Stutsman who was
responsible for your arrest. I should have known we couldn't fight the
Party. If he digs hard enough, nothing on Itra can save us."

Finally, she went out to canvas lawyers.

She came back at dusk.

"Shamar, darling," she said, "I've located him. I asked a lot of my
friends, and he's the best. He's a big lawyer for left-wing people. I
talked to him, I told him everything."

"What! You told him everything?"

"Why, yes."

"You, you told him I was an Earthman?" He grabbed her by the shoulders.
"Listen, Ge-Ge! I was arrested on a charge I could beat; now look what
you've done. What makes you think he won't turn me over to the Party?
This is too big, now! This isn't just a tax avoidance matter, this is
treason for him."

"It's all right, darling," she said soothingly, breaking free from him.
"I had to tell him so he'd take the case. Why would a big man like him
want to defend a common vagrant?"

Shamar closed his mouth. "But--you mean, he won't tell anyone?"

"Of course not."

"Has the man no patriotism?"

"Look, Shamar," she said in exasperation, "you once asked me why the
people in the street aren't upset about Earth. I'm beginning to see the
way you think. What you mean is, aren't we _afraid_ of Earth? Aren't
we afraid Earth would, oh, do something like invade us or something?
That's what you mean."

"Of course it is."

"Once upon a time," she said, "when we first got space flight, the
Party got all shook up about the possibility of some hostile force
out there developing an interstellar drive and coming along and doing
their will with us. They asked the computers about it. Invading and
conquering a planet is such a vast technological undertaking that the
mind just boggles at it. Don't forget, we've got a warning network out
there. They're not very alert, or you wouldn't have gotten through,
but they wouldn't miss an invasion fleet. There's computer-controlled
chemical rockets in orbit, and we've got a few sited on Itra that can
blast down anything that slows up to try to land. It wouldn't take
one-hundredth, it wouldn't take one-thousandth of the technological
resources required to defend Itra that it would to attack her. Earth
just simply can't afford to attack us. They'd go broke trying. Every
million dollars you spent to get here, we'd spend a thousand to keep
you from landing.

"Oh, I suppose if Earth wanted to, they might figure out some way to
blow up Itra. But where's the profit in that? We're not bothering you.
Why spend all that money when it's not going to get you one damn thing
in return?"

       *       *       *       *       *

The following day, Shamar called on the lawyer, Counselor Freemason.

Counselor Freemason inquired politely as to the state of his financial
reserves. Shamar replied reassuringly.

"Good, good. That's most encouraging. Most encouraging indeed. We need
not place any limit on our ingenuity, then.

"I've been thinking about your case, Mr. Worker. The thing first to do,
in my opinion, is to stir up public sympathy in your favor. It's almost
an ideal case. It has no real political overtones. It's not as if
you're accused of anything serious. Well, I believe I can interest some
friends of mine who are always deeply concerned with cases involving
the infringement of an individual's liberty--provided, of course,
there are no political overtones. I can think of several good people
who would be willing to head up a Defense Committee. The fact that we
have and I'm talking now about as much as, oh, one hundred thousand
dollars?" He paused interrogatively.

"I'm prepared to pay," Shamar said.

"Maybe even more," Councilman Freemason continued quickly. "We can come
to that later. The important thing right now is to get down to work on
your case."

"Counselor Freemason, now, obviously I'm not a lawyer," Shamar said,
"and I know it's bad business to tell a professional how to run
his job. But I believe Miss Germadpoldlt explained the, ah, rather
unusual delicacy of my own position. It would seem to me that the less
publicity we got, the better."

Counselor Freemason shook a pen at him. "A very good point, Mr.
Worker. It shows you're thinking, and I'm glad of the opportunity to
explain the reasons for this recommendation. If I brazenly parade you
before them, you see, by implication it means we're not afraid of your
background being examined. We have nothing to hide. Consequently, they
will not look for anything. If, on the other hand, I'm cautious,
fearful, defensive, they'll ask themselves, 'What's Counselor Freemason
trying to hide?' And they'll start digging into your past.

"Now, I hope that clears that matter up to your satisfaction? Good.
Good. I'll get right to work on your case. Do you have anything else?
Miss Germadpoldlt explained rather nicely, I think, yesterday. As
far as anyone knows, you're a man without papers. You've never paid
any taxes but they have no proof you owe taxes. You won money in the
lottery. You collected anonymously; lots of people do for perfectly
valid reasons. Let them prove you didn't win. The Party can't be very
interested in a man like that.

"So, I'll raise an issue. Maybe we'll suggest that any lottery winner
is likely to be persecuted. The Party wants things to go smoothly. The
lottery makes the people feel as if, you know, they actually own a
piece of things. And too many people don't have papers.

"My job is to take the specific and convert it to a vague general
principle that a number of people feel deeply about. The Party
will take the easy way out: they're not dumb. They've learned from
experience. You're not worth that much trouble to them. Otherwise,
there'll be a period of aggravation, people without papers beating up
police and things like that."

       *       *       *       *       *

Three days later, Shamar met with the newly formed Committee of One
Hundred for Justice to Shamar the Worker.

There were five members of the Committee and Counselor Freemason in
attendance. They briefed him on their initial activities.

They had printed letterheads and were circulating letters to people
known to be friendly, with a hastily printed booklet giving the facts
of the case.

"As you can see," Counselor Freemason said, "we're off to a very
fast start. Um, the question naturally arises as to finances. I have
advanced a certain amount out of my own pocket.... We will need
more than I can conveniently scrape together at the moment, and I'm
reluctant to--ah--impose on the Committee for a loan insofar as--"

"I took the liberty of bringing along some cash," Shamar said. "For
current expenses and, of course, your retainer."

They looked relieved. "Excellent, excellent. I might suggest, Mr.
Worker, that we appoint one of the Committee as treasurer--perhaps Mrs.
Freetle, here--" the lady smiled--"to take these financial worries
off your mind. This will leave you free to devote yourself fully to
activities defense."

"Now that that's out of the way," one of the male Committee members
said, "let's get right down to business. As you can see, we're moving
fast. Our overall strategy is this. We must first establish a public
image for you, Mr. Worker, an image the average man can identify with.
Counselor Freemason has described your case to us. I simply don't
know what the Party's coming to to permit a man like Von Stutsman to
persecute you this way. Oh, I tell you, it makes my blood boil, Mr.
Worker!"

Others of the Committee chimed in and the sentiment passed heatedly
among them.

"Well," said Counselor Freemason, "I guess that about winds it up for
the moment. You all know where to reach me. Any time, day or night. I
guess, Mr. Worker, if you'll just turn the money over to Mrs. Freetle.
And I think, Mr. Hall, if you'd hire that speech writer--what's his
name? McGoglhy?--to work with Mr. Worker on his speeches."

"Speeches?" Shamar asked.

"You're going to be our featured speaker at all the rallies, of
course," Mrs. Freetle said. "I know you will do splendidly, just
splendidly! Your accent is so captivating. I've never heard anything
quite like it."


VI

On the evening of his first public appearance, Shamar was given a
neatly typed speech. He rehearsed it hurriedly, stammers and all.

"Fellow citizens! As I stand here, looking over this sea of faces,
hearing your applause and seeing how your hearts go out to one poor man
in distress, it--I--Well, I'm deeply touched. I can't tell you how much
it means to me. I prepared a speech for tonight, but I'm not going to
use it. I'm just going to stand here, instead, and tell you, just as
the words come out, how I feel." Here he would pause for applause and
then continue. "Thank you so very much. Thank you. I know you're all
behind me--except for the police agents in the audience." Here he would
wait for laughter. "We all know them, don't we? I see about a dozen.
A dozen agents have come down here to find out what I'm going to say.
Isn't that ridiculous?" Here there would be mixed laughter, applause
and cries in the affirmative. "All right! Thank you. I hope they get an
earful tonight."

Later in the speech he would demand, "Why are they doing this to me? I
want you to tell me why. What have I done? What am I accused of doing?
Well, I'll tell you this--I'm not the kind of a man who is going to
submit meekly to this persecution. I'm going to fight back. I've got a
little money left from my lottery winnings, and I'll spend every cent
of it to fight these people doing this thing to me." Here he would
pause dramatically. "I want to leave you with this point. It's not just
Shamar the Worker that's involved. What am I? A poor, itinerant laborer
going from town to town. I'm nothing, I have never had anything, and
I guess I never will have anything. I'm no rich black marketeer or
businessman. I'm no fat politician. I'm just one little man. But it's
not me--and this is the point I want to leave you with--it's not Shamar
the Worker. He's unimportant. What is important is that if they can
do this to me, they can do it to you. If they can do it to Shamar the
Worker today, next year one of you will be up here on this platform
speaking just the way I am. So you see, this is your fight. It's not me
that's important--it's the principle that's important--"

The meeting went brilliantly. Every time he paused, the audience
responded just as the speech-writer had indicated. It was as if they
were as well rehearsed as he.

The next night, another meeting. And another. And another. He slept no
more than four hours a night when the campaign was in full swing. He
spoke dozens of times into the bright glare of TV cameras. He paraded
down a million streets in an open-topped car. Faces poured in front of
his own; on and on they came. People with tears in their eyes cried,
"God bless Shamar the Worker!" Once the Committee hired a brass band.

So, for two weeks, it went.

Then the Party threw him back in jail, in an apparent effort to deprive
the movement of its momentum.

       *       *       *       *       *

After three days, during which time Shamar was held incommunicado,
Counselor Freemason obtained permission to interview his client.

"We're making marvelous progress! Ge-Ge is turning into a most
effective crusader. You should hear her when she cries, 'Give me back
my man!' This is a wonderful development for us. It's having the
opposite of the intended effect. Von Stutsman has over-reached himself
this time. The Party is going to have to back down, and it will cost
him dearly."

"How's the finances?"

"Ge-Ge has given us some advances--"

"How much have you spent?"

"Well, to tell you the truth, I haven't been keeping track closely.
Perhaps we've run a little more than we anticipated. The response, you
see--"

Shamar returned to his cell wishing Earth's printing presses had worked
a little longer.

It took nearly two weeks to arrange for Ge-Ge to visit him. When she
arrived, she was nearly on the point of tears.

"Oh, my darling, how I've missed you!"

She brought him up to date on the progress of his case. As Counselor
Freemason had reported, his imprisonment merely increased the vigor of
his supporters. Now they were at their highest pitch: a pitch which
would be difficult to maintain.

"I'm just worried sick," she said. "If the Party can hold out another
week or two. I don't want to worry you, Shamar, but I want you to know
how you stand. Counselor Freemason says the worst that could happen
would be a short prison sentence, no more than a year, for not filing
tax forms. We could keep you out on appeal for quite a while."

"Ge-Ge, how much have we spent so far?"

"About three hundred thousand dollars."

"Good God! They'll have it all when they get through! If I ever get
back to Earth--"

"I don't care about money, Shamar! I just want you free!"

He took her shoulders. "Ge-Ge, suppose the Party can't afford to back
down? Maybe they feel they have to stand firm to prevent a lot of
future trouble. And when Freemason gets all the money ... then what
chance will we stand? They might railroad me for years. They'll make an
example out of me. Now, are you willing to gamble? Everybody would jump
at the chance to vote them out. If we could--"

"Please, Shamar," Ge-Ge said. "All this voting thing you've always been
so sold on is all right, I guess--but it just won't work. To begin
with, there isn't any way to vote."

"Maybe there is," he said.

       *       *       *       *       *

Shamar was still in jail the following day when Ge-Ge appeared on the
TV program.

PAMDEN had been reluctant to release time to her. PAMDEN was Itra's
largest industrial co-operative--Plastics, Agricultural Machinery,
Detergents, Electricity and Newsprint--and, being the most efficient,
was responsible for operating the TV networks.

"Good heavens," said the station executive. "Nobody can say we haven't
already given you coverage. Miss Germadpoldlt."

"They've ordered you to stop!" she protested.

"They? The Party? Miss Germadpoldlt, do you honestly believe that?
Nobody tells a station manager what to program. Believe me. There is no
prior censorship whatsoever. But, on the other hand, we can't turn over
the TV stations to minority propaganda either."

Ge-Ge argued and pleaded, and in the end the executive sighed wearily.
"I think we've been more than fair. But for you--and this is a personal
favor, Miss Germadpoldlt, because you are a young and attractive
woman--for you, I will phone our program director and see if he can get
you on the Noon Interview Show for tomorrow. It gives you the Itra-wide
network, which is certainly more than anyone has the right to ask.
You'll have ninety seconds to make your case. That's the best I can do."

"Oh, thank you, thank you," Ge-Ge sobbed. "You're so fair and
generous." Outside his office she took a deep breath, crossed her
fingers and went home to revise her speech. She had only expected sixty.

Ge-Ge arrived at the studio well in advance and was handed over to the
makeup department. With deft skill they converted her youth to age and
contrived to instill in her face weariness and defeat. Her protests
were ignored.

"This is the way you make up for TV," she was told.

They clucked collective tongues in disapproval when they were finished
and sent her on her way to a brief chat with the M.C.

The M.C. assured her that she looked divine and hastily scanned her
prepared remarks, which had been heavily edited by some anonymous hand
in the news department. The M.C. incorporated a few pointless revisions
and dispatched the message to the department handling idiot-board
material. It was explained that Ge-Ge was to read, word for word, from
the electronic prompter.

Ge-Ge watched the program from the wings. When she heard a commercial
message in favor of the consumption of a particular variety of candy,
her heart ran away with itself. Her courage faltered. But Shamar's face
brought it back.

The signal came. She walked into the terrible glare which held up every
imperfection to microscopic inspection. She shook hands, turned, and
the camera closed in, full face. Beyond the camera lay the largest
daytime TV audience on Itra. She felt they were examining her pores
with minute and critical attention.

She blinked nervously and began to read. "I am here to tell you about
Shamar the Worker." That was as far as she went with the prepared text.
Before the horrified ears of the auditors in the studio, she plunged
into remarks of another kind entirely.

"If you want to do something to help Shamar the Worker, stop buying
candy! Don't buy any more candy. If you want to help Shamar the Worker,
don't buy any candy until he's free. If you want to help Shamar,
please, _please_, don't buy--"

At this point the technicians cut Ge-Ge out and, with profound
mistiming, faded in an oleogenous taped message from the candy
manufacturer which began, "Friends, everybody likes Red Block candy,
and millions buy it every day. Here's why--"

Ge-Ge surveyed the surrounding confusion and walked unmolested from the
studio.

When she arrived home, an angry Counselor Freemason was waiting on her
doorstep. Inside, she allowed the Counselor to present his case.

This new move, he explained, would have terrible consequences.
Shamar's good faith would be prejudiced. One simply did not, with
impunity, go outside the law in such matters. There were rules you
absolutely _must_ play the game by. He washed his hands of all
responsibility for her conduct. "I hope to God nothing comes of it," he
concluded. "I'm having the Committee prepare a denial of--"

The phone rang at this point, and without asking permission, Counselor
Freemason answered it. "Yes? This is Counselor Freemason, go ahead." He
listened a moment, said, "They did," in a weary voice and cradled the
phone.

He turned to Ge-Ge. "Now we're in for it. That was Pete Freedle from
the Committee."

"Well," said Ge-Ge, "I think we'll just wait a few days and see what
happens."

A week later, Ge-Ge was still waiting. Counselor Freemason, deprived of
finances, was powerless to move. He saw everything crashing in shambles
at their feet.

"But are they selling candy?" Ge-Ge asked.

"That's beside the point!" Counselor Freemason cried. "Look here, every
crackpot on the planet will get into the act. They don't care about
Shamar. All you're going to prove now is that the Party is unpopular.
Everyone already knows that." He struck his forehead in exasperation.

       *       *       *       *       *

For two weeks, all was quiet. There were no more rallies for Shamar
the Worker. Signs were torn down and destroyed. No bulletins were
printed. No word passed over the electronic communications network. The
Committee, bankrupt, dissolved in mutual recriminations and bickering,
convinced that the cause of civil liberties had been set back one
hundred years.

But candy was not selling.

It clogged the distribution channels. It piled up in warehouses. It
lay untouched in stores. It grew rancid. Mechanically the factories
continued to turn it out.

The Party denied the boycott was having any effect. This did not
appease the distributors of candy and the sellers of candy and the
producers of candy. Their jobs were at stake. They had payrolls to meet.

The Party stopped production of candy. People suddenly found themselves
with no jobs to go to.

The economic system was so tightly controlled and organized that the
effect was immediate. There was too little money available to purchase
the supplies normally purchased. Suppliers cut back on their factory
orders. This further reduced the need for supplies.

At this point, the Party decided that the people would, by heaven, eat
candy. The Party Leader himself went on TV to appeal to the patriotism
of the people and to order them to resume buying candy. This was a
tactical error. But being the idea of the Party Leader himself, who had
always crashed headlong into obstacles, none opposed it.

The issue was directly joined. People resented being told that it was
their patriotic duty to eat something that all medical opinion held was
harmful. Furthermore, people realized that they had somehow stumbled on
a fatal flaw in the system, which they could exploit without immediate
danger.

They responded by refusing to buy soap.

The people were now in open revolt. At last they had a method for
disapproving of things in general.

The economy plummeted. The computers were in a frenzy. Effects of
corrective actions were no longer predictable. The Party frantically
tried to buy soap and dump it. The people turned to other commodities.

Pressure now mounted from within the Party itself. The Supervisor of
PAMDEN saw his carefully nurtured empire begin to disintegrate. A
massive layoff in Consumer Plastics (badly hit by a running boycott)
took with it valuable key personnel. The Supervisor of PAMDEN told the
Party Leader himself that he damned well better do something about the
situation, and damned soon, too.

The Party Leader himself ordered the release of Shamar the Worker.

But by then no one was interested in Shamar the Worker.

       *       *       *       *       *

The man came and unlocked Shamar's cell door. Shamar stood up. The
guard tossed in Shamar's clothing. "Get dressed." Shamar got dressed.
"Come along." Shamar came along.

Shamar had had no word from outside for nearly two months, and it was
not until he saw Ge-Ge's face, radiant with joy, that he realized he
had won.

"You're free!" she cried excitedly.

Shamar was given back his belt and possessions. As they waited for the
Judge to make it official, Shamar asked, "I wonder what will happen
now?"

"Nobody knows. Everybody says the Party's out for sure. Individual
Party members will try to form a new government, but it's going to
have to be radically different. They'll try to keep all they can, but
the people will wring them dry for every last concession. Maybe now
when they build the factories, they'll stay built and actually produce
something."

"For a little while," Shamar said.

"Longer than a little while," Ge-Ge said. "We've got a way to vote now,
when things get too bad."

The Judge, in his red robe, came in. They stood respectfully. He looked
at them for a long time and said nothing. Finally, he spoke:

"Well, Shamar the Worker, I guess you've got what you want. You pulled
down a whole civilization. I hope you're satisfied. What Dream will you
give us to replace the Dream you have taken from us?"

His face hardened.

"Shamar the Worker," he said, "the Party Leader himself has asked us to
dismiss the pending charges against you. This I now do. You are free to
go."

"Thank you, sir," Shamar said respectfully.

"Shamar the Worker, for your own sake, you better hope that I never see
you in my court. You better not get yourself arrested for anything. I
will show you no mercy, but justice will be swift and summary. So that
you may not rest easily at night, I am having some of my very skillful
and competent friends check through your background thoroughly. You
should hope, very sincerely, that they find nothing. You may go."

Ge-Ge and Shamar stood. They turned in silence. When they were at the
door, the Judge called, "Oh, Shamar the Worker!"

He turned, "Yes, sir?"

"Shamar the Worker, I do not like your accent."

Shamar could feel Ge-Ge trembling uncontrollably at his side.

But when they reached the street, they were greeted by headlines
announcing that a delegation from the planet Earth had arrived.


VII

The Earth delegation had taken over a suite in the Party Hotel,
grandest and most expensive on Itra. Usually it was reserved for high
Party members.

Shamar and Ge-Ge presented themselves at the desk. Shamar wrote out a
note in English. "Deliver this to the Earthmen," he instructed.

Shamar and Ge-Ge retired to await results. Less than five minutes
passed; the bell hop returned. "Sir and Madam," he said respectfully,
"come with me."

When he entered the suite, he felt the personality of Shamar the Worker
drop from him into memory.

"Captain Shaeffer! Captain Shaeffer! Oh, what a magnificent job! I'm
Gene Gibson from the new Department of Extra-Terrestrial Affairs. Who's
this?"

"This is my fiancee."

"Good heavens, man, you intend to marry a _native_?" The man stepped
back, shocked.

Capt. Shaeffer turned to Ge-Ge and performed bilingual introductions.

They moved from the hallway to the sitting room and arranged themselves
on the furniture.

"I must say, Captain Shaeffer, that your success on Itra has surpassed
our wildest expectations. The first inkling we had was when, out of
the blue, as it were, there was your face looking out at us from the
TV screen! You should have been there for our celebration that night!
You'd been on Itra just a little over two months! You're going down in
history as one of the greatest heroes of all time!"

Capt. Shaeffer said, "I think it would be best if Ge-Ge and I were to
board your ship immediately. Her life may be in danger. Some old-line
Party men might resent her role in the revolution. Actually, she had
more to do with it than I did."

"Oh, now, I'm sure you must be exaggerating a bit on that, Captain
Shaeffer. Her life in danger? Surely, now! Speaking frankly,
Captain--and mind you, I have no personal objection at all; this is
none of my business. But she is, after all, an _Itraian_. You know
these mixed marriages--"

"I don't give a damn what you personally think," Capt. Shaeffer said.
"Is that understood once and for all? She goes."

"Of course. I was just--now don't get huffy. Of course she goes. Just
as you wish, Captain."

The angry exchange over an unknown but fearfully expected issue caused
Ge-Ge to blink back tears.

       *       *       *       *       *

A week later, Gene Gibson came for the first time to visit them. Capt.
Shaeffer inquired as to progress.

"Well, Captain, things are progressing. We are establishing a
government which will be more responsive to the will of the people
of Itra. We've had several very pleasant, informal chats with the
Party Leader, himself. Really a wonderful man. Once he got all the
facts--which were kept from him the first time we landed--he strikes
me as being quite responsible. I think we may have misjudged him. I'm
not too sure but what he isn't just the exact man to head up the new
government. We've discussed a few details on trade agreements and, I
must say, he's been very reasonable."

Capt. Shaeffer said nothing.

"Yes," Gene Gibson said, "he's really an exceptional individual.
A wealth of administrative experience. A fine grasp of practical
politics. I don't regard him as a typical Itraian at all. He feels
that, with us backing him, we can get this whole mess straightened out
in a few months."

"Mess?"

"Well, you must admit, I think, Captain Shaeffer, that you
did--well--make negotiations extremely difficult, in view of the, ah,
present temper of the populace.

"You see, Earth would like to have a stable and responsible government.
A government, that is, which can see larger issues in perspective.
Not one which must devote its full time to coping with a group of
unpatriotic anarchists running loose in the streets."

"What's he saying?" Ge-Ge asked.

"As it is now," Gene Gibson continued, "we do have several rather
difficult problems. I think we'll probably have to quarantine Itra
for a few months until the Party Leader himself can form a stable
organizational structure. Somehow news of our trade discussions have
leaked out and for some reason has resulted in a general work stoppage.
So you see? By God, I'll just come right out and say it: Shaeffer,
you've left us one hell of a mess!"

With that, Gene Gibson departed.

"What did he say?" Ge-Ge asked meekly. But Shaeffer only shook his head.

The following day, the ship's captain came to pay a courtesy call.

"A very neat piece of work, Merle. Your new assignment just came in, by
the way, on the space radio."

"New assignment? Ge-Ge and I are on our way back to Earth."

"No, you're not. We're to drop you off at Midway for transhipment to
Folger's Hill. It's a new planet. You're to be Earth representative to
the people of Folger's Hill. The first shipload of colonists arrived
about a month ago."

"I see," Capt. Shaeffer said.

"The salary's good," the ship's captain said.

"Suppose I don't want to go?"

"I've got orders to leave you at Midway. I'd want to go if I were you.
They want you out of the way for a little while. You can't fight it.
You've been appointed a General in the Defense Forces, so you're now
under military law--and it's an order."

At this point, Ge-Ge broke in to say, "How are things going in Xxla?"

General Shaeffer choked back his anger and presented the question.

"They don't tell us anything. The crew is confined to the ship."

Shamar the Worker turned to Ge-Ge. "It's going about the same," he said.

       *       *       *       *       *

A year later, General Merle S. Shaeffer's card popped out of the
computer.

"General Shaeffer's up for re-assignment."

"Who in hell is General Shaeffer?"

"Never heard of him."

The card passed upward.

"Merle Shaeffer is due for re-assignment," a man who knew the name told
the Secretary of the Over Council at lunch the following day. "There's
a new planet opened up even further away than Folger's Hill."

"He's the one who butchered the Itra assignment? Send him there.
Anything new from Itra recently, by the way?"

"Same as usual. I understand the anarchists have formed some kind of
government."

"Terrible. Terrible. Well, the less said about that the better."

A week later, again over lunch, the Secretary was told:

"I guess we needn't worry about Merle Shaeffer any more. Disappeared
from his post, he and that Itraian woman of his, a couple of weeks
after they arrived on Folger's Hill. Probably a hunting accident got
them both. Their bodies were never found. These things happen on wild
new planets."

The Secretary was silent for a long time. Then he said: "Shaeffer dead,
eh? I guess it's better that way. Well, a genius has passed, and we'll
not see his like again. Perverted, perhaps, but a genius none the less."

They drank solemnly.

"To Merle Shaeffer. You could call him a hero, so let's you and I drink
to that. No one else ever will."

They drank again.

Nothing further served to stir the Secretary's memory of Merle
Shaeffer, and he retired six months later at the end of his term. The
new Secretary was not familiar with the Itraian affair.

He had been in office just a few days less than a year when, one
morning, he arrived at his office in a furious rage. "Get me the Head
of the Defense Forces!"

"I'm sorry, sir, all the phones are tied up," his secretary said.

"What in hell do you mean, all the phones are tied up?"

"I don't know. Maybe all at once everybody just left their phones off
the hook or something."

"Why would they do that? That's ridiculous! Get a runner over after
him."

Half an hour later, the Head of the Defense Forces arrived.

"Do you know," the new Secretary demanded, "that yesterday all the
pennies went out of circulation? People apparently have been saving
them for the last couple of months. It finally showed up. All at once,
there aren't any pennies. You can't make change. Damn it, why would
those crazy idiots all decide to save their pennies at the same time?
It's not rational. Why did they do it?"

The Head of the Defense Forces said nothing.

The Secretary raved at him in anger, but the Head of the Defense Forces
did not have the heart to tell him that a hero had returned home.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Shamar's War, by Kris Neville

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SHAMAR'S WAR ***

***** This file should be named 51072.txt or 51072.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/1/0/7/51072/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
