The Project Gutenberg EBook of Psychotennis, Anyone?, by Lloyd Williams

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: Psychotennis, Anyone?

Author: Lloyd Williams

Release Date: February 16, 2016 [EBook #51232]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PSYCHOTENNIS, ANYONE? ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                         PSYCHOTENNIS, ANYONE?

                           By LLOYD WILLIAMS

                      Illustrated by DAVID STONE

           [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from
                 Galaxy Science Fiction November 1951.
         Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
         the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]




    If scientific advance changes our forms of courtship, can other
   sports be far behind? Not when telekinesis is finally perfected!


Before them the ball took a savage turn toward the player in white.
Around Grant the crowd stood up and roared, and he felt suddenly tense
and doubting. Then the player ducked, the ball shot through above him
to smash against the court wall, and he controlled the rebound to send
the sphere once more into erratic, darting flight.

"Again!" Grant felt his muscles suddenly relax with release of anxiety.
He turned to the girl. "Bee, I'm worried. It's not like Tony--does he
want to get killed? He should stop those shots, not dodge them. Are you
sure he's all right?"

"Now, Granny." The girl kept her eyes fixed on the court. "Remember,
Tony took this match for charity. He wants the crowd to have a show,
that's all. He is in splendid shape."

"No sleep," Grant went on worriedly. "I'm sure it must be that. If his
brain were alert, he'd control that ball until Slag went crazy. Without
sleep, you can't focus prop--"

"Please, Granny, _stop_!" In that instant her throbbing mind touched
his, and he caught a glimpse of the alarm in her face. She, too, felt
that something was wrong. But she tugged at his sleeve and pointed
through the screen at the oval below. "Look!"

Slag's feet were set wide apart, and his black-robed body stood square.
But his head had begun a sort of slow wobble, from side to side, as the
ball lanced in perihedral swings about the court.

"Praise Allah!" whispered Grant. "A beautiful dance! Tony's thinking
that gangster, into a coma."

The white player was in concentration, using his eyes only rarely in
shifting ever more complex movements to the sphere. Then the rhythmic
pattern had become a wild _corondo_, with Slag as its center, and the
dark figure stood hypnotized, with only spasmodic jerks of his brutal
features to mark the fear in his mind.

"Now," said Grant. His voice seemed loud in the awed silence of the
spectators. "Now, Tony! Call it a day!"

"Just touch him," whispered Bee. "Don't hurt him, Tony."

It was as if they had signaled the player, even through the tele-proof
screen. Gradually the wild swings of the ball slowed. It circled Slag
gently, dropped closer, and poised above him. Tony's mind was clearly
in full control of the sensitive sphere.

In a seat behind Grant, an excited man suddenly yelled, "Thumbs
down, hard!" Obviously the crowd was ready to sacrifice its erstwhile
hero.

Then--the ball moved, a small movement, and there was a roar.
Uninfluenced, the ball dropped and rolled to the center court, and Tony
stood in bewilderment as Slag shook himself awake.

Grant leaped up and tried to push through to the box exit. Behind him,
Bee clung. "Granny, what will you do? What can you...."

He shook her off and answered her with his mind as he struggled on.
"Stop them, that's what! End the match."

"How? You know you cannot!"

But he felt her mind cling at the hope, and sent back reassurance. "_I_
can. They may not like it, but _I_ can stop these matches. Don't worry,
I'll get your brother safely out of there."

She was relieved. Knowledge of his position--his relation to the
sport--he felt her memory produce the reasons. _Sport_, thought
Grant. _I invented a sport. Oh, Allah! What has my sport become?_

And then her mind shrieked at him, stabbed at his brain: "Tony--Tony
darling!"

Dazedly he heard the moan and fought a path to the transparent screen.
Out on the court lay a white figure, outspread, and the ball rolled
slowly past the dripping head.

"Too late!" sobbed Bee. "Too late! Tony...."

       *       *       *       *       *

Somehow she was down there before Grant. He saw her, huddled over
Tony's body, as he finally reached an open gate in the domed screen.
On the opposite edge of the court, Psycho-sport Commissioner Woods was
in conversation with the referee, Harmon. A flash bulb glowed. Three
reporters looked at the fallen player and spoke casually to each other.
Towering above the group was Slag, staring down as if surprised.

Grant went first to the Commissioner, who adopted a defensive attitude
immediately, throwing up his hands.

"Don't jump on _me_, now. It seems I am helpless. Ask Harmon yourself.
There was nothing wrong that he could see."

"That's nonsense," said Grant, "and you know it. No matter who it is,
a ball will not smash into an awake player. It simply cannot be done.
Even a novice can overcontrol his opponent at that range."

"Right. It couldn't have happened." Sarcasm indicated the worry felt by
Woods. "Damn it, Lane, that's the way it is. Harmon watched like a hawk
in his bubble. The dome was sealed; not a single leak. Slag's second
crouched behind the shield and never moved. I personally supervised
Anthony's examination. He was in perfect condition. The only thing yet
to check is the ball, but the ball...."

"You have it? Never mind, no ball invented could do that alone. Tony
could handle any ball, even without the new sensitive core. And in a
hundred games every day, they don't ever have this sort of accident."

"Just when Slag plays." The Commissioner touched Grant's arm
helplessly. "The force of the man's mind must be terrible, Lane. He
must be a superman. But what am I going to do? If I outlaw him without
legal grounds...." He stopped, gulped nervously.

"There may be no grounds from your point of view and theirs." Grant
gestured at the crowd struggling through the exits. "But there are from
mine. If I'm to remain Honorary President of the Association, Slag has
got to go. That's final!"

Woods said, "Lane, you could stop this another way. If you don't, and
you put Slag out, they will think...." But Grant was already hurrying
over to Bee Anthony.

More people joined the group and talk died away as uniformed men bent
down to the prone figure. Bee sobbed in Grant's arms. Her mind was
withdrawn, grieving, and he patted her awkwardly while he thought of
how much these young twins had come to mean to him in the years since
he began his research in metaphysics. Just children, they had seemed at
first. He had been young. Doctor Lane, graduate of '52 on fellowship,
and they were the kids he had worked with, who had shown remarkable
powers of the mind.

Tony and himself--they had formulated the methods which still governed
the cultivation of telekinesis. Grant had discovered--the principles,
but it was the successful results of the Anthony boy's training
which paved the way for others to learn. Yet Bee was different. No
amount of tutoring could help her influence an object with her mind.
Different, but not inferior, for Bee was a telepath. With intimates
her conversation was most strange--much of it understood, yet left
unspoken.

Grant was one of the intimates. Her silent sorrow would have found him
at any distance, but now he tried to evade it, because Tony was gone
and Woods had come over to face the reporters--and Slag.

"Mister Woods," began one of the men, but the Commissioner raised a
hand and turned to the giant player.

"You have had my personal warning, Slag. Do you think I will allow you
to carry on your ugly career? Why, man, you're lucky the courts have
not ruled you a murderer!"

"It's not my fault," Slag said. "I didn't _try_ to smash him, honest. I
don't know my own strength, I guess."

Bee's reddened eyes stared at the man, and Grant whispered, "Darling,
can you tell?"

"You know their minds are closed to me. I just feel ... something
_evil_. I must get out of here. Please, Grant, take me away."

Behind Slag the little blond man Teagle, manager and second of the
professional, spoke up. "Like Slag says, Commissioner, it isn't his
fault. These fast-thinking players match him, get him all excited in
the court, and then wonder why they get knocked down. They just don't
have the stuff to match a champ."

"Slag is the only man ever warned to pull his shots," agreed a
reporter who was taking notes.

"Gentlemen!" Woods turned to Grant. "All of us here respect the opinion
of Dr. Lane, who brought this sport into being and who is, in my
estimation, its greatest exponent. I have consulted with him. If he is
to retain any connection whatever with the game, he informs me, Slag
must get out."

There was silence. The men stared first at the florid-faced
Commissioner, then at Grant.

"More than personal considerations are involved," added Woods. "Slag's
brutal style of play, according to Dr. Lane, endangers the entire
future of this grand sport."

The black-robed player looked around for support. Little Teagle pushed
in front of the Commissioner. "You mean that has-been," he pointed at
Grant, "is trying to get rid of my boy? It ain't fair, I say. Even when
he tries to take it easy, Slag has it tough. They're scared, and won't
match us--even these amateurs. And yet look what we've done to pep the
game up!"

"You may be right, Mister Teagle. All things considered, however, I
feel the merit of Dr. Lane's suggest--"

"Who is this Lane?" The little man's face was fierce. "So he starts the
game, and invents the ball, so what? They used to call him a champ,
the _master_, but that's a long time ago. Now that he's out, he don't
like Slag coming up so strong. It kills him that he ain't the best any
more."

"That will be all for tonight. In the morning I'll have an official
release ready." The reporters were tense, anxious to miss nothing.
"And, gentlemen, you have a good idea of the nature of that statement."

"Wait! I'm telling you," said Teagle. "We've tried to get a match with
this Lane. Here it is, boys, the real truth. The guy wants Slag out
because he's scared to meet him. Right here and now we challenge him!
And I bet he hasn't got the guts to take us up."

"I feel," said Woods, "that a scientist like Dr. Lane should not be
subjected to this ... this insolence."

The reporters ran toward the exit, eager to call in this news break.

Grant said nothing. Aware of Bee's feelings, he shot a look of contempt
at Teagle and turned. Yet he knew, as they walked slowly away, that
behind him were no feelings of good will. At best, the men awaited his
next move--and until then suspended judgment.

       *       *       *       *       *

In three days the city became for Grant Lane a savage jungle. The
papers shrieked at him Teagle's endless insults, Slag's boastful
challenge. Each statement by the Commissioner cleverly shifted more
responsibility from Woods to himself, and the tragic end of yet
another match was played down until it appeared that Slag, and not his
opponent, was the injured party.

After all, was his crowd-convincing argument, did they jail
professional fighters in the old days when one was killed? Just a
little accident in the heat of fair contest; it was no more than
that. Yet there _was_ more, this time. People appeared unsatisfied,
disapproving of Grant, as if he should offer himself as a sacrifice
to their sympathy with Slag. The one time he went restlessly into the
streets, they watched him sullenly, waiting....

He kept to his apartment after that, and studied furiously. No man
_could_ overcontrol an awake opponent in a direct shot--if the ball was
all right. As the ball closed in, the approached player's influence
grew proportionately stronger, while his opponent's lessened in inverse
ratio. That was the reason Grant had originally declared the sport to
be safe.

He interrupted his work only briefly for Tony's funeral, and felt an
obscure shame in facing Bee Anthony. Then the cellular organism of
the sphere used in the game absorbed his attention again. It was an
artificially nurtured nerve-center, a growth devised by himself, and
seemed to offer the only possible answer. _Perhaps this sub-life had
acquired learning ability--the ability to act independently._ It seemed
absurd, and yet how much was really known of this highly irritable
stuff called living matter?

Bee found him at his apartment the fourth morning. She seemed much more
relaxed. "Tony hated useless grief," she said. "I had to come here,
Granny. I had to know that we might see the end of all this."

"Yes." Grant still felt a vague shame. "We'll have to stop Slag short,
before he adds any more victims."

"Oh, it's more than that! It's the people, too, and the knowledge that
more Slags may appear. If all the matches suddenly...." She broke off,
frowning, as if uncertain whether to continue. "You see, Granny, Tony
decided to play because of that. It wasn't even the charities, really.
The people distrust you. Not just because you were wrong, but because
they are suspicious of any probing into the powers of mind. They prefer
fantasy to scientific hypothesis, and now Slag's triumphs...." She
faltered, and unhappily twisted her face away.

"But Tony could have crushed Slag, too."

"You know that was different. He had Slag hypnotized first. But Tony
was awake when the ball struck!"

"You're right, Bee. Frankly, I don't know what the answer could be. I'm
working on the core of the ball. There is a chance--"

"I'm sure it was something else! Granny, have you thought of the
screen? There must have been a leak, or a failure. Think of that crowd,
hoping for their hero. Suppose they subconsciously influenced the
sphere, directed it at Tony."

He thought of the mob's reaction when Slag was helpless, and kept
silent. It would be cruel to blast her one hope with nothing to offer
in exchange.

"You think I'm wrong, but what else would it be? The ball couldn't kill
Tony by itself." Then she was in tears. "I should have been there to
stop it. He wouldn't take a second--I begged him to let me--and I would
have _sensed_ any outside influence!"

Grant recognized the guilt feelings she was suffering from. He tried
to give comfort, but suddenly she was a woman, proud and independent,
and would not stay. Only at the door for one moment did she turn
appealingly to him.

"Granny, you're not going to play Slag!"

"Do you want me to? Should I obey the roar of the mob? And look!" He
gestured at one of the papers, where a center-page box proclaimed,
'Commissioner Rules Out Lane-Slag Match.' "At thirty-seven they say I'm
too old to play."

"Don't do it, Grant." He felt her conflicting, torn emotions. "Yet, the
funny thing is, I don't think I could live if they allow Slag to go on
and on."

       *       *       *       *       *

Grant's apartment was ill-equipped for working with micro-organisms.
So, although preliminary study opened up no encouraging line of
experimentation, next day he transferred his work to the university
laboratories. He found his colleagues friendly--one had cheerfully
handled Grant's lectures during his absence--but reserved, as if they
suspected him to be guilty of some terrible sin, yet hoped he might
prove himself innocent.

Barker, the bio-chemist, listened to his theory of the probability of
change in the nerve center of the ball. "I have not worked with these
cultures," he said. "You claim they are artificially produced solely
to provide a focal receptor for the controlling minds. Are the cells
non-reproductive?"

"Yes. You see, the structure must be stable. Any mind can provide the
necessary power to move light objects short distances, but focusing
that power is the difficulty. Hence the sensitive core. The operator
can _sense_ where to direct his will."

Barker reflected a moment. "So the culture is purely static--doesn't
even amplify the influence. In that case, I can only visualize such
changes as natural radiation might bring about. No hope there for a
recurrent pattern of change."

"Learning ability--acquisition of power to act voluntarily--I thought
the answer might be in that."

"We'll see. Might as well begin there, anyway. Get us a few of the
balls, Lane, and I'm sure the staff will gladly try to help out."

That evening Grant walked onto the court of the Colliseum and was made
certain of the city's anger toward him. Bee's idea was worth testing,
and he had brought with him some student telepaths, but the instant
he appeared the crowd rose in a storm of fury. When the announcer
requested spectators to direct the ball at Grant, their wrath gave
way to cheers, and they concentrated hopefully on crushing him. But
the screen held, the telepaths sensed no invading influence as Grant
whirled the ball about the court, until in disgust he signaled for the
screen to be deactivated.

Instantly the will of the crowd took hold. The sphere jerked
erratically until concerted influence steadied it opposite Grant. Then
it flashed into motion, a heavy, deadly missile, with all the mind
power of a mob driving it murderously across the court at him.

He stopped it easily, six inches away.

       *       *       *       *       *

Barker said, "No use seeking further. We may not know everything living
organisms can do, but we can certainly tell what is beyond their power.
The tests are conclusive."

Lorms, the behaviorist, nodded his head.

For just an instant Grant felt confused, helpless. His original
arguments for psychosport were proved valid, but the killings became
even more inexplicable--they were logically impossible! And, somehow,
that made _him_ the criminal.

That left him only one thing to do.

It was humiliating to accept such a solution to his personal problem.
He thought of Bee Anthony and nearly turned back. Only since the
tragedy had he realized how changed was their relationship--and how
important she was to him. Would she scorn his action, think him a
slave to public pressure? Probably, but Grant forced his steps onward.

In the lobby of the Page-Horton, Bee caught him by the arm. "Since
when," she asked, "do you walk grimly past your friends?... No, Grant.
Don't bother to think up a story. I know where you are going."

He wanted to chase her away--and to pull her close to him. But she
glanced up and laughed. "You look _so_ perplexed and silly. Professor
Lorms called me, and of course I knew what you'd do."

"Do you think," said Grant, "that I should, Bee? Is it right?"

"Darling, fighting results from frustration and breeds even more
frustration and anger. But somehow men get cornered until--well, they
_have_ to. Not Tony. He was a gay fool, tilting at windmills. Oh,
Grant! I know you're wrong, but you're right, too, and inside I'm so
glad!"

He wanted to erase the worry behind her gladness, to smother it with
reassurance. They went up together to Slag's suite. Teagle was at the
door. "Glad to see you, Mahomet," he said to Grant. "The contract's all
ready to sign. I guess you'll want _your_ cut for charity, eh?"

"You won't, I suppose."

"Not on your life. Excuse the double meaning, Miss." He smirked at
Bee. "I ask you, who's going to match us after we knock this one off?"

Slag stared glumly from a chair, not even removing his hand from the
glass beside him. "Practicing," he said. "Getting into shape for our
tussle, Doc. Like Teagle said, you had to come across."

Grant took the papers from the manager, filled in the blanks and signed.

"Don't talk much, this Doc Lane," said Slag. "Should I show him,
Teagle?"

"Sure thing. Watch this practice, Doc."

The big man concentrated on the amber bottle beside him. Slowly,
jerkily, it lifted--one inch, then two. Slag relaxed, and watched it
ring as it fell to the table. "My job when I retire," he said. "Got to
pour it right into the glass. Pretty hot, eh?"

Grant gave no warning. The man's trousers were deluged as the glass
shattered in his hand. He leaped up cursing, and then moved quickly and
with ugly purpose toward his visitors.

"Careful, boy," warned Teagle. "There's a dame present."

For fifteen seconds Grant's eyes were locked with Slag's. He looked
into their red-rimmed hatred, fought to see the depths of the man.
Then, just before the other turned away, an unreasoning, unexpected
emotion surged in Grant. It swept over and left him shaken, all in that
instant.

The emotion was fear.

       *       *       *       *       *

Out on the court it was anger he felt, anger at Slag, who stood
opposite and bowed to the noisy throng, anger at Teagle, who chanted
insults until ordered behind the second's shield, at the spectators,
packing the Colliseum in hopes of seeing a player maimed or killed--and
Bee Anthony, even at Bee.

She had defied him, bribed her way in to act as his second, and had
slipped behind the shield at his side of the court. In front of those
jeering faces, it was out of the question to make her leave.

There was a roar as the ball dropped from the referee's overhead
bubble. Grant left it to Slag, let the man shoot crudely several times,
and fought to calm himself. The shots were forceful, but easily stopped
and returned. It was like Tony's match, almost too slow at first. Until
the players became absorbed, it was hopeless to attempt any kind of
hypnotic effects with the ball.

Slag swung the sphere into rapid circles about the court. The crowd
watched silently, as if impressed by the player's control. To Grant
it was absurd--he knew that any trained child could execute the
movements. And yet, Tony must have felt so, too. But that was before--

The ball dropped on him like a hawk, and he almost laughed. To give
the gasping crowd a thrill, he barely deflected the shot, and feigned
amazement. Slag retrieved control.

Beneath the sudden amusement, Grant was uneasy. Slag had never won a
_real_ victory--never dazed or hypnotized an opponent before striking.
All his triumphs rested on single, smashing thrusts. How was it
possible? With such clumsy control, the professional could never set up
a victory--yet the record stood. Grant could not fathom the problem. If
the match went on forever, he could see no way for Slag to drop him.
And if he quickly whirled Slag into dazed defeat, the real mystery
might never be solved. His opponent would merely have suffered defeat
in a match not even recognized by the Commission.

Now he could guess why Tony had played carelessly. It was not only
victory that was sought. He had deluded himself in accepting such an
irresponsible way out. The whole affair depressed him, knotted itself
into mind-snaring tangles. The ball blurred again and he hardly cared,
only ducking to let it splat against the shield behind him. A spurt of
rage sent the sphere spinning back at Slag, but the other diverted it
easily into a screen-hugging orbit.

Tony, Slag, Woods and Teagle--they seemed to merge confusedly in his
mind. They stood, each in turn, at the door of an iron-barred cell. For
Grant, there was no way out. Win or lose, live or die, he was doomed.
The light dimmed in the cell. Just for an instant Bee appeared, her
hair throwing off sparks of brilliance. She, too, faded out. Neither
Bee the child, whom he did not love, nor Bee the woman, who did not
love him, could save him. Before him gaped the bottomless pit of shame
and penance. He had unloosed a monster on the world. He had to pay for
that.

But first Grant had another debt to pay. He tried to throw off the
depression, imagining as he did so a sob of joy in the disembodied Bee.
He wrested the sweeping ball from Slag, even from the opposite end of
the court. He spun it in wild orbits and compensated for the other's
furious thrusts. Faster and faster he circled it. Slag's mind could not
keep up the pace. The even swings acquired a jogging pattern, edged
farther out--to within ten feet of Slag. A quick break lanced behind
the man, out again, and then the sphere fell into helical loops, thrice
differentiated by harmonic variations, and swept wide around the court.

Somehow Slag's distress gave Grant no pleasure. Defeat seemed to face
him everywhere; he read it in his opponent's twisted features, even in
the futile effort to withdraw attention from the ball. _It's no good_,
he thought. _I have failed all along._

Savagely he worked the sphere. He would do it quickly. There was no
use expecting Tony's fate. The ball darted again for Slag and this
time there could be no interference. It became pure mathematics, the
motion, complicated far beyond Tony's simple _corondo_, a flashing
three-dimensional blur of color. He could not keep it up. The
concentration brought an invading blackness to his mind. Somewhere
there was a dull roar, and he felt as if his own mind were cracking.
His nerves quivered to put an end to it, to touch Slag with the ball.
Slowly, cautiously, he brought the sphere down....

Slag was not there!

He gaped. His eyes suddenly found the crumpled heap across the court,
and relief swept ever him. The man was beaten, in a state of collapse,
and there was nothing more Grant could do.

"Grant!" Bee screamed. "Oh, no! Grant darling, look up!"

Her radiance was almost blinding. He half-twisted to reach her, and
then his eyes caught it--the ugly sheen of the fast-growing ball.
Desperately he turned, and it shifted in unison. Then she shrieked
once more, despairingly, and he threw himself flat, arms outstretched,
toward her.

The ball's speed was so great that it shattered to pieces against the
shield behind him.

From back of the barrier ran Bee. She crouched beside him, and her
enveloping warmth lifted the evil spell from his mind. The loud
confusion of the crowd burst upon him, he saw the referee's swiftly
lowering bubble. He was in control of himself, thanks to Bee's
interference, and could act on the knowledge so dangerously gained.

"The murderer!" Grant pulled Bee up with him. "We've got him!"

Opposite them, Slag still lay on the court.

"I don't see how he did it," Grant said bewilderedly.

"Not Slag--_him_!" She pointed out the small, running figure.

Teagle battered vainly at a gate. The still-active screen held him
back, and the man's face was a despairing white grimace. Then Grant was
upon him, and took him by the throat.

       *       *       *       *       *

Woods paced the dressing room, still confused. "I begin to see," he
said, "but what can I do with the two of them?"

"Stop worrying." Grant was curt. "You can do nothing. The law will take
Teagle, and without him Slag is just another bum."

"He never knew," marveled Bee. "Slag never knew how he won."

"I am to blame." Grant thought of the surging fear Teagle had directed
in him at Slag's hotel. "I should have known that telepsychical
phenomena could be used as a weapon. The man is a freak. He couldn't
influence the ball, but communicated overpowering emotion--without even
seeing his subjects--from behind his shield. The victims committed
suicide, just as I nearly did before Bee...."

"What did you feel--a so-called called death wish?" asked Woods. "No
matter. Not seeing Slag collapse, he overplayed his hand."

"Slag's being unconscious merely provided an anti-climax," said Grant.
"There was a more important factor added this time. And if you don't
mind, Woods, I have an apology to make in private to my one and only
second."

"Not just the only one, darling," said Bee. "But your permanent,
till-death-do-us-part second! Right?"

"Right!" Grant said.

"That's the only thing tonight," said Woods, "of which I officially
approve."





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Psychotennis, Anyone?, by Lloyd Williams

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PSYCHOTENNIS, ANYONE? ***

***** This file should be named 51232.txt or 51232.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/1/2/3/51232/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
