The Project Gutenberg EBook of Syndrome Johnny, by Charles Dye

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: Syndrome Johnny

Author: Charles Dye

Release Date: February 16, 2016 [EBook #51231]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SYNDROME JOHNNY ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                            Syndrome Johnny

                            BY CHARLES DYE

                          Illustrated by EMSH

           [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from
                   Galaxy Science Fiction July 1951.
         Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
         the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]




          The plagues that struck mankind could be attributed
              to one man. But was he fiend ... or savior?


The blood was added to a pool of other blood, mixed, centrifuged,
separated to plasma and corpuscles, irradiated slightly, pasteurized
slightly, frozen, evaporated, and finally banked. Some of the plasma
was used immediately for a woman who had bled too much in childbirth.

She died.

Others received plasma and did not die. But their symptoms changed,
including a syndrome of multiple endocrine unbalance, eccentricities of
appetite and digestion, and a general pattern of emotional disturbance.

An alert hospital administrator investigated the mortality rise and
narrowed it to a question of who had donated blood the week before.
After city residents were eliminated, there remained only the signed
receipts and thumbprints of nine men. Nine healthy unregistered
travelers poor enough to sell their blood for money, and among them a
man who carried death in his veins. The nine thumbprints were broadcast
to all police files and a search began.

The effort was futile, for there were many victims who had sickened and
grown partially well again without recognizing the strangeness of their
illness.

Three years later they reached the carrier stage and the epidemic
spread to four cities. Three more years, and there was an epidemic
which spread around the world, meeting another wave coming from the
opposite direction. It killed two out of four, fifty out of a hundred,
twenty-seven million out of fifty million. There was hysteria where
it appeared. And where it had not appeared there were quarantines to
fence it out. But it could not be fenced out. For two years it covered
the world. And then it vanished again, leaving the survivors with a
tendency toward glandular troubles.

Time passed. The world grew richer, more orderly, more peaceful.

A man paused in the midst of his work at the U.N. Food and Agriculture
Commission. He looked up at the red and green production map of India.

"Just too many people per acre," he said. "All our work at improving
production ... just one jump ahead of their rising population, one jump
ahead of famine. Sometimes I wish to God there would be another plague
to give us a breathing spell and a fair chance to get things organized."

He went back to work and added another figure.

Two months later, he was one of the first victims of the second plague.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the dining hall of a university, a biochemical student glanced up
from his paper to his breakfast companion. "You remember Johnny, the
mythical carrier that they told about during the first and second
epidemics of Syndrome Plague?"

"Sure. Syndrome Johnny. They use that myth in psychology class as a
typical example of mass hysteria. When a city was nervous and expecting
the plague to reach them, some superstitious fool would imagine he saw
Syndrome Johnny and the population would panic. Symbol for Death or
some such thing. People imagined they saw him in every corner of the
world. Simultaneously, of course."

It was a bright morning and they were at a window which looked out
across green rolling fields to a towering glass-brick building in the
distance.

The student who had gone back to his paper suddenly looked up again.
"Some Peruvians here claim they saw Syndrome Johnny--"

"Idiotic superstition! You'd think it would have died down when the
plague died."

The other grinned. "The plague didn't die." He folded his newspaper
slowly, obviously advancing an opening for a debate.

His companion went on eating. "Another of your wild theories, huh?"
Then through a mouthful of food: "All right, if the plague didn't die,
where did it go?"

"Nowhere. _We have it now._ We all have it!" He shrugged. "A virus
catalyst of high affinity for the cells and a high similarity to a
normal cell protein--how can it be detected?"

"Then why don't people die? Why aren't we sick?"

"Because we have sickened and recovered. We caught it on conception
and recovered before birth. Proof? Why do you think that the countries
which were known as the Hungry Lands are now well-fed, leisured,
educated, advanced? Because the birth rate has fallen! Why has the
birth rate fallen?" He paused, then very carefully said, "Because two
out of three of all people who would have lived have died before birth,
slain by Syndrome Plague. We are all carriers now, hosts to a new
guest. And"--his voice dropped to a mock sinister whisper--"with such a
stranger within our cells, at the heart of the intricate machinery of
our lives, who knows what subtle changes have crept upon us unnoticed!"

His companion laughed. "Eat your breakfast. You belong on a horror
program!"

       *       *       *       *       *

A police psychologist for the Federated States of The Americas was
running through reports from the Bureau of Social Statistics. Suddenly
he grunted, then a moment later said, "Uh-huh!"

"Uh-huh what?" asked his superior, who was reading a newspaper with his
feet up on the desk.

"Remember the myth, of Syndrome Johnny?"

"Ghost of Syndrome Plague. Si, what of it?"

"Titaquahapahel, Peru, population nine hundred, sent in a claim that he
turned up there and they almost caught him. Crime Statistics rerouted
the report to Mass Phenomena, of course. Mass Phenomena blew a tube and
sent their folder on Syndrome Johnny over here. Every report they ever
had on him for ninety years back! A memo came with it." He handed the
memo over.

The man behind the desk looked at it. It was a small graph and some
mathematical symbols. "What is it?"

"It means," said the psychologist, smiling dryly, "that every crazy
report about our ghost has points of similarity to every other crazy
report. The whole business of Syndrome Johnny has been in their 'funny
coincidence' file for twenty years. This time the suspect hits the
averaged description of Johnny too closely: A solid-looking man,
unusual number of visible minor scars, and a disturbing habit of
bending his fingers at the first-joint knuckles when he is thinking.
The coincidence has gotten too damn funny. There's a chance we've been
passing up a crime."

"An extensive crime," said the man at the desk softly. He reached
for the folder. "Yes, a considerable quantity of murder." He leafed
through the folder and then thought a while, looking at the most recent
reports. Thinking was what he was paid for, and he earned his excellent
salary.

"This thumbprint on the hotel register--the name is false, but the
thumbprint looks real. Could we persuade the Bureau of Records to give
their data on that print?"

"Without a warrant? Against constitutional immunity. No, not a chance.
The public has been touchy about the right to secrecy ever since that
police state was attempted in Varga."

"How about persuading an obliging judge to give a warrant on grounds of
reasonable suspicion?"

"No. We'd have the humanist press down on our necks in a minute, and
any judge knows it. We'd have to prove a crime was committed. No crime,
no warrant."

"It seems a pity we can't even find out who the gentleman is," the
Crimes Department head murmured, looking at the thumbprint wistfully.
"No crime, no records. No records, no evidence. No evidence, no proof
of crime. Therefore, we must manufacture a small crime. He was attacked
and he must have defended himself. Someone may have been hurt in the
process." He pushed a button. "Do you think if I send a man down there,
he could persuade one of the mob to swear out a complaint?"

"That's a rhetorical question," said the psychologist, trying to work
out an uncertain correlation in his reports. "With that sort of mob
hysteria, the town would probably give you an affidavit of witchcraft."

       *       *       *       *       *

"Phone for you, Doctor Alcala." The nurse was crisp but quiet, smiling
down at the little girl before vanishing again.

Ricardo Alcala pushed the plunger in gently, then carefully withdrew
the hypodermic needle from the little girl's arm. "There you are,
Cosita," he said, smiling and rising from the chair beside the white
bed.

"Will that make me better, Doctor?" she piped feebly.

He patted her hand. "Be a good girl and you will be well tomorrow." He
walked out into the hospital corridor to where the desk nurse held out
a phone.

"Alcala speaking."

The voice was unfamiliar. "My deepest apologies for interrupting your
work, Doctor. At this late hour I'm afraid I assumed you would be at
home. The name is Camba, Federation Investigator on a health case. I
would like to consult you."

Alcala was tired, but there was nothing to do at home. Nita was at the
health resort and Johnny had borrowed all his laboratory space for a
special synthesis of some sort, and probably would be too busy even
to talk. Interest stirred in him. This was a Federation investigator
calling; the man's work was probably important. "Tonight, if that's
convenient. I'll be off duty in five minutes."

Thirty minutes later they were ordering in a small cantina down the
street from the hospital.

Julio Camba, Federation Investigator, was a slender, dark man with
sharp, glinting eyes. He spoke with a happy theatrical flourish.

"Order what you choose, Senor. We're on my expense account. The
resources of the Federated States of all The Americas stand behind your
menu."

Alcala smiled. "I wouldn't want to add to the national debt."

"Not at all, Senor. The Federated States are only too happy thus to
express a fraction of their gratitude by adding a touch of luxury to
the otherwise barren and self-sacrificing life of a scientist."

"You shame me," Alcala said dryly. It was true that he needed
every spare penny for the health of Nita and the child, and for the
laboratory. A penny saved from being spent on nourishment was a penny
earned. He picked up the menu again and ordered steak.

The investigator lit a cigar, asking casually: "Do you know John
Osborne Drake?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Alcala searched his memory. "No. I'm sorry...." Then he felt for the
first time how closely he was being watched, and knew how carefully his
reaction and the tone of his voice had been analyzed. The interview was
dangerous. For some reason, he was suspected of something.

Camba finished lighting the cigar and dropped the match into an
ash-tray. "Perhaps you know John Delgados?" He leaned back into the
shadowy corner of the booth.

Johnny! Out of all the people in the world, how could the government be
interested in him? Alcala tried to sound casual. "An associate of mine.
A friend."

"I would like to contact the gentleman." The request was completely
unforceful, undemanding. "I called, but he was not at home. Could you
tell me where he might be?"

"I'm sorry, Senor Camba, but I cannot say. He could be on a business
trip." Alcala was feeling increasingly nervous. Actually, Johnny was
working at his laboratory.

"What do you know of his activities?" Camba asked.

"A biochemist." Alcala tried to see past the meditative mask of the
thin dark face. "He makes small job-lots of chemical compounds. Special
bug spray for sale to experimental plantations, hormone spray for
fruits, that sort of thing. Sometimes, when he collects some money
ahead, he does research."

Camba waited, and his silence became a question. Alcala spoke
reluctantly, anger rising in him. "Oh, it's genuine research. He has
some patents and publications to his credit. You can confirm that if
you choose." He was unable to keep the hostility out of his voice.

A waiter came and placed steaming platters of food on the table. Camba
waited until he was gone. "You know him well, I presume. Is he sane?"

The question was another shock. Alcala thought carefully, for any man
might be insane in secret. "Yes, so far as I know." He turned his
attention to the steak, but first took three very large capsules from a
bottle in his pocket.

"I would not expect that a doctor would need to take pills," Camba
remarked with friendly mockery.

"I don't need them," Alcala explained. "Mixed silicones. I'm guinea
pigging."

"Can't such things be left to the guinea pigs?" Camba asked, watching
with revulsion as Alcala uncapped the second bottle and sprinkled a
layer of gray powder over his steak.

"Guinea pigs have no assimilation of silicones; only man has that."

"Yes, of course. I should have remembered from your famous papers, _The
Need Of Trace Silicon In Human Diet_ and _Silicon Deficiency Diseases_."

       *       *       *       *       *

Obviously Camba had done considerable investigating of Alcala before
approaching him. He had even given the titles of the research papers
correctly. Alcala's wariness increased.

"What is the purpose of the experiment this time?" asked the small dark
Federation agent genially.

"To determine the safe limits of silicon consumption and if there are
any dangers in an overdose."

"How do you determine that? By dropping dead?"

He could be right. Perhaps the test should be stopped. Every day, with
growing uneasiness, Alcala took his dose of silicon compound, and every
day, the chemical seemed to be absorbed completely--not released or
excreted--in a way that was unpleasantly reminiscent of the way arsenic
accumulated without evident damage, then killed abruptly without
warning.

Already, this evening, he had noticed that there was something faulty
about his coordination and weight and surface sense. The restaurant
door had swung back with a curious lightness, and the hollow metal
handle had had a curious softness under his fingers. Something merely
going wrong with the sensitivity of his fingers--?

He tapped his fingertips on the heavy indestructible silicone plastic
table top. There was a feeling of heaviness in his hands, and a feeling
of faint rubbery _give_ in the table.

Tapping his fingers gently, his heavy fingers ... the answer was
dreamily fantastic. _I'm turning into silicon plastic myself_, he
thought. But how, why? He had not bothered to be curious before, but
the question had always been--what were supposedly insoluble silicons
doing assimilating into the human body at all?

Several moments passed. He smoothed back his hair with his oddly heavy
hand before picking up his fork again.

"I'm turning into plastic," he told Camba.

"I beg your pardon?"

"Nothing. A joke."

Camba was turning into plastic, too. Everyone was. But the effect was
accumulating slowly, by generations.

       *       *       *       *       *

Camba lay down his knife and started in again. "What connections have
you had with John Delgados?"

_Concentrate on the immediate situation._ Alcala and Johnny were
obviously in danger of some sort of mistaken arrest and interrogation.

As Alcala focused on the question, one errant whimsical thought
suddenly flitted through the back of his mind. In red advertising
letters: TRY OUR NEW MODEL RUST-PROOF, WATERPROOF, HEAT & SCALD
RESISTANT, STRONG--EXTRA-LONG-WEARING HUMAN BEING!

He laughed inwardly and finally answered: "Friendship. Mutual interest
in high ion colloidal suspensions and complex synthesis." Impatience
suddenly mastered him. "Exactly what is it you wish to know, Senor?
Perhaps I could inform you if I knew the reasons for your interest."

Camba chose a piece of salad with great care. "We have reason to
believe that he is Syndrome Johnny."

Alcala waited for the words to clarify. After a moment, it ceased to
be childish babble and became increasingly shocking. He remembered the
first time he had met John Delgados, the smile, the strong handclasp.
"Call me Johnny," he had said. It had seemed no more than a nickname.

The investigator was watching his expression with bright brown eyes.

Johnny, yes ... but not Syndrome Johnny. He tried to think of some
quick refutation. "The whole thing is preposterous, Senor Camba. The
myth of Syndrome Plague Johnny started about a century ago."

"Doctor Alcala"--the small man in the gray suit was tensely
sober--"John Delgados is very old, and John Delgados is not his proper
name. I have traced his life back and back, through older and older
records in Argentina, Panama, South Africa, the United States, China,
Canada. Everywhere he has paid his taxes properly, put his fingerprints
on file as a good citizen should. And he changed his name every twenty
years, applying to the courts for permission with good honest reasons
for changing his name. Everywhere he has been a laboratory worker, held
patents, sometimes made a good deal of money. He is one hundred and
forty years old. His first income tax was paid in 1970, exactly one
hundred and twenty years ago."

"Other men are that old," said Alcala.

"Other men are old, yes. Those who survived the two successive plagues,
were unusually durable." Camba finished and pushed back his plate.
"There is no crime in being long-lived, surely. But he has changed his
name five times!"

"That proves nothing. Whatever his reasons for changing his name, it
doesn't prove that he is Syndrome Johnny any more than it proves he
is the cow that jumped over the moon. Syndrome Johnny is a myth, a
figment of mob delirium."

       *       *       *       *       *

As he said it, he knew it was not true. A Federation investigator would
not be on a wild goose chase.

The plates were taken away and cups of steaming black coffee put
between them. He would have to warn Johnny. It was strange how well you
could know a man as well as he knew Johnny, firmly enough to believe
that, despite evidence, everything the man did was right.

"Why must it be a myth?" Camba asked softly.

"It's ridiculous!" Alcala protested. "Why would any man--" His voice
cut off as unrelated facts fell into a pattern. He sat for a moment,
thinking intensely, seeing the century of plague as something he had
never dreamed....

A price.

Not too high a price in the long run, considering what was purchased.
Of course, the great change over into silicon catalysis would be a
shock and require adjustment and, of course, the change must be made in
several easy stages--and those who could not adjust would die.

"Go on, Doctor," Camba urged softly. "'_Why_ would any man--'"

He tried to find a way of explaining which would not seem to have any
relationship to John Delgados. "It has been recently discovered"--but
he did not say _how_ recently--"that the disease of Syndrome Plague
was not a disease. It is an improvement." He had spoken clumsily.

"An improvement on life?" Camba laughed and nodded, but there were
bitterness and anger burning behind the small man's smile. "People
can be improved to death by the millions. Yes, yes, go on, Senor. You
fascinate me."

"We are stronger," Alcala told him. "We are changed chemically. The
race has been improved!"

"Come, Doctor Alcala," Camba said with a sneering merriment, "the
Syndrome Plagues have come and they have gone. Where is this change?"

Alcala tried to express it clearly. "We are stronger. Potentially, we
are tremendously stronger. But we of this generation are still weak
and ill, as our parents were, from the shock of the change. And we
need silicone feeding; we have not adjusted yet. Our illness masks our
strength." He thought of what that strength would be!

Camba smiled and took out a small notebook. "The disease is connected
with silicones, you say? The original name of John Delgados was John
Osborne Drake. His father was Osborne Drake, a chemist at Dow Corning,
who was sentenced to the electric chair in 1967 for unauthorized
bacterial experiments which resulted in an accidental epidemic and
eight deaths. Dow Corning was the first major manufactury of silicones
in America, though not connected in any way with Osborne Drake's
criminal experiments. It links together, does it not?"

"It is not a disease, it is strength!" Alcala insisted doggedly.

       *       *       *       *       *

The small investigator looked up from his notebook and his smile was
an unnatural thing, a baring of teeth. "Half the world died of this
strength, Senor. If you will not think of the men and women, think of
the children. Millions of children died!"

The waiter brought the bill, dropping it on the table between them.

"Lives will be saved in the long run," Alcala said obstinately.
"Individual deaths are not important in the long run."

"That is hardly the philosophy for a doctor, is it?" asked Camba with
open irony, taking the bill and rising.

They went out of the restaurant in silence. Camba's 'copter stood at
the curb.

"Would you care for a lift home, Doctor Alcala?" The offer was made
with the utmost suavity.

Alcala hesitated fractionally. "Why, yes, thank you." It would not do
to give the investigator any reason for suspicion by refusing.

As the 'copter lifted into the air, Camba spoke with a more friendly
note in his voice, as if he humored a child. "Come, Alcala, you're a
doctor dedicated to saving lives. How can you find sympathy for a
murderer?"

Alcala sat in the dark, looking through the windshield down at the
bright street falling away below. "I'm not a practicing medico; only
one night a week do I come to the hospital. I'm a research man. I don't
try to save individual lives. I'm dedicated to improving the average
life, the average health. Can you understand that? Individuals may be
sick and individuals may die, but the average lives on. And if the
average is better, then I'm satisfied."

The 'copter flew on. There was no answer.

"I'm not good with words," said Alcala. Then, taking out his pen-knife
and unfolding it, he said, "Watch!" He put his index finger on the
altimeter dial, where there was light, and pressed the blade against
the flesh between his finger and his thumb. He increased the pressure
until the flesh stood out white on either side of the blade, bending,
but not cut.

"Three generations back, this pressure would have gone right through
the hand." He took away the blade and there was only a very tiny cut.
Putting the knife away, he brought out his lighter. The blue flame
was steady and hot. Alcala held it close to the dashboard and put his
finger directly over it, counting patiently, "One, two, three, four,
five--" He pulled the lighter back, snapping it shut.

"Three generations ago, a man couldn't have held a finger over that
flame for more than a tenth part of that count. Doesn't all this prove
something to you?"

The 'copter was hovering above Alcala's house. Camba lowered it to
the ground and opened the door before answering. "It proves only that
a good and worthy man will cut and burn his hand for an unworthy
friendship. Good night."

Disconcerted, Alcala watched the 'copter lift away into the night,
then, turning, saw that the lights were still on in the laboratory.
Camba might have deduced something from that, if he knew that Nita and
the girl were not supposed to be home.

Alcala hurried in.

Johnny hadn't left yet. He was sitting at Alcala's desk with his feet
on the wastebasket, the way Alcala often liked to sit, reading a
technical journal. He looked up, smiling. For a moment Alcala saw him
with the new clarity of a stranger. The lean, weathered face; brown
eyes with smile deltas at the corners; wide shoulders; steady, big
hands holding the magazine--solid, able, and ruthless enough to see
what had to be done, and do it.

"I was waiting for you, Ric."

"The Feds are after you." Ricardo Alcala had been running. He found he
was panting and his heart was pounding.

Delgados' smile did not change. "It's all right, Ric. Everything's
done. I can leave any time now." He indicated a square metal box
standing in a corner. "There's the stuff."

What stuff? The product Johnny had been working on? "You haven't time
for that now, Johnny. You can't sell it. They'd watch for anyone of
your description selling chemicals. Let me loan you some money."

"Thanks." Johnny was smiling oddly. "Everything's set. I won't need it.
How close are they to finding me?"

"They don't know where you're staying." Alcala leaned on the desk edge
and put out his hand. "They tell me you're Syndrome Johnny."

"I thought you'd figured that one out." Johnny shook his hand formally.
"The name is John Osborne Drake. You aren't horrified?"

"No." Alcala knew that he was shaking hands with a man who would be
thanked down all the successive generations of mankind. He noticed
again the odd white web-work of scars on the back of Johnny's hand. He
indicated them as casually as he could. "Where did you pick those up?"

       *       *       *       *       *

John Drake glanced at his hand. "I don't know, Ric. Truthfully.
I've had my brains beaten in too often to remember much any more.
Unimportant. There are instructions outlining plans and methods filed
in safety deposit boxes in almost every big city in the world. Always
the same typing, always the same instructions. I can't remember who
typed them, myself or my father, but I must have been expected to
forget or they wouldn't be there. Up to eleven, my memory is all right,
but after Dad started to remake me, everything gets fuzzy."

"After he did _what_?"

Johnny smiled tiredly and rested his head on one hand. "He had to
remake me chemically, you know. How could I spread change without
being changed myself? I couldn't have two generations to adapt to
it naturally like you, Ric. It had to be done artificially. It took
years. You understand? I'm a community, a construction. The cells that
carry on the silicon metabolism in me are not human. Dad adapted them
for the purpose. I helped, but I can't remember any longer how it was
done. I think when I've been badly damaged, organization scatters to
the separate cells in my body. They can survive better that way, and
they have powers of regrouping and healing. But memory can't be pasted
together again or regrown."

John Drake rose and looked around the laboratory with something like
triumph. "They're too late. I made it, Ric. There's the catalyst
cooling over there. This is the last step. I don't think I'll survive
this plague, but I'll last long enough to set it going for the finish.
The police won't stop me until it's too late."

       *       *       *       *       *

Another plague!

The last one had been before Alcala was born. He had not thought that
Johnny would start another. It was a shock.

Alcala walked over to the cage where he kept his white mice and looked
in, trying to sort out his feelings. The white mice looked back
with beady bright eyes, caged, not knowing they were waiting to be
experimented upon.

A timer clicked and John Delgados-Drake became all rapid efficient
activity, moving from valve to valve. It lasted a half minute or less,
then Drake had finished stripping off the lab whites to his street
clothes. He picked up the square metal box containing the stuff he had
made, tucked it under his arm and held out a solid hand again to Alcala.

"Good-by, Ric. Wish me luck. Close up the lab for me, will you?"

Alcala took the hand numbly and mumbled something, turned back to the
cages and stared blindly at the mice. Drake's brisk footsteps clattered
down the stairs.

       *       *       *       *       *

Another step forward for the human race.

God knew what wonders for the race were in that box. Perhaps something
for nerve construction, something for the mind--the last and most
important step. He should have asked.

There came at last a pressure that was a thought emerging from the
depth of intuition. _Doctor Ricardo Alcala will die in the next plague,
he and his ill wife Nita and his ill little girl.... And the name of
Alcala will die forever as a weak strain blotted from the bloodstream
of the race...._

He'd find out what was in the box by dying of it!

He tried to reason it out, but only could remember that Nita, already
sickly, would have no chance. And Alcala's family genes, in attempting
to adapt to the previous steps, had become almost sterile. It had been
difficult having children. The next step would mean complete sterility.
The name of Alcala would die. The future might be wonderful, but it
would not be _his_ future!

"Johnny!" he called suddenly, something like an icy lump hardening in
his chest. How long had it been since Johnny had left?

Running, Alcala went down the long half-lit stairs, out the back door
and along the dark path toward the place where Johnny's 'copter had
been parked.

A light shone through the leaves. It was still there.

"Johnny!"

John Osborne Drake was putting his suitcase into the rear of the
'copter.

"What is it, Ric?" he asked in a friendly voice without turning.

_It would be impossible to ask him to change his mind._ Alcala found
a rock, raised it behind Syndrome Johnny's back. "I know I'm being
anti-social," he said regretfully, and then threw the rock away.

His fist was enough like stone to crush a skull.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Syndrome Johnny, by Charles Dye

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SYNDROME JOHNNY ***

***** This file should be named 51231.txt or 51231.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/1/2/3/51231/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
