The Project Gutenberg EBook of Chain Reaction, by Boyd Ellanby

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: Chain Reaction

Author: Boyd Ellanby

Release Date: February 20, 2016 [EBook #51255]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CHAIN REACTION ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                            CHAIN REACTION

                            By BOYD ELLANBY

                         Illustrated by DOKTOR

           [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from
                Galaxy Science Fiction September 1956.
         Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
         the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]




              Would this be the last poker game--with all
              life at stake and every card a mere deuce?


MacPherson shuffled the cards over and over again. His hands were
almost steady.

"Want to place a limit on the bets?" he asked.

His two colleagues who had made the night drive with him from the
University said nothing, but Rothman laughed.

"Today?" he said. "Today, the sky's the limit."

MacPherson rested the deck on the table and watched as Rothman stood
up to look through the barred window at the glittering Arizona desert.
Rothman had got thinner during his months of confinement; his shoulders
were bony beneath the gray hospital robe and his balding head looked
like a skull.

"Are you going to play?" asked MacPherson. "Or is poker too childish an
amusement for a mathematician?"

Rothman turned his back to the window. "Oh, I'll play. When three old
friends from the Project suddenly turn up for a visit, even a madman
will string along."

Shuffling the cards again, MacPherson wished the other men would say
something; it wasn't fair of them to make him carry the conversation.
Professor Avery, who had cut his physics classes in order to join the
morning's party, sat in glum silence. His plump face was pale, and
behind thick-lensed spectacles which enlarged his eyes grotesquely, he
blinked as he watched the flickering cards. Dr. Neill, from Physical
Chemistry, was tapping his toe against the table leg, watching Rothman,
who stood at the window, waiting.

"But we can't have much of a game with only four people," said Rothman.
"We ought to have a fifth."

"Maybe we can find someone." MacPherson walked to the locked steel door
and rattled the rectangular lattice set in at shoulder height, put his
mouth to the metal bars and called out.

"Hey, Joe!"

       *       *       *       *       *

An attendant in white uniform shuffled into the corridor of closed
doors, carrying a tray with one hand and scratching his head with the
other.

"How about joining us for a game of poker?"

Joe shook his head and grinned. "Not me, Professor! I start buddying
around with the loonies, I lose my job."

"But we're not inmates!"

"Maybe not, but Dr. Rothman is."

"Doesn't prove I'm crazy, Joe," said Rothman. "Conversely, not being
inmates doesn't prove these men are sane."

"It's a fact you don't look any crazier to me than a lot of
professors," confessed Joe. "I don't know. All I know is, _I'm_
not crazy enough to break the rules and lose my job. Besides, you
long-hairs wouldn't stand a chance at poker with me."

Still grinning, he shuffled out of sight down the hall.

MacPherson sighed and went back to the table. "Well, we'll have to get
along with just the four of us."

"There's always the unseen guest," said Rothman, "but you won't need to
deal him a hand. He already holds all the cards."

Neill looked up. "Stop hamming and sit down. Quit making like a maniac.
It's not even a good act."

"Okay." Rothman drew up a chair. "Now what was said about limiting the
bets?"

"Why bother setting a limit?" said Neill. "We're not likely to mistake
each other for millionaires and we all got exactly the same pay when we
were on the Project. Unless your sick pay has had two or three zeros
tacked onto it, you're not going to be making any wild bets, and as for
the rest of us--"

"University professors are still being paid less than nightclub
dancers," said Avery. "You're lucky to be out of the rat race,
Rothman. While we worry about how to pay the grocery bill, you can
relax, eating and sleeping at government expense. You never had it so
good."

"Maybe you'd like to get yourselves committed and keep me company?"

MacPherson rapped the deck on the table. "Stop that kind of talk. We
came here to play poker."

"Did you?" asked Rothman, grinning. "Then why don't you deal?"

"Cut, Neill?" said MacPherson. As he shot the slippery cards over the
table top, each flick of his thumb watched by Rothman's intent eyes,
he regretted this impulsive visit; it now seemed a gesture without
meaning. He wondered whether the others were as nervous as he was.

On the drive over from Los Angeles during the night, Neill had seemed
calm enough and even Avery, who had changed a lot during work on the
Project, had chatted with them unconstrainedly. It was hard to be
certain what other men were feeling, even when you had known them a
long time, but it could not be pleasant for any of them to be visiting
a former colleague who had been removed from the Project directly to a
sanitarium.

"Tell me something," said Rothman as he picked up his cards. "Do you
still think I'm crazy?"

"Don't be an idiot," MacPherson snapped. "Do you think we'd cut our
classes and drive nearly five hundred miles just to play poker with a
lunatic?"

"No," said Rothman. "That's how I know. But why aren't you frank about
it? Why keep on pretending there wasn't a special reason for your
visit?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Neill was beating his foot against the table leg again and Avery's eyes
were hard and staring as he examined his cards.

"Who'll open?" MacPherson asked. "I can't."

"I can," said Rothman. "I'm betting one blue chip. Listen, Avery, why
won't you look at me? If you think I'm hamming, what do you call your
own act? How long are we going to go on kidding each other? They've
shut me up here, but that doesn't mean they've stopped me from logical
thinking. My three old friends from the Project don't turn up in the
middle of a Friday morning just to calm my fevered brain with a card
game."

"What's wrong with poker?" demanded MacPherson.

"Poker? Nothing. I know--It must be the test. Total conversion of
matter to energy. Not just a minute percentage any more--_total_
conversion. They've finished the set, haven't they? They're ready to
test. They're going to disintegrate Waaku, aren't they? It must be
today. Then this is the day the world ends. Tell me, when is zero hour?"

Neill's cards had slipped from his fingers and he stooped to the floor,
fumbling for them. Avery was bending one corner of a card, creasing it,
smoothing it out, and creasing it again. Nobody was going to answer,
MacPherson realized. They were leaving it up to him.

He spoke sharply. "You're getting onto forbidden ground, Rothman. You
know we're not allowed to discuss the Project with you. We're allowed
to visit you only under the strictest promise not to speak of it at
all. You're certainly rational enough to understand what the therapists
have told you, that you'd get well easily enough if you'd stop
worrying. Forget about zero hour. Everything's going to be all right."

Rothman turned to look out the window. "Is it today?"

"How should we know? We're only innocent bystanders now, like you.
Remember, we all left the Project over six months ago, except Avery,
and last month they let him go."

Neill had rearranged his cards now and he looked at them instead of
Rothman as he spoke. "There's nothing to worry about. Your calculations
were wrong. The test is not going to get out of control--if and when
they make it. But they don't tell us things any more."

"Since they fired you," said Rothman.

"That's right, since they fired us," Neill said. The creased corner of
a card suddenly broke off in his fingers.

"If you didn't believe in my calculations, why did you back me up? I
didn't ask you to. If you didn't believe in the danger, why didn't you
stay out of the argument and keep your jobs? It wasn't your fight. You
could have kept out of it--or attacked me, like Avery."

"All we did was insist that even if you had made a mistake in your
calculations, that didn't necessarily prove you were crazy," said
Neill. "We didn't know whether you were right or not. We couldn't argue
about the math. Avery tore that to pieces and the boys at Columbia and
Harvard backed him up. MacPherson and I aren't competent to check your
math. To us, you didn't seem any crazier than the people who sent you
here. But after you'd scared them silly, they had to do something to
stop your scaring other people."

       *       *       *       *       *

He turned to pick up his cards again, but stopped at the sight of
Avery. Avery was standing and crumpling a card spasmodically, his lips
were moving without sound, and he was breathing rapidly.

"Look here," said MacPherson. "You'd better change the subject. If
little Joe passes by the door and hears us talking about the Project,
he'll have our visiting privileges revoked before you can say nuclear
fission, and they'll stay revoked forever."

"How long is forever?" asked Rothman.

Avery threw down his cards and walked to the window. Through the bars,
there was nothing to be seen but the expanse of sand, glinting in the
morning sun, and a cactus plant casting a stubby shadow. He whirled to
face the others.

"Look, MacPherson," he burst out. "I'm fed up with this game. Snookums
Rothman mustn't think about the Project any more, so we mustn't say the
naughty word. But we were all in it together at the beginning and there
was a while when we were all every bit as scared as he was. Why not
tell him we came this morning in case--just in case--he'd heard about
the test and was worrying? What's the harm in telling him what the
whole university knows? That zero hour is today, this morning, now!"

"Shut up, you fool!" said MacPherson.

But Rothman glanced at his cards again, then looked up. "When does it
begin? What time is it now?"

"Don't answer!" shouted MacPherson. "Are you trying to knock him off
balance again?"

"I will answer!" said Avery. "I'm going to tell him. He scared us silly
with his calculations; now let us scare him with some cold facts. It'll
do him good. Maybe when the test is over, if he finds--I mean _when_ he
finds--he was wrong, he'll be cured."

"Yes, and maybe he'll really be crazy."

Grabbing Avery fiercely by the arm, MacPherson tried to drag him to the
door, but Avery broke away.

"Listen, Rothman!" Avery's breath was coming quick and shallow. "Today
is the day! Zero hour is eleven o'clock this morning!"

       *       *       *       *       *

MacPherson sagged. No one spoke or moved as they all watched Rothman.

At last Rothman sighed, once. "What time is it now?"

From the door came a scratching sound. MacPherson turned to see Joe,
grinning at them through the steel lattice.

"How's things?" Joe wanted to know. "Thought I heard a commotion in
here. Doc Rothman's not acting up, I hope?"

"Everything's under control, Joe," MacPherson assured him. "Just having
a friendly game."

"Don't cheat while they're watching you," said Joe, and his face
disappeared.

"Well, the murder's out," said MacPherson.

"No use kidding you any longer," Neill said, fanning his cards.
"Eleven o'clock this morning. Six o'clock tomorrow morning, Waaku time.
But it's just another test. Nothing's going to happen."

Avery took off his glasses and began to polish the lenses. "Any idea
of a possible chain reaction is ridiculous. As a matter of fact, I
recently spent a full week checking the math again myself, so I know.
But we knew how you felt about it, Rothman, and we didn't want you to
be worrying here all alone, in case you'd found out. That's why we
came."

Rothman was looking out the window. He did not answer. Slowly
MacPherson went back to his chair and picked up his cards. "And now how
about playing some poker? Rothman, you opened for a blue. What about
you, Neill?"

"I'm staying," said Neill, shoving in a chip. "Always was a gambler.
I'm going to stay till the cows come home."

"What time is it?" Rothman asked. "I haven't got a wristwatch. They
think I might break the crystal and cut my throat."

MacPherson slammed down his cards and jerked his watch from his pocket.
"What does it matter what time it is? Why couldn't they give you a
watch with a plastic crystal? If you have to know, it's eleven-forty."

"And thirteen seconds," added Neill.

"Then it's already started," said Rothman.

       *       *       *       *       *

He leaned his head against the back of his chair and closed his eyes.
"It's on its way now. There's somewhat more than a third of the
Earth between us and Waaku--the place where Waaku was, I mean. The
disintegration wave is moving slowly. The seismic wave of an earthquake
would get here in about fifty minutes, more or less. But the shock wave
from Waaku, traveling somewhere around five thousand miles an hour,
will need about an hour and seventeen minutes, plus or minus a minute
or so. That means it will reach us in about thirty-seven minutes from
now, and the disintegration wave is following close behind. Well, nice
to have known you, fellows. Anyone want to check my math?"

He waved toward the desk behind him, piled high with manuscript and a
sprawling heap of books on which rested a slide-rule.

"Calm down," said MacPherson. "Nothing is going to happen. Damn you,
Avery! Are you proud of what you accomplished?"

Avery glared. "It'll do him good! He's got to learn to face reality,
like the rest of us. In a little more than half an hour, the test will
be finished. The world will still be here. Rothman will have to admit
his equations were wrong--and then he'll be cured."

Rothman leaned forward. "Or contrariwise, Rothman will _not_ have to
admit he was wrong and Rothman will _not_ be cured! If I made a mistake
in my math, why couldn't anybody put his finger on it? I'm not so crazy
that I wouldn't be able to see an error in calculus when it was pointed
out to me. If you're sure my calculations are wrong, why do you look so
frightened?"

"Do we have to go over all that again?" said MacPherson. "The boys
at Columbia told you where the mistake was. It's where you inverted
that twelve-by-twelve matrix. Didn't you bother to check the inverted
matrix?"

"The same old tale." Rothman picked up his cards. "No mathematician
will ever admit that another mathematician could invent a method beyond
his comprehension. Still harping on an error in my inverted matrix.
What time is it now?"

"There's no doubt that your calculations are wrong," said Neill, "but
I still don't see why we have to insist on proving it the hard way.
With bombs, why do we need to fool around with the total disintegration
of matter? Sure, I know the new model releases a googol times the
energy you get out of uranium fission, but who cares? There's plenty of
uranium for our needs."

"The trouble with uranium is that it doesn't make a big enough bang,"
said MacPherson. "People aren't impressed by it any more. The same
goes for plutonium, even for lithium, at least for any size bomb we
can make. The idea is to show the world something so convincing that
they'll never even think of a war again. When they see every island in
the Waaku chain wiped off the map, they'll get the point."

       *       *       *       *       *

Avery creased another card and cleared his throat. "_Did_ you check the
inverted twelve-by-twelve, Rothman?"

"I suppose you think I forgot to. Have _you_ checked it?"

"Yes, I have. I may not know much math, but I did check it."

"Even after the Columbia boys said it was nonsense? Well, does it come
out right?"

"No, it doesn't! You multiply the inverted matrix by the original and
you not only don't get zeros for all elements outside the diagonal,
you get a haphazard assortment of ones and twos. Worse still, every
element in the diagonal comes out equal to zero. The product of the two
matrices is about as different from the identity matrix as anything
could be. You're one of our most brilliant mathematicians--how could
you manage to make so many mistakes in one set of calculations?"

"Did I tell you that was an inverted matrix? Maybe, for this problem,
you need something a little more advanced than algebra. Anyhow, if my
math is all wrong, why did your first report okay it?"

"What do you mean, my first report?"

"The one you sent to Prexy. The one you later called in and burned.
Except Prexy showed it to me and I photostated it. Here." Rothman
reached into the pile of papers on his desk and drew out a little
envelope. It contained photographic prints. He held one before Avery's
glasses. "Does that look familiar?"

Avery drew his hand across his forehead, but did not reply.

"Is that true, Avery?" asked MacPherson. "Did you make a report okaying
Rothman's calculations and then withdraw it?"

"Well, what if I did? The report didn't seem to make me much more
popular than Rothman was. What if some very influential people in
Government explained to Prexy, and he explained to me, just how
unpopular that first report might make me? Or suppose they didn't.
Maybe I simply didn't find the mistakes in the math until later." Avery
kept looking at his cards as he spoke.

"Oh, great," said MacPherson. "Rothman gets put away here, Neill and
I lose our jobs, and there's hell to pay in Washington, all because
Avery says Rothman's math is full of holes. Now it turns out he wasn't
sure and maybe was pressured into it. Grand. Between a screwball and a
skunk, I'll choose the screwball. Maybe if Avery had stuck to his guns,
there wouldn't have been any test."

       *       *       *       *       *

"It doesn't matter," said Rothman. "Avery was probably warned to mend
his ways. I was. Or maybe he couldn't face the truth. I'm sure he's
been much happier, the last few months, believing I'm crazy. Anyway,
I don't blame him any more. Maybe my math will soon speak for itself.
For your benefit--" he turned to Avery--"I may point out that the
errors you said you found affect only the _velocity_ of the wave of
disintegration. So what if that isn't quite right? The proof that the
reaction will be self-sustaining is independent of that."

Avery was white with rage. "The proof, as you called it, that the
reaction will be self-sustaining and will consume the entire substance
of the Earth doesn't make sense, either. You used D as an operator
where it should have been a constant. That's what finally made them
certain that you were insane."

There was a rap at the door and Joe poked his head in. "Lunch,
Professors! Twelve o'clock, high noon, like they say. How about some
turkey sandwiches?"

MacPherson began to sweat; the thought of food made him feel sick.

Was it possible, he wondered, that in spite of everything, he was not
quite sure? He looked at Neill and Avery, but they had turned their
heads away.

"We won't bother with lunch, Joe," said Rothman.

"Must be a pretty good game if you won't even knock off to eat," said
Joe. "Well, will you at least mark your menu for tomorrow?"

"For tomorrow? Tomorrow isn't going to come, you know."

"Nuts," muttered Joe as he closed and locked the door. "Pure nuts."

Avery cleared his throat, and his voice was thin. "Look here, Rothman!
If the Universe were composed of matter as unstable as you claim,
it would have ceased to exist long ago. Somewhere, somehow, in the
infinity of chance events since the creation of the Earth, something
would have occurred to start the self-sustaining chain reaction, and
all matter would have been annihilated."

"Are you trying to prove something to yourself?" asked Rothman. "Surely
you don't equate infinity with a mere four billion years. That's
a finite time--long enough for the more dangerous radioactives to
disappear completely, of course, but not long enough for all possible
chance events to have taken place. Anyway, I never have asserted that
the reaction would reach from Earth to the other planets, or even to
the Moon. The Universe, including the Solar System, will still go on.
But our old Earth is going up like a pile of magnesium powder mixed
with potassium chlorate when you drop a lighted match on it."

       *       *       *       *       *

Avery wiped his forehead. "I don't know why I keep arguing with
a lunatic. But you know yourself that the value you give for the
integration constant in those equations is a pure guess, only you
spend ten pages of doubletalk trying to hide that fact. If the constant
is the one you give, why, sure, then you get a chain reaction. But
you made it up! Who ever heard of a constant of that magnitude in the
solution of an ordinary differential equation?"

"That's one criticism of my work the Harvard and Columbia boys never
mentioned."

"Okay, then I mention it. You're crazy!"

"Are you sure?"

"Positive!"

"Then why can't you forget the approach of zero hour? I'll tell you
why and you aren't even making a good show of hiding it. You know
that, compared to mine, your knowledge of mathematics is about on a
level with that of a college sophomore. Deep down, you know that my
calculations were correct. You are convinced--_convinced_--that the
bombing of Waaku has already started a chain reaction. And that about
seventeen minutes past twelve, around eight minutes from now, the shock
wave will reach us, and then the wave of disintegration. Look out of
the window! See that cactus in the sand, with its little yellow flower?
It will be annihilated. All that desert will go, too--every pebble,
every grain of sand. Everything you see, and you yourself, will be
disintegrated, transformed into energy!"

Suddenly he relaxed into a grin and softened his voice. "I thought we
were playing poker. We're waiting for you to bet. Why don't you at
least look at your cards?"

Avery opened his mouth, then closed it, and picked up his hand,
riffling the five cards.

"I'm staying," he said. "Here's your blue and I raise you a blue."

Slowly the others picked up their hands and stared at the cards.
MacPherson scarcely looked at his as he spoke.

"I'm staying." He picked up the deck. "Cards, gentlemen?"

Rothman shook his head. "I'll play these."

Neill took two. "I like to hold a kicker," he explained.

Avery and MacPherson drew three.

"I opened," said Rothman, "and I'll bet five blue chips."

"See you and raise you a blue," Neill said.

"I'll string along," said Avery.

MacPherson threw his hand in. "I'll let you guys fight it out."

       *       *       *       *       *

They all looked at Rothman, who was studying his cards.

"I'll see you," he began, and paused. Then he shoved all of his chips
into the pot. "I'll see you and raise you a hundred blue chips."

"Damn it Rothman!" MacPherson protested. "I know we agreed on no
limit, but if you go on playing like this, you'll lose more than you
can afford."

"I've already lost everything," said Rothman, "and so have you. Don't
you know what time it is? In a few minutes, none of you will be around
to try to collect. What time is it now?"

Avery reached for his watch, then stopped.

Rothman turned his head. "What's that?"

Nobody moved.

A noise like the roar of a swift freight train rushed into the
room, rattling the windows. The walls shook, the floor trembled, the
slide-rule slid off the pile of books and clattered to the floor.

They jumped to their feet and Avery ran to the window, clutching at the
bars.

"Not yet," said Rothman calmly. "The cactus plant will still be there,
casting its little shadow. You might as well sit down and finish the
game. That was only the shock wave. Have you forgotten that it is
transmitted through the Earth faster than the wave of disintegration?
We still have a few minutes left. Isn't anybody going to see my bet?"

Avery lurched to the desk, grabbed a remnant of torn paper and
scribbled on it

"I'll see you," he yelled, "and raise you a hundred and twenty-five
billion blues!"

MacPherson walked to the window. "Look at the sky. This is it."

They all jammed against his back, trying to see the horizon, waiting.
Avery dropped the scrap of paper and covered his eyes.

"What is there to see?" Neill whispered.

"I thought--there was a flash...." MacPherson's voice trailed off, and
he rubbed his eyes.

"But I didn't see anything," said Neill. "There's nothing to see."

       *       *       *       *       *

A minute went by. The desert remained calm, the blue sky was unmarked
by even a cloud, the air was still.

A second minute went by.

Neill drew out his watch, looked wonderingly at the steady march of
the second hand. Then he turned and stumbled into the lavatory. They
could hear his dry heaves.

Rothman's eyes wavered from MacPherson to Avery, and back to
MacPherson, and he sighed.

"Looks as if I was wrong, gentlemen," he said. "Maybe I am crazy, after
all. I wonder if that integration constant could have been wrong." He
reached down to the floor to pick up the fallen slide-rule, sat down
and drew a pad of paper toward him.

MacPherson leaned against the window, too weak to move. He saw Avery
take his hands away from his eyes. He could hear the chattering of
Avery's teeth, could hear them click as he clamped them together,
trying to control his lips. It seemed a long time before Avery managed
to speak.

"_You!_" cried Avery. He lunged forward, grabbed Rothman by the
shoulder and jerked him to his feet. "This--will teach you--not to
make--mistakes--"

He smashed his fist into Rothman's face.

Still MacPherson could not move, could not even shout. He could only
listen to Avery.

"And this will teach you--not to set up matrices--that don't
multiply--that burn up--the world--"

Again Avery struck and knocked Rothman to the floor.

Breaking through his paralysis, MacPherson clutched Avery by the
shoulder, but Avery kicked at the man on the floor, again and again.

"Avery!" shouted MacPherson. "Snap out of it, man! It's all over! The
test is finished. We're still here. Rothman was wrong, just as we
always knew he was!"

But Avery was on his knees, pounding Rothman with both fists, sobbing
out meaningless words, oblivious to the shouts outside and to
MacPherson's tugging.

The door burst open and Joe rushed in, followed by two other attendants.

"What goes on?" After a glance at Avery's contorted face, Joe grabbed
for his legs. "Send for the doc, boys. We're going to need help."

       *       *       *       *       *

One of the men ran down the corridor while Joe and the others succeeded
in pulling Avery away from Rothman, who struggled to his feet. A doctor
came in with a loaded hypodermic. He gave Avery an injection in the arm.

"Go easy there," said MacPherson. "He'll be all right in a few minutes.
He's had a shock, that's all."

"Shock," Avery mumbled.

MacPherson gripped Avery's arm. "Try to relax, man. It's finished. We
never believed in it, of course. But I'll admit it's a relief, even to
me, to be _sure_ there was no danger of a chain reaction at all."

Suddenly he felt cold.

There was no understanding in Avery's eyes. He slumped to the floor.

"Do you think he'll be all right when he comes out from under the
drug?" asked MacPherson.

"I can't say," said the doctor. "I only saw him a few minutes, when
you came here this morning. I thought at the time he was pretty
disturbed. Much more than Rothman here. Next week, I think, we're going
to send Rothman home."

Rothman wiped the blood off his chin and grinned weakly. "You don't
mean that, Doc. I used the wrong integration constant in a little
calculation. I must be crazy."





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Chain Reaction, by Boyd Ellanby

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CHAIN REACTION ***

***** This file should be named 51255.txt or 51255.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/1/2/5/51255/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
