The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Cool War, by Andrew Fetler

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: The Cool War

Author: Andrew Fetler

Release Date: February 21, 2016 [EBook #51256]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE COOL WAR ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                             THE COOL WAR

                           by ANDREW FETLER

                         Illustrated by NODEL

           [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from
                   Galaxy Science Fiction June 1963.
         Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
         the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]


                  Here's what happens when two Master
                  Spies tangle ... and stay that way!


"Nothing, nothing to get upset about," Pashkov said soothingly, taking
his friend's arm as they came out of the villa forty miles from Moscow.
Pashkov looked like a roly-poly zoo attendant leading a tame bear.
"Erase his memory, give him a new name and feed him more patriotism.
Very simple."

Medvedev raised his hand threateningly. "Don't come howling to me if
everybody guesses he is nothing but a robot."

Pashkov glanced back at the house. Since the publication of _Dentist
Amigovitch_, this house had become known all over the world as Boris
Knackenpast's villa. Now the house was guarded by a company of
soldiers to keep visitors out. From an open window Pashkov heard the
clicking of a typewriter.

"It's when they're not like robots that everybody suspects them," he
said, climbing into his flier. "Petchareff will send you word when to
announce his 'death'."

"A question, brother."

"No questions."

"Who smuggled the manuscript out of Russia?"

Pashkov frowned convincingly. "Comrade Petchareff has suspected even
me."

He took off for Moscow, poking his flier up through the clouds and
flying close to them, as was his habit. Then he switched on the radio
and got Petchareff's secretary. "Nadezhda?"

"I know what you're up to, Seven One Three," Nadezhda Brunhildova said.
"Don't try to fool _me_, you confidence man. You are coming in?"

"In ten minutes. What have I done now?"

"You were supposed to make funeral arrangements for Knackenpast, so
what are you doing in Stockholm?"

"Stockholm?"

"You're lying and I'll kill you. Don't you think I know about Anastina,
that she-nurse in the Stockholm National Hospital?"

"Darling, why so cruel? Anastina is one of our contacts. Besides, she's
cross-eyed and buck-toothed."

"Beast!" She switched him to Petchareff.

"What's been keeping you, Pashkov?"

"Consoling Medvedev. Am I supposed to be in Stockholm?"

"Never mind, get here at once. What size hospital gown do you wear?"

"Hospital gown?"

"Stockholm embassy says you're in the National Hospital there. In a
hospital gown. I got through to Anastina. She says it's Colonel James
again. He looks like you now."

Pashkov grunted.

"I'll never understand," said Petchareff, "why all top secret agents
have to look like bankers. Anastina says Colonel James was operated on
by a Monsieur Fanti. What do you know about him?"

"He's a theatrical surgeon."

"You're not playing one of your jokes, Pashkov?"

"Hardly."

"You'd better be in my office in ten minutes. What size hospital gown?"

"Short and fat," Pashkov said, and switched off.

Most countries wanted to break his neck, and his own Motherland did not
always trust him. But he enjoyed his work--enjoyed it as much as his
closest professional rival, Colonel James, U.S.A.

       *       *       *       *       *

Pashkov landed on the roof of Intelligence in the northeast corner of
the Kremlin, hitched up his pants and rode down.

In his office, Petchareff removed the cigar from his mouth as Pashkov
came in. "Medvedev get my orders?"

"He's preparing a new super-patriotic writer to replace Boris
Knackenpast," Pashkov reported. "When you give the word, he will call
_Izvestia_ and tell them Boris is dead."

Petchareff glanced at his calendar. "We have two other state funerals
this week. You made it plain, I hope, we want no repetition of
Knackenpast's peace nonsense?"

"No more Gandhi or Schweitzer influences. The new literature," Pashkov
promised, raising a chubby finger, "will be a pearl necklace of
government slogans."

Nadezhda buzzed the intercom. "The man from the Bolshoi Theater is
here, Comrade."

"Send him in."

A small man hurried into the room. He had a narrow face and the
mustache of a mouse and a mousy nose, but his eyes were big rabbit
eyes. He bowed twice quickly, placed a package on the desk with
trembling forepaws and bowed twice again.

Petchareff tore open the package. "You got the real thing? No bad
imitation?"

"Exactly, exactly," the mouse piped. "No difference, Comrade." He held
his paws as in prayer and his pointed mouth quivered.

Petchareff held up the hospital gown. On the back of the gown was
printed in indelible ink:

                      stockholm national hospital
                              courtesy of
                               Coca-Cola

Petchareff tossed the gown to Pashkov. "This is what Colonel James is
wearing," he said, dismissing the mouse, who bowed twice and scurried
out.

"Try and split the allies," Pashkov muttered, reading the legend on the
gown.

Petchareff blew cigar smoke in his face. "If Colonel James makes a
monkey of you once more, you're through, Pashkov. You don't take your
job seriously enough. You bungle this and I'll have you transferred to
our Cultural Information Center in Chicago."

Pashkov winced.

"Now, you'll go to Stockholm and switch places with the American
colonel and find out what they're up to. Zubov's kidnaping team is
there already, at Hotel Reisen. Any questions?"

"I thought Zubov was a zoological warfare expert. What is he doing with
a kidnaping team?"

"His team is more agile. On your way."

In the front office, Pashkov stopped to kiss Nadezhda Brunhildova
goodby. "I may not return from this dangerous mission. Give me a tender
kiss."

Nadezhda was a big girl with hefty arms, captain of her local broom
brigade. "Monster!" She seized him by the collar. "Is Anastina
dangerous?"

"Darling!"

"Bitter sweetness!" she howled, dropping him. "Go, love. Make me
miserable."

       *       *       *       *       *

Pashkov spent an hour at Central Intelligence. Nothing unusual going on
in Stockholm: an industrial exhibit, the Swedish Academy in session,
a sociology seminar on prison reform, a forty-man trade mission from
India.

An addendum to the Stockholm file listed two Cuban agents operating
from Fralsningsarmen's Economy Lodgings. They were buying small arms
and ammunition. He thought a moment, impressed the Cubans' address on
his memory, and went to his flier.

He did not fly to Hotel Reisen at once. Zubov's kidnaping team could
wait. Coming slowly over Stockholm he spotted the National Hospital and
circled.

A line of ambulance fliers was parked on the ground in the ambulance
court. On the hospital roof, he noticed, apart from private fliers,
stood a flier that resembled his own.

He veered away, detoured around Riddarholmen, and five minutes later
landed on the roof of Fralsningsarmen's Economy Lodgings--the Salvation
Army flophouse.

"My Cuban friends," Pashkov inquired in fluent English at the desk on
the top floor. "Are they in?"

The old desk clerk looked like a stork. "Yu, room six fifteen," he
clacked. "Tree floors down. Aer yu Amerikan?"

"Brazil."

"Ah so? You sprikker goot Inglish laik me."

"Very kind of you."

He rode down three floors, found room 615, and stopped as he heard
voices within.

"... _dos, tres, cuatro, cinco, seis, siete_. By seven o'clock tonight,
okay, Gringo?"

"What do you expect for seven thousand bucks--service? Look, boys, I'm
just a honest businessman. I can't get it for you today. Have a seegar,
Pablo."

"Tfu!"

"All rightie, your cause is my cause. Maybe I can get it for you
tonight. But you'll have to pay in advance. What do you say, Francisco?"

"I counted the money. It is waiting for you. You deliver, we pay."

"But how can I trust you? I like you boys, I know you like me, but
business is business. I gotta give something to my jobber, don't I?"

"Gringo!"

At that moment Pashkov knocked on the door.

From within: "Shh! _Alguien llama a la puerta._"

Pashkov knocked again and a scuffle ensued within, the crack of a chair
on a skull, the dragging of a beefy body into a closet, and the slam
of the closet door.

"_Yu?_"

"_Buenas tardes_," Pashkov said through the door. "_Asuntos muy
importantes._"

The door opened a crack and two dark eyes in a young bearded face
peered out. "Eh?"

"_Gospodin Pashkov, para servir a usted._"

The door opened enough to admit the roly-poly visitor into the room.
The other Cuban, also bearded and wearing a fatigue cap, held a
revolver.

"No gun-play, caballeros," Pashkov went on in Spanish. "We are in the
Salvation Army charity house, not in a two-peso thriller. Besides, I
deliver before I ask payment."

"Deliver what, senor?"

"We favor any disturbance close to the United States. May I sit down?"

Between two beds were stacked some dozen crates of explosives. A small
table was littered with papers.

Sitting down at the table, Pashkov's elbow rested on an invoice, and
moments later the invoice was tucked in his pocket.

"What kind of ammunition do you need, caballeros?"

The Cubans looked at each other. "Thirty-o-six caliber, two-twenty
grain. How much can you deliver?"

"Two thousand rounds."

"Not much."

"Maybe three thousand. I'll toss in a box of hand grenades and a can of
lysergic acid diethylamide."

"You have that? You have LSD-25?"

"I have that. When are you leaving Stockholm?"

Again the young beards exchanged looks. "Maybe we stay till tomorrow
if you have more business. Three thousand rounds is not much. How much
payment, senor?"

"Two thousand kronor," Pashkov said, taking an envelope on the table
and addressing it to Nadezhda Brunhildova, Kremlin, Moscow. No return
address.

"Do you trust us to send the money?"

"It is bad for you if I do not trust you," Pashkov said, smiling up at
them.

"You can trust us. We shall send the money. Please take a cigar."

Pashkov took four Havanas from the box they held out to him, stuck
three in his breast pocket, and lit one.

"You come again, senor. We make much business."

"Why not? Help retire Latin-American dictators to Siberia. More gold in
Siberia than in Las Vegas."

"Hyi, hyi, that is funny. You come again."

On his way up to the roof, Pashkov studied the invoice he had lifted.
It was from a manufacturer of sporting arms to Francisco Jesus Maria
Gonzales, Salvation Army Economy Lodgings. He tucked the invoice into
his inner pocket with a satisfied grunt, climbed into his flier and
hopped over to Hotel Reisen, where Zubov's kidnaping team was waiting
for him.

       *       *       *       *       *

Comrade Zubov, the kidnaping expert, was pacing the roof of Hotel
Reisen. As Pashkov eased down in his flier, Zubov's big front tooth
flashed with delight. Pashkov felt like tossing him a bone.

"Everything in order, Gospodin Pashkov. Constant vigilance maintained
at hospital by my two assistants. With your pardon, Comrade Petchareff
urges all haste. Colonel James is due to leave the hospital tomorrow."

"Comrade Petchareff always urges haste. What else?"

Zubov's big tooth settled respectfully over his lower lip. His small
eyes were so closely set that he looked cockeyed when he focused them
on his superior.

"With your pardon, I shall conduct you to our suite. Plans for
kidnaping of Colonel James all ready."

"Here's a cigar for you."

"Gratefully accepted. Reduced unavoidable fatalities to six." Zubov
counted on his long hard fingers. "Two watchmen, three nurses, one
doctor."

In the hotel corridor, Zubov looked before and after, his eyes crossed
suspiciously, and peered around corners. They got to their suite
without incident, and Pashkov gave him another cigar.

"Gratefully accepted. Here is a map of hospital and grounds. Here is a
map of twenty-third floor. Here is a map of Colonel James' room. Here
is hospital routine between midnight and dawn. With your pardon--"

Pashkov picked up the phone, dialed the Soviet embassy, and got the
chargé d'affaires. "How is your underdeveloped countries fund?" he
asked.

"Always depleted, always replenished."

"I don't want any Russian brands."

"Nothing but foreign," the chargé buzzed. "We got almost everything now
through an American surplus outlet in Hamburg. Nationals get caught
with American goods, Americans get blamed. Wonderful confusion. What do
you need?"

"Thirty-o-six two-twenty, three thousand--if you have it."

"Most popular. What else?"

"Pineapples--one crate."

"Only confiscated German potatoes. Will that do?"

"Fine. And a small can of sentimental caviar."

"Too risky."

"It's all right. It will fall to local authorities by tomorrow."

Pashkov put down the receiver. Give the Cubans enough to expect
more--make sure they stay in town.

       *       *       *       *       *

Zubov was cross-checking his kidnaping plans. He said, "With your
pardon, do we take Colonel James alive or dead-or-alive?"

"Alive."

Zubov pulled a long face. "Dead-or-alive would be easier, Gospodin
Pashkov. Fast, clean job."

Pashkov squinted at Zubov's crossed eyes. "Have you had your eyes
examined lately?"

"No need," Zubov assured him with a smile. "I see more than most
people."

Pashkov held up his remaining cigar. "How many cigars in my hand?"

"Two."

At that moment the door opened and Zubov's kidnaping team lumbered
in. They were a couple of big apes dressed in blue canvas shoes, red
trousers, yellow jackets, white silk scarves, sport caps and sun
glasses.

"What are you doing here?" cried Zubov. "Why aren't you observing the
hospital?"

"Dhh, you said to report ... um ... if something happened," the first
ape said in a thick voice.

"Well?"

"Victim's room lights out," the ape said.

"My assistants," Zubov introduced them to Pashkov. "Line up, line up,
lads. With your pardon, they are good lads. This is Petya, and this is
Kolya. No, _this_ is Kolya and this one is Petya."

"Twins?"

"Not exactly. Same genetic experiment. Good lads. Stand straight,
Petya. Don't curl your feet like that, Kolya, I've told you before. Why
didn't you shave your hands today?"

Kolya looked guiltily at his hands.

"They've made progress," Zubov assured Pashkov, pulling a small whip
from his hip pocket. "Straight, lads, straight," he flicked the whip.
"We have company."

"Are their costumes your own idea?"

"With your pardon, for purposes of concealment. What are your orders?"

Pashkov told them to pick up the boxes of ammunition at the embassy and
deliver them to the Cubans, and then to commandeer a private automobile.

"We have autos at the embassy pool," Zubov suggested.

"I want a vehicle off the street. Then report back here with your
lads."

Petya gave Kolya a box on the ear.

"Boys, boys!" Zubov cracked the whip. "Out you go. A job for Gospodin
Pashkov, lads. They don't get enough exercise," he grinned, backing out
after them. "With your pardon, I'll thrash them later."

And they were gone. Pashkov turned to the hospital maps and studied
them before taking a nap.

       *       *       *       *       *

Shortly before dawn, Zubov's team returned, their mission accomplished.

"With your pardon, an excellent Mercedes," Zubov reported.

Pashkov had changed into the hospital gown with the Coca-Cola legend on
the back. He glanced at his watch. It was four o'clock in the morning.

He tossed his bundle of clothing to the first ape. "Take my flier back
to Moscow, Kolya lad. Give my clothes to Nadezhda Brunhildova, and tell
Comrade Petchareff to expect Colonel James today."

Clutching the bundle, Kolya stuck his tongue out at Petya and bounded
out of the room. They waited at the window until they saw Kolya take
off in Pashkov's flier. Then they made their way down the service
stairs to the alley, Pashkov dressed only in the hospital gown; got
into the stolen Mercedes and drove to the National Hospital, all three
leaning forward.

In the ambulance court, Zubov and Petya moved quickly to a Red Cross
flier. Pashkov dropped the invoice he had lifted from the Cubans on the
front seat of the stolen car, and followed.

A watchman emerged from his hut, looked idly up at the rising
ambulance, and shuffled back to his morning coffee.

As Petya brought the flier to a hovering stop against Colonel James'
window, Pashkov bounced into the room; Zubov drew his gun and jumped in
after.

Colonel James awoke, turned on the night lamp, and sat up in the bed,
his eyes blinking.

Pashkov stood looking at Colonel James. The resemblance between them
was remarkable. Zubov's eyes were crossed with astonishment.

"My dear Gospodin Pashkov!" Colonel James greeted him in Russian,
yawning. "How kind of you to visit me. Do sit down." Not only was his
Russian good; his voice was a good imitation of Pashkov's voice.

"You're not really sick?" Pashkov asked, sitting down on the bed.

"Not physically. But imagine my psychological condition. When I look
in the mirror--" The colonel shuddered.

"I hope your sacrifice won't be permanent?" Pashkov said.

"That would be too much. How is my Russian? The truth, now."

"Excellent. Put up your gun, Zubov. Colonel James and I don't get to
talk very often."

"And a pity we don't. Good manners accomplish more than an opera full
of cloaks and daggers. Cigarette?"

"Gratefully accepted," Zubov said, slipping his gun into its holster
with a flourish.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Your treatment is over, then?" Pashkov asked. "You are ready for your
assignment?"

"Ready."

"And that is?"

"Delicate, very delicate. I must report to the Palace this morning."

"Shall I kidnap him now?" Zubov interrupted, puffing conceitedly on his
cigarette.

"Mind your language, Zubov. May I ask, Colonel--do you want me to think
I am falling into a trap?"

"No, no, my friend. I am only doing my best not to show my surprise at
seeing you again." The colonel got out of bed and sat down on Pashkov's
other side.

"Zubov will make your trip to Moscow comfortable. All right, Zubov."

Zubov focused his crossed eyes on Pashkov.

"Take him straight to Petchareff," Colonel James said to Zubov. "I'll
report as soon as I know what these Swedes are up to."

Zubov seized Pashkov by the scruff of the neck and dragged him towards
the window.

"Hold your claws, Zubov lad," Pashkov said. "You have got the wrong
man, can't you see? _That_ is Colonel James."

"Eh?"

"Use your eyes, blockhead. _I_ am Pashkov."

Zubov did use his eyes. He looked from one to the other, and back. The
more he focused, the more his eyes crossed. "Eh?"

Colonel James sat calmly on the bed. He said, "Carry him out."

Zubov lifted Pashkov off the floor, crashed with his weight against the
wall, but held on, grinned and staggered with Pashkov in his arms to
the window.

"You miserable idiot," Pashkov shouted. "You'll get a rest cure for
this!"

Zubov dropped him, pulled his gun and backed off into a corner. "How
can I tell you two apart just by looking!" he cried hysterically. "I'm
not a learned man."

"One small but decisive proof," Pashkov said, unbuttoning his hospital
gown. "I have a mole."

Zubov yanked the colonel up by an arm. "Send _me_ to rest cures, will
you?"

Colonel James sighed. "I guess we have to keep up appearances," he
muttered, and climbed out the window into the hovering ambulance. Zubov
leaped in after, and they were off.

       *       *       *       *       *

The suit of clothes hanging in the closet might have been Pashkov's
own, identical with the clothes Kolya had taken to Moscow not an hour
before. Even the underwear had facsimiles of the Order of Lenin sewn in.

Satisfied, he crawled into the bed and fell into a pleasant snooze.

He was awakened by the nurse, Anastina Bjorklund--alias Anastasia
Semionovna Bezumnaya, formerly of the Stakhanovite Booster's Committee,
Moscow Third Worker's District.

"Wonderful morning, Colonel James!"

Petchareff seldom let one agent know what another was doing.

She put a big breakfast tray on Pashkov's lap. "Cloudy, damp, and
windy. London stock market caves in, race riots in South Africa, famine
in India, earthquake in Japan, floods in the United States, general
strike in France, new crisis in Berlin. I ask you, what more can an
idealist want?"

"Good morning, Miss Bjorklund."

The breakfast tray was crammed with a liter of orange juice, four
boiled eggs, six slices of bacon, four pancakes, two pork chops, four
slices of toast, a tumbler of vodka, a pot of coffee and two cigars.

"Ah, Colonel," Anastina said as Pashkov fell to, "why did you let them
change your face? It does not become you at all."

"Part of my job. Don't you think I am more handsome now?"

Anastina laughed shrilly. "That bulbous nose handsome? What woman could
fall in love with a nose like that?"

"It shows determination. I wish I had this nose permanently."

"You mustn't talk like that. But I'll ignore your nose if you tell me
more about White Sands Proving Grounds, as you promised."

"With pleasure, with pleasure," he said, sinking his teeth into a pork
chop, having seasoned the chop with the soft-boiled egg yolk. "But
right now I'm in a hurry to get to the Palace. Give my shoes an extra
shine, there's a good girl."

"Oh, you and your secrets!"

An hour later, Pashkov landed on the Palace roof in Colonel James'
flier--an exact copy of his own flier. The Palace roof captain stared
at him, then smiled nervously.

"They are waiting for you in the Gustavus room, Colonel."

"Colonel? Do I still look like Colonel James?"

"Oh, no, sir."

"Do I talk like Colonel James?"

"You've changed completely, sir. If I didn't know, I would swear you
were the notorious Gospodin Pashkov."

"I am Gospodin Pashkov now, Captain. To everybody."

"Of course, sir. I'll ring down you are coming."

Pashkov glanced at his watch. Colonel James would be landing in Moscow
about now and taken to Comrade Petchareff for questioning.

A manservant in velvet cutaways, patent leather shoes and white gloves,
escorted Pashkov through rooms hung with chandeliers, tapestries,
paintings. Pashkov entered the last room and stopped as the door
clicked shut behind him.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the room were three men, all of whom he recognized: Professor
Kristin of the Swedish Academy, a white-haired old man with a kind,
intelligent face; the king, Gustavus IX, a thin old man stroking his
Vandyke, sitting under a portrait of Frederick the Great; and Monsieur
Fanti, the make-up surgeon.

Pashkov bowed his head. "Your majesty. Gentlemen."

"Extraordinary!" Professor Kristin said.

Pashkov turned to the surgeon. "Monsieur, should my face have such a
frivolous expression?"

M. Fanti raised his eyebrows, but did not answer.

"I thought," said Pashkov, "that Gospodin Pashkov's face has a more
brutal look."

"Propaganda," said the artist. But he came closer and looked at
Pashkov's face with sudden interest.

Professor Kristin said, "Colonel James, we presume you have studied
the problem in detail. I'm afraid we have delayed announcing the Nobel
prize for literature much too long. How soon can you bring Boris
Knackenpast to Stockholm?"

So there it was: Boris Knackenpast a supreme success, as Pashkov had
suspected. It would be amusing to tell robotist Medvedev about it.

"Delicate, very delicate," Pashkov said. "Everything depends on my not
running into Gospodin Pashkov."

"We can't wait any longer," Professor Kristin said. "Fortunately, we
have an ally in the enemy camp. The robotist, Medvedev, is expecting
you at Knackenpast's villa."

"Bad show," M. Fanti said suddenly. "No good. His left cheekbone is at
least four centimeters too high."

The men looked at the surgeon, then at Pashkov.

M. Fanti fingered Pashkov's cheekbone. "How could I have made such a
mistake! Just look at him. People laugh at such faces."

"How much time to correct the error then, Monsieur Fanti?" the king
asked.

"A week at least. His skin needs a rest. I must rework the whole left
side of his face--it's all lopsided."

"But we can't spare a week," Professor Kristin said.

"With your majesty's permission," Pashkov offered, "I am willing to go
as I am. Indeed, my plans call for immediate departure."

"It is a good thing you do for us, Colonel James," Gustavus IX said,
"and a courageous thing. Please accept our thanks."

Professor Kristin saw Pashkov to the door. "One suggestion, Colonel.
Your r's are still too soft for a real Russian. Why do you Americans
slur them like that? And I beg you, if you value your life, do not fail
to watch your fricatives."

       *       *       *       *       *

The roof captain saluted as Pashkov stepped out of the lift. His flier
was serviced and ready.

"What weather in Moscow, Captain?"

"Ceiling four thousand. We're having patrols half way out to sea. They
are instructed to let you pass."

A small incident, the roof captain explained. A Swedish Red Cross flier
was missing from the National Hospital. Two Cuban agents had been
arrested and a cache of small arms and ammunition was found. But no
trace of the ambulance.

"I suppose the Cubans deny stealing the ambulance?" Pashkov asked.

"They say they've been framed by a fat little Russian. But it's
transparent, a clumsy job. Imagine, they left a stolen car in the
ambulance court and in it an invoice for six cases of ammunition. It
was traced to the Cubans in half an hour."

Pashkov climbed into his flier. "Well, it's fashionable to blame the
Russians for everything." He waved his chubby hand, and took off.
Flying over the Baltic, he set the controls on the Moscow beam.

Ten minutes west of Moscow he tuned the communicator in on Petchareff's
office.

"Seven One Three here, Nadezhda. Tell Petchareff--no, let me talk to
him."

"Seven One ... but that's impossible! Gospodin Pashkov is in conference
with Comrade Petchareff."

"Stupid!" Petchareff's voice sounded behind Nadezhda's, and the speaker
clicked and went dead.

Pashkov dove into the clouds and brought his flier to a hovering stop.

Petchareff did not believe he was Pashkov. Colonel James, it was clear,
was at that moment in Petchareff's office, impersonating Pashkov. And
Zubov was probably getting a rest cure.

Pashkov crawled out of the cloud and skimmed northeast to Mir, Boris
Knackenpast's villa.

"You came fast, sir," the lieutenant of guards welcomed him at Mir. "We
did not expect you for another fifteen minutes."

Fifteen minutes. The colonel was not wasting time.

"Listen carefully, lieutenant." Pashkov described the American agent.
"But his left cheekbone is lower than mine--about four centimeters. He
may be armed, so be careful."

The lieutenant stared. "Shall we kill him?"

"No, no. Put him in a cage."

As Pashkov ran up the steps to the villa, the curtain in the vestibule
window stirred. But when he entered, the vestibule was empty.

He looked in the dining room, the music room, the library. Nobody.
The house was strangely quiet. He came to the door of the study and
listened. Not a sound. He went in and there, behind the large writing
desk, sat Boris Knackenpast.

The robot was unscrewing screws imbedded in his neck.

"My God, sir," said Pashkov, "what are you doing?"

       *       *       *       *       *

The robot's eyes, large disks of glittering mirror, flashed as he
looked up. "Ah, Colonel James," Boris said in a voice that seemed to
come from a deep well. "Excuse the poor welcome, but I understand we
have little time. You scared my valet; he thought you were Gospodin
Pashkov."

The door burst open and Medvedev rushed in, the old valet at his heels.
Medvedev stopped, gaped, then seized Pashkov's hand. "Colonel James!
What an artist, that Monsieur Fanti. But quick, Boris, Pashkov is on
his way."

Boris pulled off his head, and crawled out of the robot shell. Pashkov
saw Boris as he really was, a tall human with a gaunt, ascetic face.

The sad thing about us, thought Pashkov, is that Medvedev could not
trust even me. But then I could not trust Medvedev, either. Yes, that's
the trouble with us.

"I hope you need no luggage, Mister Knackenpast," Pashkov said. "We
must be off at once."

"Too late!" the old valet said from the window.

Colonel James had landed. But as he climbed down from his flier, the
guards closed a circle about him.

"He'll keep," Pashkov said, hitching up his pants. "Let's be off,
Mister Knackenpast. It won't take long for Petchareff to smell us out."

"Look!"

The guards fell back from the flier and snapped to attention. Chewing
on his cigar furiously, out stepped Petchareff.

Zubov leaped out next, his big front tooth flashing. Then his two
assistants, Petya and Kolya, tumbled out in their coats and hats. Last
of all to emerge from the flier was Nadezhda Brunhildova.

"Pretend not to know me, will he?" she yelled at Colonel James, picking
up a rock.

"Hold it, citizenress," Colonel James said.

"Citizenress, is it?" The rock flew over his head and felled Zubov.

"I warned you both, no kitchen squabbles while on duty," Petchareff
roared. He snapped an order to the lieutenants of guards, and the
guards surrounded the house.

"No alarm, no alarm," Pashkov said, pulling Boris away from the window.
"Mister Knackenpast, when you see your way clear to my flier, run for
it. But get back into your robot costume."

"I can't operate the machine."

"I'll be right behind you. The rest of us will go out to Petchareff."

As they came out, Petchareff was reviving Zubov by slapping his face.
The kidnaping expert lay stretched cold on the ground, and Nadezhda
Brunhildova stood by, holding the rock and weeping.

Colonel James said, "There he is, the American spy."

Petchareff looked up as Pashkov was led forward by the guards. "Not
bad," Petchareff said. "We could use Monsieur Fanti. What's his price?"

"Don't you know me, chief? Me, Pashkov."

"Curse me," Nadezhda said, staring at him. "Another Pashkov."

A terrible howl came from Zubov. Petya and Kolya, imitating
Petchareff's efforts to revive their master, were battering Zubov's
face with their slouched hats.

"Stand back!" Kolya screamed, smashing his hat into Zubov's face. "He
is trying to say something!"

"He's moving!" Petya kicked Zubov and looked up for approval, his hair
standing up like spikes.

Petchareff slapped Kolya's face and crushed the glowing end of his
cigar on Petya's forehead. The apes reeled back to a tree.

       *       *       *       *       *

Pashkov whispered to Colonel James.

"Capitalist hell and damnation, now I can't tell them apart myself,"
Petchareff said. "Zubov!"

"Hhng?"

"Which one's the real Pashkov?"

"Hhng?"

But Colonel James was running to the flier, throwing Nadezhda's rock at
Petchareff and running.

"Grenade!" Pashkov yelled, and flung himself to the ground.

At the same moment Boris Knackenpast ran from the house to the flier,
his robot gear clattering like Don Quixote's armor.

The guards scattered and dove for cover.

"Down, lads! Grenade!" Pashkov yelled.

The two apes took up the cry, "Grenade, grenade!" and flattened
themselves behind the tree.

Nadezhda and Medvedev collided, digging in behind the valet.

Only Petchareff remained standing. "Stop the robot!"

Nobody moved.

Boris reached the flier, Colonel James pulled him in, the engine
hummed, and they were off. A moment later the flier vanished in the
clouds towards Stockholm.

Petchareff relit his cigar. "Tfui, tastes of monkey hair."

Medvedev shambled over. "Was the grenade a dud?"

"One of these days I'll catch you, Pashkov," Petchareff spat. "Your
deviousness, that's one thing. It could be useful. But your levity--"

"Darling!" Nadezhda threw on Pashkov.

"Not in public," Pashkov said.

"Wait a minute," Petchareff said. "Nadezhda Brunhildova, how do you
know he really is Pashkov? If he's actually Colonel James, I can shoot
him summarily. He _does_ look like Colonel James to me."

"But if you're mistaken?" Medvedev put in nervously.

"We all make mistakes," Petchareff said. "What would history be without
mistakes?"

"I don't trust him either," Nadezhda said. "But I know my Pashkov. If
he's not Pashkov, I shall let you know in the morning."





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Cool War, by Andrew Fetler

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE COOL WAR ***

***** This file should be named 51256-8.txt or 51256-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/1/2/5/51256/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
