The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Furious Rose, by Dean Evans

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: The Furious Rose

Author: Dean Evans

Release Date: February 21, 2016 [EBook #51257]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE FURIOUS ROSE ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                           The Furious Rose

                             By DEAN EVANS

                         Illustrated by THORNE

           [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from
                 Galaxy Science Fiction January 1952.
         Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
         the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]




         This world was a setup for any man who wanted to get
     along--provided one had enough victims to toss to the wolves!


The Master Clock on the black desk in the office of _Federal
Executions_ made a quiet blipping sound. Immediately the lights lowered
to Emote Neutral. Long, probing shadow fingers snaked here and there
across the floor, and a silence that should have been restful--and
wasn't--descended on the place.

Tony Radek leaned back in his chair and frowned. One-fifteen in the
morning. At one-fifteen in the morning no man, no matter who, should be
going to his Neg-Emote. Why not hang a man instead? Or electrocute him?
Or gas him the way they used to back in the old days? In those old days
his grandfather used to talk about, where twelve ordinary citizens said
the word that peeled the life off a man like skinning an onion.

He sighed softly and folded his hands across a tiny paunch that was
just beginning to show. Tony Radek was getting old. He was a "safe"
now. That meant he needn't worry about the war any longer. He was
a nice, mild, peaceable gentleman who stayed at home and thought
beautiful thoughts about the younger men out in space. A man his age
didn't feel anger and hate and retribution and lust and treachery any
more. He was just a little old fat guy. He was the Federal Executioner.

He frowned again and leaned forward and touched a nacre button on the
desk top. That lit up the screen on his left. Not the Master Screen,
which was the one on his right. This was the other, the one that could
tell him what was going on outside the office, outside in _Portal
Waiting_, where certain peculiar ghouls who derived a measure of
excitement from the executions were allowed by the gracious State to
hang out.

He stared at the screen. His frown deepened. _Portal Waiting_ should be
bare and vacant at this hour, but it wasn't. This was the third night
in a row that it wasn't. There was a girl out there. A quiet girl, a
girl who looked about as ghoulish as one of the nice red ritual roses
over in the cooler built into the wall.

_Damn the dame, why didn't she go home?_ Tony Radek's upper lip lifted
a little, showing small angry teeth.

At once the Emote Neutral lights in the office flickered wildly. Tony
pulled his eyes from the screen and glared up at the lights. That's
progress for you. Let a man go on one little momentary emotional
binge, like this, and right away spies in the joint start screaming.
In a moment now, the one on his right--the Master Screen--would blink
into life and old hell-hips himself would start poking around asking
questions. Just see if it didn't.

He turned his head to the right, stared at the Master Screen and waited.

The screen blazed into life. A narrow-faced man with washed-away eyes
that looked as though they'd seen sin and hadn't liked it peered
angrily over toward Tony behind the desk.

"_Mr._ Radek!" he had a thin, thin voice that sounded like a sheet of
paper slitting down the middle. "What's going on down there? Can't you
control your own office? Or maybe you'd like to be back in Training?"
The eyes squinted sharply.

Tony worked up an innocent look. He spread his hands on the black
surface of the desk, smiled, and said mildly: "Out of your mind. My
lights have been as steady as old Emote Neutral herself. Probably that
blonde you got Central Direction kidded into thinking you need as an
assistant--probably you sneaked up on her when she was in Personal Lok
and...."

"What?" The Master Screen trembled a little and the narrow-faced man's
eyes seemed to jerk out of registration for a moment. "Look here,
Radek, I've stood just about enough of your insinuations!"

"Look who's making the lights flicker now," said Tony calmly. He waved
an arm around the office. Emote Neutral was flickering rapidly as
though controlled by an interrupter switch. "Central Direction should
see this," he observed.

He stared briefly at the contorted face on the screen. That face was
working convulsively now, getting red like the ritual roses over in the
cooler.

He snorted disgustedly, reached forward and touched the matswitch which
threw the Master Screen into visi-lok. At once the screen darkened and
all sound left the office.

That was more like it. Let old hell-hips up in Supplies and Control
stew if he wanted, there wasn't anything in the Constitution--not even
the old Constitution--that said a man had to sit and look at him.

"_Central Direction to Radek!_" a hard voice rapped out of the
alternate speaker over in the corner.

Tony Radek jerked, spun around. He swallowed quickly, said nervously:
"Yes, sir?"

"Radek, you're violating Ordinance Six, Code 325, Division of Security!
Unlock that visi-screen at once!"

"Yes, sir." Tony's hand flew to the matswitch, pulled it. "Sorry. Elbow
must have hit it accidentally. Didn't know it was locked...."

"Radek, there's a war on. That visi-lok must be used only in emergency.
You know that."

"Yes, sir. Like I said...."

"I heard. In the future, be a little more careful. And, Radek--"

"Yes, sir?"

"Ready Cell Two. Execution at one-twenty-seven. John Edward Haley.
Convicted of mass interference of morale, City of Greater New Denver,
as outlined under Congressional Act of April 12, 2250. Decision
rendered equally on all three Final Master Machines."

"No appeal?" asked Tony very softly.

"No appeal. And, Radek--"

"Yes, sir?"

"The condemned is married. Check with Supplies and Control for bill of
divorcement. His wife is a young woman, will have to marry again in the
morning as outlined under Congressional Act of May 28, 2211. Got that?"

"Yes, sir."

The Master Screen went dead. Tony blinked. Bill of divorcement. Will
have to marry again in the morning as outlined under Congressional Act.
By God, that's progress for you! He sat staring at the Master Screen
for a long time.

Then he sighed, punched the button on Supplies and Control.

"Hell-hips!" he growled. "Snap it up. Execution at one-twenty-seven.
Bill of divorcement."

The narrow face peered sourly out at him from the Master Screen. It
didn't have much emotion in it now. It was almost blank, like the face
of a humanoid robot somebody'd left something out of.

"Been hittin' the bottle again, huh?" said Tony.

"My name is Clacker, _Mr._ Radek. Arthur Jared Clacker. Kindly keep
that in mind when you address me."

"Sure, sure. Nice name. Lovely name. Sounds like a stone-boat going
over ground glass. Whip up that bill of divorcement."

"It's ready, _Mr._ Radek. _Been_ ready for the last half hour.
I suggest that if there were a little of my own well known and
demonstrated efficiency in _your_ office, perhaps Executions would
be something to be proud of. Instead of what it is. Instead of the
foul-smelling, sloppily run, lice-infested...."

Tony's hand reached out for the button on Supplies and Control. "Watch
those lights," he said tiredly.

       *       *       *       *       *

He got up from the desk, stretched a little and went across the office
to the cooler in the opposite wall. His feet made no noise; he had that
quiet tread that all cats, a few men and some women achieve. His hand
interrupted the automatic cellgard and a tiny, almost hidden door in
the wall swung wide. He reached up, poked his hand in the cooler, felt
around. A little smile came into his eyes. He took his hand out of the
cooler, got up on tiptoes and looked inside. No roses. Not even one
rose.

Not even _half_ of a rose.

Chuckling, he went back to the desk and jabbed a finger at the button
over Supplies and Control.

"Hell-hips!" he rapped. "Where's all that well known and demonstrated
efficiency I've had to rake out of my ears?"

The narrow face lit up the Master Screen once more. It looked bored
now. "_Mr._ Radek, there was something?"

"Yeah. Something." Tony's voice dropped, got deadly soft. "How many
weeks since you checked the cooler, boy? There aren't any ritual roses."

"There--there aren't any?"

"That's right, Mr. Clacker. Now get away from that screen. I'm
reporting this to Central Direction." His finger jammed down on the
Supplies and Control button. He watched the Master Screen go blank and
grinned. He thought, "Shake a little, Mr. Clacker, shake a little,"
because he didn't dare even whisper to himself.

He sat down at the desk again and thought of something. His finger went
out, touched the button on the screen on the left--the _Portal Waiting_
screen.

She was still there, hunched up in one of the chairs like a small child
somebody had left in an interplanet waiting room and then gone away and
forgotten. Tony frowned once more. Damn that dame, she was spoiling his
nights.

He got up, crossed the office on silent feet, opened the door of
Executions, went down a bare, silent hall. At the levelators he waited
a moment for the platform, took it down, got off again at _Portal
Waiting_, and crossed to the foyer.

She was there, just as she'd been on the screen upstairs, only clearer,
more vivid, something witnessed instead of second hand, something with
dimension to it. She was in a big chair that could have accommodated
two like her. She had her legs tucked under her and her brown eyes that
looked up at Tony's approach weren't any larger than two full moons.

He said, "Are you Mrs. John Haley?"

The girl nodded. "They--they've got Johnny...."

"I know." Tony dropped into a chair opposite the girl. "It's late," he
said softly. "You shouldn't be here this time of night, Mrs. Haley."

The girl thought about that. "You're Mr. Radek, aren't you? In the
Execution Office?"

"Call me Tony, Mrs. Haley."

"All right, Tony. Yes, it's late. I hadn't noticed, but I suppose
you're right."

"You should go home, Mrs. Haley." He stopped, then lied a little.
"They'll let you know. You don't have to worry."

_You don't have to worry. They're bringing the guy up now, little
girl, but you don't have to worry. Old hell-hips is getting a ritual
rose now, little girl, but you don't have to worry._

As if he'd deliberately telepathed the thought, the girl said suddenly:
"Tony, is--is it true about the furious roses? I mean, if a man is
found guilty, do they--?"

"The 'furious' roses, Mrs. Haley?" He smiled. "I see. You mean because
they're so red. Yes, it's true. Ritual roses, we call them, but that's
nothing. Nothing at all. A custom only. A symbol handed down. It means
nothing."

"I know." The girl nodded again. "When we were children, we always
called them the furious roses because they were a furious red. We
always used to say that if an innocent man was executed, the furious
red rose would right away turn white, Tony. To show they'd been wrong
about him."

He shrugged. "Bedtime stories, Mrs. Haley."

"Not--not that it means anything to me, Tony. They'll find Johnny
innocent, of course. All three machines. The final machines."

_Innocent? Oh, sure._

"A man," said Tony with a vague motion of his hands. "What's the
difference what man a woman has? In the morning there's always
another--and another name. What's the difference?" He smiled a small
toy smile with eyes half closed so the girl couldn't look too closely
into them.

But it was all right, she hadn't heard. At least she wasn't balling
those big eyes of hers at him. She was looking down into her folded
hands.

He continued, "There's a war on, Mrs. Haley. It seems there's always a
war on, somehow. And everybody--you, me, the guy down the street who
skins ships for a living--we all have to remember that. And yet some
of us don't. Some of us go off on a tangent and try to sell out our
country and then there's hell to pay. And if we're found guilty, we get
the execution. The Neg-Emote."

The girl's lips began to tremble. She looked up. "Does it hurt, Tony? I
mean...."

"Physically? No, of course not." A corner of his mouth curled. "We're
humane nowadays, hadn't you heard? We just strap a man in a chair and
press a button and down comes a metal hood over him. We press some more
buttons and pull a switch or two, and that's that. No feeling, nothing.
The man's as good as new except he has no emotions any more. No
emotions whatever except personal physical pain, such as he'd need in
case somebody stepped on his toe or jabbed him with a pin. The State
wants us to protect ourselves, you see. It wouldn't want us getting
hurt because we don't feel anything."

He stopped because it was getting harder to continue. "We used to call
it 'stripping,' but that was long ago before the humane boys decided
the term was a little cruel. Now it's just Neg-Emoting. But the same
thing. Just a fancy title."

Her big eyes were suddenly eating into his. "What do they do with them,
Tony?"

He shrugged again. "Send 'em off to Training. Some can be taught this,
some that, but a living death nevertheless. What else can a traitor
expect?"

The girl began to tremble all over. "Not Johnny! They can't do that to
Johnny! He's innocent, Tony--he didn't do anything! Tony, tell them
that! Tell them to let him go...."

He put his teeth together hard. What do you say to a woman who sits
across from you, waiting the long, long wait? What do you say to a
woman like this when you see the terror--and something else--in eyes
like hers?

"You like the guy, Mrs. Haley?" he asked gently. "That's old-fashioned
as hell, you know. We all learn that way back in primaries."

But the woman wasn't listening again, wasn't caring what he'd said.
She began to whisper very softly:

"In the nights I used to be frightened. I used to lie there asleep
and dream of the ships coming down and spraying the house with the
burn-waves. And I could hear the roaring thunder of the jets and
the house would start to shake and I'd try to yell, but I couldn't.
Something inside would be choking me. And just when the burn-waves
would be coming hot through the window and licking at the walls inside
the room, I'd scream myself awake and jump up in bed and the sweat
would be pouring off me."

Tony stared, incredulous, into the big balls of fright that her eyes
had become.

"And then the lights would come on again, and there would be Johnny
lying next to me smiling a little, and his curly hair would be all
tousled from sleep, and he'd say to me, 'Baby, you've been dreaming
again. Don't you know I'm here? Don't you know I'll always be here?
Don't you know that, Baby?' And then it would be all right, and the
roaring jets would be only the dawn shift going out on Security Patrol.
And then I could go back to sleep again."

She stopped. _Portal Waiting_ had become a gray ghost of a thing with
nothing living in it, only the clouds of memory like smoke veils
swirling, drifting here and there, soon gone.

And then: "They'll let him go, Tony. He's innocent, you know. They have
to let him go."

He didn't look at her. He got up from his chair, put his hands rigidly
at his sides. Then he did look, just once, and very hard.

"Get out of here!" he growled.

"No, Tony."

He took a deep breath, turned, went across the foyer to the levelators.
As he passed under the huge Master Screen, her voice came again, but
quite thin:

"You'll let me know, Tony? You'll let me know as soon as you get word?"

He didn't answer, didn't look back, didn't do anything except
keep going to the levelators. He went upstairs, found the door of
Executions, opened it, went through, let it slam shut.

       *       *       *       *       *

Things started to happen. The Master Clock over on the black desk made
a quiet blipping sound and the Emote Neutral lights went out. At once
the office was flooded with Amber Official, the working lights. Then
the Master Screen glowed and a narrow-faced man with washed-away eyes
looked out at him.

"Condemned is waiting, _Mr._ Radek," the narrow-faced man said acidly.
"Cell Two is getting dusty waiting for you, _Mr._ Radek. Very dusty."

Tony looked up. His heart wasn't in it, but he said it anyhow: "Go
chase your blonde some more, hell-hips."

He went over to the desk, banged the Supplies and Control button, held
it down. Master Screen darkened. He looked at the small square of white
paper on the black desk top.

A bill of divorcement. Like that. So in the morning the kid downstairs
could go out and get herself another mate and then she could go back to
bed again and dream some more about the roaring jets and the burn-waves.

He reached up and wiped at his forehead. She didn't have to see it
happen. Nothing in the Constitution--old or new--stated she had to see
it happen. He looked down at the matswitch that controlled the visi-lok
on the Master Screen. He clamped his teeth together and his hand went
out and flipped the switch. The office went dead.

Maybe nobody'd notice. Maybe he'd have time to slip into Cell Two and
get it over with before anybody noticed. He started across the room on
fast, silent feet.

"_Radek!_" the alternate speaker over in the corner blasted out. He
froze solid. "Radek, don't move! Stand where you are!"

Don't move? He couldn't have moved if he'd had jets on. And then the
hard voice went on again: "Central Command to Supplies and Control. Use
Emergency visi-relay. Unlock the Master Screen! This is Command 419,
Regulation Four. Signed, Countersigned."

Almost at once the Master Screen flickered into life and a hard,
severe-looking face appeared there. "Radek, turn around! Face the
screen!"

"Yes, sir." Tony turned.

"Second violation, Radek. Why?"

Tony forced a blank face. He lifted his shoulders, said: "I was over
here on my way to Cell Two for the Execution. How could I--"

"That will be all, Radek! Clear your desk. Prepare for judgment on
final machines."

Tony swallowed. He didn't move because he couldn't move.

"Well, Radek?"

He fought his face clean, kept his hands rigid at his sides. Sweat was
rolling down his back, but that was all right; Central Command couldn't
be expected to see sweat roll down a man's back under his clothing,
though a lot of people thought so.

"A suggestion, sir," he said at last.

"What?" Hard eyes bored into his own.

He let a little anxious look creep over his face. Not a guilty
look--he hoped--but the kind of anxious look a worried but innocent man
might have in a spot like this.

He said quickly: "About that visi-lok. I suggest it might have gone
into lock by itself. You see, it's one of the old-fashioned kind, the
type they used to have that worked with solenoids. We've had trouble
with them before."

That brought a little silence. The hard eyes in the screen said at
last: "Central Command to Supplies and Control. Is the visi-lok in
Executions controlled by a solenoid? Was it never changed to relay?"

Tony gulped. He looked into the Master Screen, but he remained frozen
to the floor, hardly breathing. And then a very thin voice answered
nervously:

"I--I believe that's correct, sir. I believe Executions does have the
old-fashioned solenoid. It seems there hasn't been time to change it.
I've been intending to...."

The voice was cut off. The hard eyes came back to Tony. "Decision!" the
hard voice said.

"Yes, sir?"

"Exonerated, Radek! Carry on with Execution in Cell Two." The screen
went blank.

Tony shuddered. A close one. A damned close one. That was the war for
you. Even a man's breaths are counted. He went on shaky feet over to
the cooler, reached in, got out a ritual rose, left the office end
shuffled down the hall to Cell Two.

John Edward Haley. The condemned. A thin man, Tony thought. Well, sure,
there aren't many fat men any more. Not in ordinary circumstances, that
is.

The man was sitting tensely in the chair. There was no one else in the
cell, which was as it should be, of course. Witnesses, yes--the Master
Screen up on the wall--but not here, not visible.

Tony went across the Cell. "John Edward Haley," he said.

The man moved a nervous tongue over dry lips.

"John Edward Haley, you have been sentenced for Execution. Now hear
these final words of the State as directed by Presidential order from
Responsibility Official in the City of Greater New Denver, this night."

He took two small steps toward the man in the chair. He held out the
red rose, put it in the hand of the other. Then he stepped back two
steps until his toes were just touching a small plaque built into the
floor. He looked down, read from the plaque:

"The giving of this rose. A symbol for the red of the blood of your
brothers that you have let by treason and/or treachery. A symbol that
as the rose is red, so are the unclean acts of your own hand, of your
own mind. The State has so spoken."

He looked up. A nice way to kiss a guy off. Might as well tell him he
bit his brother's finger, too, when he was a kid.

"Have you anything to say?" he asked.

The man's nervous tongue worked again. He said quickly:

"Yeah. Look, guy, just one thing. Just one favor. I don't give a damn
what happens to me. Sure, I'm guilty. So you caught me, and so I take
it. So what? A guy expects that. But the wife...."

Tony's teeth came together hard.

"... But the wife, see? She's down in _Portal Waiting_. Been there for
three nights now. I don't want her to witness this. I don't want her
to look into that Master Screen down there and see it. That's all I'm
asking, guy, and it ain't much. Just a flick of a switch is all I'm
asking. It ain't much. It ain't, is it?"

_It ain't, hey? By God!_

"When the hood comes down, she'll see it. She's bound to," the thin
man went on fast. "She'll see the flash in the Screen and she'll know
it's me, and she's never done anything to deserve that. That's all I'm
asking, guy. That's all I'm asking."

The silence in the cell was a thick thing. Tony could feel the sweat
rolling down his back again. But a different kind of a sweat now--not
a sweat for himself, a sweat for somebody else. Just one finger touch
on that visi-lok matswitch would do it. Just one finger, and the small
woman downstairs in _Portal Waiting_ wouldn't know, would have one more
instant of waiting, of hoping against hope. Of suspense. Of breathing
in the air we all breathe in, of being alive, sentient; and knowing
that her man, the thin fellow with the tousled, curly hair, was still
sentient, too.

"Well, guy?"

Tony wet his lips. "Sorry, Haley. Petition refused." The hood came
down. The Master Screen up on the wall blazed into life.

       *       *       *       *       *

Tony sat at his black desk with his hands folded, fingers laced. That's
Executions for you. And this is war. There's a war on. Don't forget
that. He looked down at his hands, sighed. Then he reached out and
touched the Supplies and Control button.

"Hell-hips!" he growled.

He looked at the screen. It wasn't hell-hips. It was a blonde. Not
a young blonde, a scarecrow blonde. An old wretched piece of living
mechanism like himself.

"Where's Clacker?" he asked.

"Mr. Clacker is no longer with us, Mr. Radek."

"Huh? What happened to him?"

"Mr. Clacker has been taken to the three Final Machines for trial and
judgment. I am now taking over here. My name is Hortense. G. Welker
Hortense."

Tony looked at the blonde. Crude, undisguised lights were coming from
the woman's eyes. Promotion-happy.

He said at last: "Sorry as hell about that. The solenoid thing, I
suppose. I didn't mean to get the guy in trouble. I sure didn't mean
that."

"He'd been ordered to change it. It was no one's fault but his own. You
were only doing your duty, I'm sure. And duty comes above everything."

"Yeah. Yeah, sure. I know." He sighed once more. "Get me an airbrush
and a bottle of white paint."

"What?"

"I want an airbrush and a bottle of white paint. I want to paint my
nice little ritual roses. I don't like red any more. I want all white
ones."

"Mr. Radek...?"

Tony glared. "Do I get that paint or don't I? Don't just stand there!"
His fist banged down on Supplies and Control button. The Master Screen
went blank, and then flashed into motion again fast. The blonde again.
Nasty now. A chip off the old block. Another hell-hips, but this time
with skirts.

"Request not granted! This is entirely against regulations, Mr. Radek!
Specifically, against ordinance 1991, of the Code of...."

"Oh, can it," he growled wearily. "For God's sake, don't give me any
more of that."

The blonde stiffened. "Well! After all, I'm only doing my duty, Mr.
Radek. As head of Supplies and Control, I have certain well-defined and
inflexible...."

Tony blacked her out. He held her blacked out till he was sure she
wouldn't come on again. Duty.

The Master Clock made a quiet blipping noise. Amber Official lights
dimmed and Emote Neutral came on. Long, probing shadow fingers snaked
here and there across the floor, and a stillness that should have been
restful descended eventually on the place.

"_Radek!_"

The hard eyes. The hard voice. Tony looked into the screen. "Yes, sir?"

"Radek, that woman is still downstairs in _Portal Waiting_! We can't
have her hanging around all night. Why hasn't she been given her bill
of divorcement and sent home? My God, man, where's your feelings? She's
at least entitled to that."

"Right away, sir. I was just going."

He picked up the square of white paper. He pushed back his chair, got
to his feet, went across the office taking those peculiar, quiet little
steps of his.

Yes, sir. Just going, sir. On my way, sir. Because, sir, as you've
pointed out so clearly, sir, she's at least entitled to that.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Furious Rose, by Dean Evans

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE FURIOUS ROSE ***

***** This file should be named 51257.txt or 51257.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/1/2/5/51257/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
