The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Man Who Was Six, by F. L. Wallace

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: The Man Who Was Six

Author: F. L. Wallace

Release Date: February 24, 2016 [EBook #51295]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MAN WHO WAS SIX ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                          The Man Who Was Six

                           By F. L. WALLACE

                         Illustrated by ASHMAN

           [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from
                Galaxy Science Fiction September 1954.
         Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
         the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]




              There is nothing at all like having a sound
             mind in a sound body, but Dan Merrol had too
             much of one--and also too much of the other!


"Sorry, darling," said Erica. She yawned, added, "I've tried--but I
just can't believe you're my husband."

He felt his own yawn slip off his face. "What do you mean? What am I
doing here then?"

"Can't you remember?" Her laughter tinkled as she pushed him away and
sat up. "They said you were Dan Merrol at the hospital, but they must
have been wrong."

"Hospitals don't make that kind of mistake," he said with a certainty
he didn't altogether feel.

"But _I_ should know, shouldn't I?"

"Of course, but...." He did some verbal backstepping. "It was a
bad accident. You've got to expect that I won't be quite the same
at first." He sat up. "_Look_ at me. Can't you tell who I am?" She
returned his gaze, then swayed toward him. He decided that she was
highly attractive--but surely he ought to have known that long ago.

       *       *       *       *       *

With a visible effort she leaned away from him. "Your left eye does
look familiar," she said cautiously. "The brown one, I mean."

"The _brown_ one?"

"Your other eye's green," she told him.

"Of course--a replacement. I told you it was a serious accident. They
had to use whatever was handy."

"I suppose so--but shouldn't they have tried to stick to the original
color scheme?"

"It's a little thing," he said. "I'm lucky to be alive." He took her
hand. "I believe I can convince you I'm _me_."

"I wish you could." Her voice was low and sad and he couldn't guess why.

"My name is Dan Merrol."

"They told you that at the hospital."

They hadn't--he'd read it on the chart. But he had been alone in the
room and the name had to be his, and anyway he _felt_ like Dan Merrol.
"Your name is Erica."

"They told you that too."

She was wrong again, but it was probably wiser not to tell her how he
knew. No one had said anything to him in the hospital. He hadn't given
them a chance. He had awakened in a room and hadn't wanted to be alone.
He'd got up and read the chart and searched dizzily through the closet.
Clothes were hanging there and he'd put them on and muttered her name
to himself. He'd sat down to gain strength and after a while he'd
walked out and no one had stopped him.

It was night when he left the hospital and the next thing he remembered
was her face as he looked through the door. Her name hadn't been on the
chart nor her address and yet he had found her. That proved something,
didn't it? "How could I forget you?" he demanded.

"You may have known someone else with that name. When were we married?"

Maybe he should have stayed in the hospital. It would have been easier
to convince her there. But he'd been frantic to get home. "It was quite
a smashup," he said. "You'll have to expect some lapses."

"I'm making allowances. But can't you tell me something about myself?"

He thought--and couldn't. He wasn't doing so well. "Another lapse,"
he said gloomily and then brightened. "But I can tell you lots about
myself. For instance, I'm a specialist in lepidoptera."

"What's that?"

"At the moment, who knows? Anyway, I'm a well-known actor and a
musician and a first-rate mathematician. I can't remember any equations
offhand except C equals pi R squared. It has to do with the velocity
of light. And the rest of the stuff will come back in time." It was
easier now that he'd started and he went on rapidly. "I'm thirty-three
and after making a lot of money wrestling, married six girls, not
necessarily in this order--Lucille, Louise, Carolyn, Katherine, Shirley
and Miriam." That was quite a few marriages--maybe it was thoughtless
of him to have mentioned them. No woman approves her predecessors.

"That's six. Where do I come in?"

"Erica. You're the seventh and best." It was just too many, now that he
thought of it, and it didn't seem right.

She sighed and drew away. "That was a lucky guess on your age."

       *       *       *       *       *

Did that mean he wasn't right on anything else? From the expression
on her face, it did. "You've got to expect me to be confused in the
beginning. Can't you really tell who I am?"

"I _can't_! You don't have the same personality at all." She glanced at
her arm. There was a bruise on it.

"Did I do that?" he asked.

"You did, though I'm sure you didn't mean to. I don't think you
realized how strong you were. Dan was always too gentle--he must have
been afraid of me. And _you_ weren't at all."

"Maybe I was impetuous," he said. "But it was such a long time."

"Almost three months. But most of that time you were floating in
gelatin in the regrowth tank, unconscious until yesterday." She
leaned forward and caressed his cheek. "Everything seems wrong, no
matter how hard I try to believe otherwise. You don't have the same
personality--you can't remember anything."

"And I have one brown eye and one green."

"It's not just that, darling. Go over to the mirror."

He had been seriously injured and he was still weak from the shock. He
got up and walked unsteadily to the mirror. "Now what?"

"Stand beside it. Do you see the line?" Erica pointed to the glass.

He did--it was a mark level with his chin. "What does it mean?"

"That should be the top of Dan Merrol's head," she said softly.

He was a good six inches taller than he ought to be. But there must be
some explanation for the added height. He glanced down at his legs.
They were the same length from hip bone to the soles of his feet, but
the proportions differed from one side to the other. His knees didn't
match. _Be-dum, be-dum, be-dumdum, but your knees don't match_--the
snatch of an ancient song floated through his head.

Quickly, he scanned himself. It was the same elsewhere. The upper right
arm was massive, too big for the shoulder it merged with. And the
forearm, while long, was slender. He blinked and looked again. While
they were patching him up, did they really think he needed black, red
and brown hair? He wondered how a beagle felt.

       *       *       *       *       *

What were they, a bunch of humorists? Did they, for comic effect, piece
together a body out of bits and scraps left over from a chopping block?
It was himself he was looking at, otherwise he'd say the results were
neither hideous nor horrible, but merely--well, what? Ludicrous and
laughable--and there were complications in that too. Who wants to be
an involuntary clown, a physical buffoon that Mother Nature hadn't
duplicated since Man began?

He felt the stubble on his face with his left hand--he _thought_ it
was his left hand--at least it was on that side. The emerging whiskers
didn't feel like anything he remembered. Wait a minute--was it _his_
memory? He leaned against the wall and nearly fell down. The length of
that arm was unexpectedly different.

He hobbled over to a chair and sat down, staring miserably at Erica as
she began dressing. There was quite a contrast between the loveliness
of her body and the circus comedy of his own.

"Difficult, isn't it?" she said, tugging her bra together and closing
the last snap, which took considerable effort. She was a small girl
generally, though not around the chest.

It was difficult and in addition to his physique there were the
memories he couldn't account for. Come to think of it, he must have
been awfully busy to have so many careers in such a short time--_and_
all those wives too.

Erica came close and leaned comfortingly against him, but he wasn't
comforted. "I waited till I was sure. I didn't want to upset you."

He wasn't as sure as she seemed to be now. Somehow, maybe he was still
Dan Merrol--but he wasn't going to insist on it--not after looking at
himself. Not after trying to sort out those damned memories.

She was too kind, pretending to be a little attracted to him, to the
scrambled face, to the mismatched lumps and limbs and shapes that,
stretching the term, currently formed his body. It was clear what he
had to do.

       *       *       *       *       *

The jacket he had worn last night didn't fit. Erica cut off the sleeve
that hung far over his fingertips on one side and basted it to the
sleeve that ended well above his wrist, on the other. The shoulders
were narrow, but the material would stretch and after shrugging around
in it, he managed to expand it so it was not too tight.

The trousers were also a problem--six inches short with no material
to add on, but here again Erica proved equal to the task and, using
the cuffs, contrived to lengthen them. Shoes were another difficulty.
For one foot the size was not bad, but he could almost step out of the
other shoe. When she wasn't looking, he wadded up a spare sock and
stuffed it in the toe.

He looked critically at himself in the mirror. Dressed, his total
effect was better than he had dared hope it would be. True, he did look
_different_.

Erica gazed at him with melancholy affection. "I can't understand why
they let you out wearing those clothes--or for that matter, why they
let you out at all."

He must have given some explanation as he'd stumbled through the door.
What was it?

"When I brought the clothes yesterday, they told me I couldn't see you
for a day or so," she mused aloud. "It was the first time you'd been
out of the regrowth tank--where no one could see you--and they didn't
know the clothes wouldn't fit. You were covered with a sheet, sleeping,
I think. They let me peek in and I could make out a corner of your
face."

It was the clothes, plus the brief glimpse of his face, which had made
her think she recognized him when he came in.

"They told me you'd have to have psychotherapy and I'd have to have
orientation before I could see you. That's why I was so surprised when
you rang the bell."

His head was churning with ideas, trying to sort them out. Part of last
night was dim, part sharp and satisfying.

"What's Wysocki's theorem?" she asked.

"_Whose_ theorem?"

"Wysocki's. I started to call the hospital and you wouldn't let me,
because of the theorem. You said you'd explain it this morning." She
glanced at the bruise on her arm.

It was then he'd grabbed her, to keep her from talking to the hospital.
He'd been unnecessarily rough, but that could be ascribed to lack of
coordination. She could have been terrified, might have resisted--but
she hadn't. At that time, she must have half-believed he was Dan
Merrol, still dangerously near the edges of post-regrowth shock.

       *       *       *       *       *

She was looking at him, waiting for that explanation. He shook his
mind frantically and the words came out. "Self-therapy," he said
briskly. "The patient alone understands what he needs." She started to
interrupt, but he shook his head and went on blithely. "That's the
first corollary of the theorem. The second is that there are critical
times in the recovery of the patient. At such times, with the least
possible supervision, he should be encouraged to make his own decisions
and carry them through by himself, even though running a slight risk of
physical complications."

"That's new, isn't it?" she said. "I always thought they watched the
patient carefully."

It ought to be new--he'd just invented it. "You know how rapidly
medical practices change," he said quickly. "Anyway, when they
examined me last night, I was much stronger than they expected--so,
when I wanted to come home, they let me. It's their latest belief that
initiative is more important than perfect health."

"Strange," she muttered. "But you are very strong." She looked at him
and blushed. "Initiative, certainly you have. Dan could use some,
wherever he is."

Dan again, whether it was himself or another person. For a brief time,
as she listened to him, he'd had the silly idea that.... But it could
never happen to him. He'd better leave now while she was distracted and
bewildered and believed what he was saying. "I've got to go. I'm due
back," he told her.

"Not before you eat," she said. "Any man who's spent the night with me
is hungry in the morning."

It was a domestic miracle that amidst all the pressing and fitting,
she'd somehow prepared breakfast and he hadn't noticed. It was a simple
chore with the automatics, but to him it seemed a proof of her wifely
skill.

He wanted to protest, but didn't. Maybe it was the hand she was
holding--it seemed to be equipped with a better set of nerves than its
predecessor. It tingled at her touch. Sadly, he sat down and looked at
his food. Eat? Did he want to eat? Oddly enough, he did.

"How much do you remember of the accident?" She shoved aside her own
food and sat watching him.

       *       *       *       *       *

Not a thing, now that she asked. In fact, there wasn't much he did
remember. There had been the chart at his bed-side, with one word
scrawled on it--_accident_--and that was where he'd got the idea. There
had been other marks too, but he hadn't been able to decipher them. He
nodded and said nothing and she took it as he thought she would.

"It wasn't anybody's fault. The warning devices which were supposed to
work didn't," she began. "A Moon ship collided with a Mars liner in
the upper atmosphere. The ships broke up in several parts and since
they are compartmented and the delay rockets switched on immediately,
the separate parts fell rather gently, considering how high they were.
Casualties weren't as great as you might think.

"Parts of the two ships fell together, the rest were scattered. There
was some interchange of passengers in the wreckage, but since you were
found in the control compartment of the Mars liner, they assumed you
were the pilot. They never let me see you until yesterday and then
it was just a glimpse. I took their word when they said you were Dan
Merrol."

At least he knew who or what Dan Merrol was--the pilot of the Mars
liner. They had assumed he was the pilot because of where he was found,
but he might have been tossed there--impact did strange things.

Dan Merrol was a spaceship pilot and he hadn't included it among his
skills. It was strange that she had believed him at all. But now that
it was out in the open, he did remember some facts about spaceships. He
felt he could manage a takeoff at this instant.

But why hadn't he told her? Shock? Perhaps--but where had those other
identities come from--lepidopterist, musician, actor, mathematician
and wrestler? And where had he got memories of wives, slender and
passionate, petite and wild, casual and complaisant, nagging and
insecure?

Erica he didn't remember at all, save from last night, and what was
that due to?

"What are you going to do?" he asked, deliberately toying with the last
bite of breakfast. It gave him time to think.

"They said they'd identified everyone, living or dead, and I supposed
they had. After seeing you, I can believe they made any number of
similar mistakes. Dan Merrol may be alive under another name. It will
be hard to do, but I must try to find him. Some of the accident victims
went to other hospitals, you know, the ones located nearest where they
fell."

Even if he was sure, he didn't know whether he could tell her--and he
wasn't sure any longer, although he had been. On the physical side of
marriage, how could he ask her to share a body she'd have to laugh at?
Later, he might tell her, if there was to be a 'later.' He pushed back
his chair and looked at her uncertainly.

"Let me call a 'copter," she said. "I hate to see you go."

"Wysocki's theorem," he told her. "The patient has decided to walk."
He weaved toward the door and twisted the knob. He turned in time to
catch her in his arms.

"I know this is wrong," she said, pressing against him.

It might be wrong, but it was very pleasant, though he did guess her
motives. She was a warmhearted girl and couldn't help pitying him.
"Don't be so damned considerate," he mumbled.

"You'll have to put me down," she said, averting her eyes.
"Otherwise.... You're an intolerable funny man."

He knew it--he could see himself in the mirror. He was something to
laugh at when anyone got tired of pretending sympathy. He put her down
and stumbled out. He thought he could hear the bed creak as she threw
herself on it.


II

Once he got started, walking wasn't hard. His left side swung at a
different rate from his right, but that was due to the variation in
the length of his thighs and lower legs, and the two rhythms could be
reconciled. He swept along, gaining control of his muscles. He became
aware that he was whizzing past everyone.

He slowed down--he didn't want to attract attention. It was difficult
but he learned to walk at a pedestrian pace. However poorly they'd
matched his legs, they'd given him good ones.

Last night, on an impulse, he'd left the hospital and now he had to go
back. _Had_ to? Of course. There were too many uncertainties still to
be settled. He glanced around. It was still very early in the morning
and normal traffic was just beginning. Maybe they hadn't missed him
yet, though it was unlikely.

He seemed to know the route well enough and covered the distance in a
brief time. He turned in at the building and, scanning the directory,
went at once to the proper floor and stopped at the desk.

       *       *       *       *       *

The receptionist was busy with the drawer of the desk. "Can I help
you?" she asked, continuing to peer down.

"The director--Doctor Crander. I don't have an appointment."

"Then the director can't see you." The girl looked up and her firmly
polite expression became a grimace of barely suppressed laughter.

Then laughter was swept away. What replaced it he couldn't say, but it
didn't seem related to humor. She placed her hand near his but it went
astray and got tangled with his fingers. "I just thought of a joke,"
she murmured. "Please don't think that I consider you at all funny."

The hell she didn't--and it was the second time within the hour a woman
had used that word on him. He wished they'd stop. He took back his
hand, the slender one, an exquisite thing that might once have belonged
to a musician. Was there an instrument played with one hand? The other
one was far larger and clumsier, more suited to mayhem than music.
"When can I see the director?"

She blinked at him. "A patient?" She didn't need to look twice to see
that he had been one. "The director does occasionally see ex-patients."

He watched her appreciatively as she went inside. The way she walked,
you'd think she had a special audience. Presently the door opened and
she came back, batting her eyes vigorously.

"You can go in now," she said huskily. Strange, her voice had dropped
an octave in less than a minute. "The old boy tried to pretend he was
in the middle of a grave emergency."

On his way in, he miscalculated, or she did, and he brushed against
her. The touch was pleasant, but not thrilling. That reaction seemed
reserved for Erica.

"Glad to see you," said Doctor Crander, behind the desk. He was nervous
and harassed for so early in the morning. "The receptionist didn't give
me your name. For some reason she seems upset."

She did at that, he thought--probably bewildered by his appearance. The
hospital didn't seem to have a calming influence on either her or the
doctor. "That's why I came here. I'm not sure who I am. I thought I was
Dan Merrol."

Doctor Crander tried to fight his way through the desk. Being a little
wider and solider, though not by much, the desk won. He contented
himself by wiping his forehead. "Our missing patient," he said, sighing
with vast relief. "For a while I had visions of...." He then decided
that visions were nothing a medical man should place much faith in.

"Then I _am_ Dan Merrol?"

The doctor came cautiously around the desk this time. "Of course. I
didn't expect that you'd come walking in my office--that's why I didn't
recognize you immediately." He exhaled peevishly. "Where did you go?
We've been searching for you everywhere."

It seemed wiser to Dan not to tell him everything. "It was stuffy
inside. I went out for a stroll before the nurse came in."

Crander frowned, his nervousness rapidly disappearing. "Then it was
about an hour ago. We didn't think you could walk at all so soon, or we
would have kept someone on duty through the night."

       *       *       *       *       *

They had underestimated him, but he didn't mind. Of course, he didn't
know how a patient from the regrowth tanks was supposed to act.
The doctor took his pulse. "Seems fine," he said, surprised. "Sit
down--please sit down."

Without waiting for him to comply, Crander pushed him into a chair and
began hauling out a variety of instruments with which he poked about
his bewildered patient.

Finally Crander seemed satisfied. "Excellent," he said. "If I didn't
know better, I'd say you were almost fully recovered. A week ago, we
considered removing you from the regrowth tank. Our decision to leave
you there an extra week has paid off very, very nicely."

Merrol wasn't as pleased as the doctor appeared to be. "Granted you can
identify me as the person who came out of regrowth--but does that mean
I'm Dan Merrol? Could there be a mistake?"

Crander eyed him clinically. "We don't ordinarily do this--but it is
evident that with you peace of mind is more important than procedure.
And you look well enough to stand the physical strain."

He pressed the buzzer and an angular woman in her early forties
answered. "Miss Jerrems, the Dan Merrol file."

Miss Jerrems flashed a glance of open adoration at the doctor and
before she could reel it in, her gaze swept past Dan, hesitated and
returned to him. Her mouth opened and closed like that of a nervous
goldfish and she darted from the room.

_They see me and flee as fast as they can caper_, thought Merrol. It
was not wholly true--Crander didn't seem much affected. But he was a
doctor and used to it. Furthermore, he probably had room for only one
emotion at the moment--relief at the return of his patient.

Miss Jerrems came back, wheeling a large cart. Dan was surprised at the
mass of records. Crander noticed his expression and smiled. "You're
our prize case, Merrol. I've never heard of anyone else surviving
such extensive surgery. Naturally, we have a step-by-step account of
everything we did."

He turned to the woman. "You may leave, Miss Jerrems." She went, but
the adoration she had showed so openly for her employer seemed to have
curdled in the last few moments.

Crander dug into the files and rooted out photographs. "Here are
pictures of the wreckage in which you were found--notice that you were
strapped in your seat--as you were received into the hospital--at
various stages in surgery and finally, some taken from the files of the
company for which you worked."

Merrol winced. The photographic sequence was incontrovertible. He had
been a handsome fellow.

"Here is other evidence you may not have heard of. It's a recent
development, within the last ten years, in fact. It still isn't
accepted by most courts--they're always lagging--but to medical men
it's the last word."

       *       *       *       *       *

Merrol studied the patterns of waves and lines and splotches. "What is
it?"

"Mass-cell radiographs. One was loaned by your employer. The other was
taken just after your last operation. Both were corrected according
to standard methods. One cell won't do it, ten yield an uncertain
identity--but as few as a hundred cells from any part of the original
body, excepting the blood, constitute proof more positive than
fingerprints before the surgical exchange of limbs. Don't ask me
why--no one knows. But it is true that cells differ from one body to
the next, and this test detects the difference."

The mass-cell radiographs did seem identical and Dr. Crander seemed
certain. Taken altogether, the evidence was overwhelming. There had
been no mistake--he was Dan Merrol, though it was not difficult to
understand why Erica couldn't believe he was her husband.

"You did a fine job," he said. Recalling the picture of the wreckage,
he knew they had. "But couldn't you have done just a little better?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Crander's eyebrows bounced up. "We're amazed at how well we have
done. You can search case histories and find nothing comparable." His
eyebrows dropped back into place. "Of course, if you have a specific
complaint...."

"Nothing specific. But look at this hand...."

The doctor seized it. "Beautiful, isn't it?"

"Perhaps--taken by itself." Dan rolled up his sleeve. "See how it joins
the forearm."

Crander waggled it gravely. "It coordinates perfectly. I've observed
you have complete control over it. The doctor's eye, my boy. The
doctor's diagnostic eye."

The other just didn't understand. "But the size--it doesn't match my
arm!"

"Doesn't _match_?" cried the doctor. "Do you have any idea of the
biological ways in which it _does_ match? True, it may not be
esthetically harmonized, but here we delve into the mysteries of the
human organism, and we can hardly be striving for Botticelli bodies and
Michelangelo men. First, your hand moves freely at the joint, a triumph
of surgical skill." He moved the hand experimentally, to show Merrol
how it was done. He dropped the hand and hurried to a screen against
the wall.

Crander drew his finger across the surface and the mark remained. "You
know about Rh positive and negative blood. Mixed, they can be lethal.
This was discovered long ago, by someone I've forgotten. But there are
other factors just as potent and far more complex."

He scribbled meaningless symbols on the screen with his finger. "Take
the bone factors--three. They must be matched in even such a slight
contact as a joint ... this was done. Then there are the tissue
factors--four. Tendon factors--two. Nerve-splice factors--three
again. After that, we move into a complex field, hormone-utilization
factors--seven at the latest count and more coming up with further
research.

"That's the beginning, but at the sensory organs we leave the simple
stuff behind. Take the eye, for instance." Merrol leaned away because
Dr. Crander seemed about to pluck one of Dan's eyes from its socket.
"Surgical and growth factors involved in splicing a massive nerve
bundle pass any layman's comprehension. There are no non-technical
terms to describe it."

       *       *       *       *       *

It was just as well--Merrol didn't want a lecture. He extended his
arms. One was of normal length, the other longer. "Do you think you can
do something with this? I don't mind variation in thickness--some of
that will smooth out as I exercise--but I'd like them the same length."

"There were many others injured at the same time, you know--and you
were one of the last to be extricated from the ship. Normally, when
we have to replace a whole arm, we do so at the shoulder for obvious
reasons. But the previously treated victims had depleted our supplies.
Some needed only a hand and we gave them just that, others a hand and
a forearm, and so on. When we got to you, we had to use leftovers or
permit you to die--there wasn't time to send to other hospitals. In
fact there wasn't any time at all--we actually thought you were dead,
but soon found we were wrong."

Crander stared at a crack in the ceiling. "Further recovery will take
other operations and your nervous system isn't up to it." He shook his
head. "Five years from now, we can help you, not before."

Merrol turned away miserably. There were other things, but he had
learned the essentials. He was Dan Merrol and there was nothing they
could do for him until it was too late. How long could he expect Erica
to wait?

The doctor hadn't finished the medical session. "Replacement of body
parts is easy, after all. The big trouble came when we went into the
brain."

"Brain?" Dan was startled.

"How hard do you think your skull is?" Crander came closer. "Bend your
head."

Merrol obeyed and could feel the doctor's forefinger slice across his
scalp in a mock operation. "This sector was crushed." Roughly half his
brain, it appeared. "That's why so many memories were gone--not just
from shock. In addition, other sectors were damaged and had to be
replaced."

Crander traced out five areas he could feel, but not see. "Samuel
Kaufman, musician--Breed Mannly, cowboy actor--George Elkins,
lepidopterist--Duke DeCaesares, wrestler--and Ben Eisenberg,
mathematician, went into the places I tapped."

Dan raised his head. Some things were clearer. The memories were
authentic, but they weren't his--nor did the other wives belong to him.
It was no wonder Erica had cringed at their names.

"These donors were dead, but you can be thankful we had parts of their
brains available." Crander delved into the file and came up with a
sheet.

"Here are some body part contributors." He read rapidly. "Dimwiddie,
Barton, Colton, Morton, Flam and Carnera were responsible for arms and
hands. Greenberg, Rochefault, Gonzalez, Tall-Cloud, Gowraddy and Tsin
supplied feet and legs."

       *       *       *       *       *

He was not a man, Merrol thought. Not now. If anything, he was a
convention and one body was not a large enough hotel to hold it in
comfort.

"These were the major human donors, but there were others I didn't
bother to read, for the kidneys and so on. And I think our four-footed
friends deserve some mention." He looked up. "The skin on your face is
from a pig embryo."

That explained why it was hard to shave. "_Oink?_" he said. "I mean did
it have to be a pig?"

"You'd be surprised how hard it is to transplant human skin," commented
Crander. "Besides, we wanted to give you a masculine look. The finest
face there is, genuine pigskin."

Merrol felt like a wallet.

The doctor droned on through the list, but Merrol scarcely listened.
Only once did he interrupt, to ask incredulously, "Did you say a
_horse_?"

"Is there anything wrong with a horse?"

Merrol thought back. Come to consider it, there was nothing wrong--in
fact, compliments were more in order.

"The skill that went into matching the unrelated parts that are now
you is a landmark in medical history, quite comparable to Harvey's
discovery of the circulation of the blood," said Dr. Crander. "I
wouldn't believe it if I hadn't participated in it myself. There have
been limb and brain replacements before, but never on such a scale. One
of these days, we'll get out a report that will astound the medical
world."

Without doubt, it would. Merrol tried to feel grateful, but gratitude
refused to come. They had saved him--but was it worth it?

Puzzled, Crander frowned at the buzzer. He'd been pressing it
intermittently for the past few minutes. "Doesn't seem to be working,"
he muttered, heading toward the door through which Merrol had entered.
"Wait here--I'll be back. I have to cancel an appointment."

       *       *       *       *       *

As soon as the door closed, a voice behind Merrol hissed. "I fixed the
buzzer. He went for the guards."

He whirled. Miss Jerrems stood in the doorway that led into the filing
room on the opposite side of the office. "Guards?" he repeated.

"Of course--guards for the violent patients."

"What does that have to do with me?"

"You escaped once, didn't you?"

He hadn't escaped, he had merely walked out when he felt he could. Did
that qualify him as violent? It might. "What of it? I'm no longer a
patient. The doctor said I had recovered."

"That's what he said to _you_. But even if he means it, there's always
psychotherapy, post-re-growth orientation."

Orientation--he hadn't thought of that. They'd want to keep him under
observation for several days and he had no desire to stay hospitalized.
Erica would come to the hospital in a few hours. Perhaps she was there
now, waiting to see someone. Come to think of it, he had got past the
receptionist with remarkable ease. At any rate, if she was insistent
about it, she must eventually get to see the evidence he had just
studied.

And then there would be orientation--for both of them.

Without doubt, he would be taught to accept himself as he was, and
Erica would be trained to look at him without laughter, and together
they would know that beneath his piebald exterior lurked a lovely
personality. Then, well adjusted, they would go home and live happily
ever after. Or would they?

"Don't stand there, if you want to get away," Miss Jerrems whispered
urgently. "Next time they won't take any chances."

They wouldn't. He would be confined to a room he couldn't break out of
with guards disguised as nurses. Blindly he moved toward the door.

"Not there," she exclaimed. "Do you want to walk right into them? This
way. They won't look for you in here." She clasped his hand in her bony
fingers and led him through the maze of files to an elevator. "This
takes you to the ground floor," she said. "Once outside, you can get
away."

He probably could--it was a large building and it would take a
prolonged search to determine that he was not inside it.

She smiled peculiarly, clearing her throat. "Thirty-seven Brighton
Drive."

Mechanically he repeated the number. "What is it?"

"That's where you can find out."

"Find out what?"

"What they did to you here. I can't tell you now," she whispered
nervously. "Oh, _do_ hurry!"

If he had to move fast, this seemed a good time. The elevator dropped
him to the street level and, looking cautiously around, he walked out.
In a few minutes, he was blocks away. It was mid-morning, and he swung
along, hands thrust into his jacket. There was a wad of paper inside
and he fished it out and examined it--money, neatly folded with a note
around it.

The note was from Erica, saying that the money was meant for him. The
sum was not great, but she must have given him everything she had in
the house. Mistily, he counted it out.


III

Dan hadn't been stopped and didn't expect to be. He wasn't a criminal,
but until the hospital released him, he was technically a mental case.
But Crander would hardly be anxious to report to the police that a
patient was missing--not until he had tried everything else.

Merrol took the elevator. It was a bright new apartment building, which
conferred some social status and not much else on those living in it.

Miss Jerrems opened the door. "Come in," she said, looking around
furtively as he slipped past her.

He sat down gingerly, watching her scurry about. He tried to protest,
but nothing he said had any effect on her aggressive hospitality.
She thrust a cup of watery coffee in his hand and placed a tray of
breakfast rolls beside him.

She sat facing him. Their knees almost touched--it was a narrow room.
"I came home at once," she said, not very successful in her attempt to
control her excitement. "I told them I was upset and, after my long
years of service, they didn't question me. I tore my dress and told
them you had done it. I said that you ran up toward the top of the
building."

He appreciated her motives, but thought she shouldn't have tried so
hard to convince them. Now they had reason to think he was violent.

"Until today, I've been devoted to Doctor Crander," she said sternly.

He recalled the first look on her face in the doctor's office--and the
one after she had seen him. In seconds, her whole attitude had changed.
Why?

"I heard what he told you." She hissed the word--"Lies."

Dan stared at her skeptically. "They didn't do what he said?"

"Oh, the facts were straight enough," she said bitterly. "It was the
reasons he concealed. They thought you didn't have a chance, so they
did all sorts of strange things they never tried on anyone else. You
were an experiment, that's all--but you surprised them."

The hospital was looking for the wrong mental case. They had one
working for them and didn't know it. He didn't doubt that she was
right--about his being an experiment--but her observations were wrong.
It was due entirely to their unorthodox procedures that he was alive.

She looked him over carefully and he knew that the halves of his face
didn't match by a ridiculous margin, that one shoulder was heavier than
the other, that his hair was in three colors. Even in repose and fully
clothed, so that some of the discrepancies of his physique were hidden,
he was hardly presentable.

"When I saw you standing there today, I realized what they had done to
you and my loyalty to the institution and the doctor vanished," she
said earnestly. "And the psychotherapy isn't to help you, it's to make
sure you won't protest over what they've done. That's why I had to get
you away. They've ruined you and now _you_ must ruin _them_."

He had half-suspected it would come to this--but he hadn't been sure.
"I don't want to ruin them," he said slowly. "I'd rather be alive, even
as an experiment. And if you're thinking of a malpractice suit, you saw
the files. I couldn't win against that."

"I ought to know about the files--I worked on them." Her eyes sparkled
and her voice lowered. "What if the evidence is missing?"

       *       *       *       *       *

He sat back. With her co-operation, the vital parts of the file could
vanish and, with that gone, he could collect a staggering amount from
the institution. He had only to appear and no jury or panels of experts
would decide against him. Is that what she had planned so swiftly
in the director's office--that she would share the money with him?
Somehow, he couldn't believe money meant that much to her. "I can't
permit it," he said. "In spite of everything, I feel obligated."

She flung herself across the narrow space. "I expected you to be
noble," she sobbed. "One look at you, and I knew I had met the
loneliest person in the world."

Like called to like, at least for her, and that explained why she had
grimaced when she had first seen him. It was her counterpart of the
receptionist's reaction. It explained, too, why she was willing to turn
against the doctor she had previously adored. As for the money, she
didn't want it for herself, but as bait for him--and he'd have to take
her with it.

She had guessed wrong on all counts. He would have thrust her away, but
it would have been too cruel. He tried to comfort her, and she dried
her eyes on his shoulder. "Darling," she sniffled. "I've never yielded
to any man, but if it will help you...."

She pressed close and he couldn't get away without breaking through
the thin walls of the cramped apartment. He had never known a female
form could be shaped around so many bones. "These things take time," he
said, though they didn't. "Let's not rush into anything we'll regret."
He seemed to arouse the motherly instinct in some women, if only in the
future tense.

Presently, she sat up, blowing her nose and looking ardently at him
through tear-rimmed eyes. "You can stay here. You've no place else to
go, and they'll be looking for you."

"Well," he said--but it was true. He shouldn't be wandering on the
streets.

He slept that night on a sink that converted to a bed. It would have
been more comfortable unconverted.

       *       *       *       *       *

He crept out in the morning before she was awake. He paused outside
to scribble a note, principally to throw her off his track. You never
could tell with so unstable a person. Implicated in his escape, she
might nevertheless report to the hospital. He shoved the note under the
door and left quickly and quietly.

His first move was to buy a hat, which entailed further trouble. The
doctors had overcompensated in replacing the missing brain tissue and,
in piecing a skull together, had constructed an outsized head on which
nothing seemed to fit. By careful shopping, he found something that did
fit and, when he'd clapped it on, he happily noted it concealed the
tricolor hair ... one item less to attract attention.

He ate and afterward walked to the rocketport. It was a long distance
and formerly he might have complained, but now he didn't mind it. The
miles seemed to have shrunk to furlongs.

He found the big _Interplanet_ sign and examined the place minutely
from the outside. Once he had worked there, technically he still did.
Some memories came back, but not many. He needed at least an hour
inside to enable him to forget the hospital and its psychotherapy.

Once cleared, he would be free for a while to concentrate on what to do
about Erica.

The hospital evidently had yet to call in the police. He was still safe
on the streets, but the medicos must have notified _Interplanet_ and
all other places at which he might show up. However, the company was
too big for everyone to know about him this soon. More likely there
would be only a few who could have information on him as yet. The trick
was to bypass those individuals who might try to detain him and still
get where he wanted.

Normally, he'd go to the front office after an accident. This time, he
went to the side gate and when the guard looked at him questioningly,
mumbled, "Reporting for duty." Which got him through.

Inside, there were more memories awaiting him. Depending on them, he
walked rapidly through hall after hall and finally found the desk he
sought. The man behind it looked up. "Are you sure you're in the right
place?" he asked.

Merrol would soon know. "Reporting for duty," he stated.

This reply elicited a puzzled expression. "The devil you are. We
haven't hired anyone new."

"I'm not new. I've been injured, and this is my first time back. Dan
Merrol's my name."

"Okay, where's your slip?"

"Slip?" he asked, stalling. This was something he ought to know about,
but didn't.

"Sure, the release from the front office after an injury."

"They said they'd send it down," he replied, holding his breath.

       *       *       *       *       *

The clerk pawed through the stack. "They don't send nothing down," he
growled. "I'll call and find out." His hand reached out and then he
relaxed. "No use bothering them, it'll get here tomorrow." He looked up
and laughed. "Red tape," he said by way of explanation. "Why should I
doubt you? If you said they released you, then they did."

Merrol was glad to see one man who wasn't impressed by office routines.
Still, his behavior was a little puzzling.

The man screened on. The communication unit was behind the desk, tilted
so he couldn't see it. The volume was low, but Dan could hear the
conversation from this end. "Got a case for you. Name is Dan Merrol. I
don't know, he's before my time."

The reply was faint and Dan didn't catch it. But the clerk added, "He
seems okay. What? Sure he's got a release. Would I send him in?"

He cut the connection and looked up. "Go over to Psych. They'll test
you. If you pass, we'll put you back on schedule." He started to turn
away and saw Merrol standing there. "What's the matter?"

"I don't know where Psych is."

"I see. We must have moved things since you were here." The man got up
and pointed. "Down there and turn left at the second corner. You can't
miss."

The examiner was scanning a card as he entered. "Lots of experience,"
he commented. "We'll pass over the written stuff. That's for kids, to
make sure they've studied their lessons. After you've been out this
long, you can almost feel a course faster than anyone can figure it."

It was a relief. Merrol didn't know how much theory he remembered, but
was sure he could still lift a ship as well as the next man.

The examiner made a notation on the card and tossed it into a machine
that snapped it up and clicked furiously over it. "Let's take the
biggest thing first, if you're up to it."

"I feel fine." It was not true, but it was the customary answer.
Anything else, and he'd be shunted off into a series of meaningless
tests, each designed to verify the results of previous tests. An
ingenious scheme rigged up by the psych crew in their spare time
to see how complicated they could make any given system. Answered
straightforwardly, they rushed a man through with a minimum of
officiousness.

"Okay, let's take the trip."

He accompanied Dan into a room unlike the others. For one thing, it
might have been the control room of a ship. Forward, there was the
usual clear view. The stars were there too, in an adaptation of the
planetarium. Outside, arranged to give any effect from top acceleration
to free fall, were a number of gravity coils. Except for the pilot--and
Merrol would play that role--there was a full complement of officers
who were invisible.

       *       *       *       *       *

The tester flicked on a machine. "I'll give you Mars, because that's
your usual run. This is a short drive, because you're in a favorable
position. Got it?"

Merrol nodded and climbed into the seat, facing the instruments.

"I've turned on the best crew simulators, better than you'd ever
actually get. Don't worry about them, just take the data and flit the
way you think you should." The tester clamped a mike inches away and
adjusted the visio-recorders firmly on his head, where electron beams
could sneak in and tap his optic centers. "The first trip after you've
been away is rough, but you'll make it."

Merrol strapped himself in and hoped the other man was right.

The examiner went to the door, turned and grinned. "Watch out for the
interplanetary goose," he called and snapped the switch.

Merrol was now in a ship. In the back of his mind there was some doubt
of his ability, but it didn't reach as far as his fingers. Rockets
vibrated beneath him. Outside, he could see the glazed earth-slick. He
touched the power and climbed above the clouds. The sky turned black
and there were stars.

He checked position. The tester had given him a setup. The Moon was
out of the way and the run to Mars was the shortest on record. If he
couldn't handle this, he wasn't a pilot.

The seat jabbed him suddenly. That's what he'd been warned about--he'd
been expecting it and still wasn't prepared. The tempathy drugs flooded
into him and the needle was withdrawn.

Takeoff and landing were always rehearsed on the pilot's own time.
The ends of a voyage were critical and it was essential to have an
undistorted reaction. Besides, neither took long.

The time between one planet and the next was long and nothing much
happened, so it could be shortened without deleterious effect on the
results. Tempathy drugs shortened it, though not completely. Part of a
man's consciousness went along at normal speed and the rest, that which
counted in jockeying rockets, was enormously telescoped.

It telescoped on Merrol. He couldn't see. Rather, part of him could
but, for the other fraction, images passed in front of his eyes too
fast for his mind to evaluate. Weeks flipped past in minutes. It
was a dream world turned inside out--the roles of consciousness and
unconsciousness were reversed.

There was something wrong with the sounds he half-heard. He could get
emotions, though he couldn't separate them into sense. There were
additional voices that shouldn't be there--the mechanical crew spoke to
him giving silent data--but there were other actual voices, fearful or
consolatory. He tried to speak, but his vocal cords were preempted.

He was doing it all, speaking, moving the controls, directing the ship
between planets. It ought to be easier than takeoff, but it wasn't. He
shouldn't be afraid of anything he might find out there--which was
nothing--but that didn't alter conditions. He was profoundly disturbed,
and he hoped the tester noticed it.

The examiner did spot trouble. He opened the door and reversed the
switch. Lights went on, and another needle speared him, counteracting
the effects of the tempathy drugs. Slowly the ship disappeared, space
along with it, and the room whirled back into view and settled down.
Something handed him back his eyes and ears.

"Easy," said the man. "Sit there. You don't have to move. We'll find
out what's wrong. It may not be serious at all."

       *       *       *       *       *

Unhooking the visio-recorder, the tester also swung the mike away. "You
were doing fine," he said. "Never saw anything smoother. About here,
though, you seemed to be having difficulty. We'll slow it down and see
what it was."

He snapped the reels in place and darkened the room. On the screen
was the vision-port and, through it, a view of Mars. A fleck of light
glittered, grew, became a cloud, a swarm. A swarm?

"God!" said the tester, bewildered. "A billion butterflies! How could
you imagine butterflies, twenty million miles from a planet?"

Merrol squirmed--he didn't know either. What was wrong with him to make
him dream up butterflies?

The examiner switched the film off and the lights on. "So you missed
them--why, I don't know." He fiddled with another machine. "We'll slow
down the sound, synchronize the two of them later, but maybe by itself
the sound will give us a clue as to what happened."

"What's that?" It came from the sound track, but it was Merrol's voice.

"Those are lepidoptera." Another voice, also his, though of different
pitch and timbre--his, because he was the only one there to speak.
"I've always dreamed of discovering a new species and at last I have,
since these can fly through space. What strange adaptations they have
made. Aren't they beautiful?"

He answered. "They won't be when I plow through them. The rockets will
fry them."

"Turn aside!" shouted the lepidopterist. "You can't destroy them."

"I'm going to act as if this were not happening," said a cultured
voice. "_Bang-bang!_"

"This is upsetting," said a different person. "Since I have
no instrument, I'll listen with my memory to a Bach concerto.
Unfortunately, it ends in the middle of the third movement, as though
it has been sliced through with a knife that separated one note cleanly
from the next. Still, it's better to have this than nothing."

"Your computers are awfully slow," said the fifth. "I'll figure out a
new course for us."

"Gimme the controls," said the wrestler. "I'll turn the ship, if I
hafta do it with my bare hands."

The examiner snapped off the sound and busied himself with things that
may have been necessary. "You don't have to sit there," he said after a
while. "Wait outside." He glanced down, "Be careful when you move, the
control column will fall off. Didn't know it could be broken."

As he got out of the seat, the examiner slapped his back. "Tell you
what, fellow--don't wait--go now to the Compensation Board and see
about retirement."


IV

Merrol sat in the room where he had been sitting for a day and a half
since the psych test. He had walked out immediately, found a room and
was still in it. It wasn't comfortable, sitting. Whichever position was
right for the bend of one knee was wrong for the other.

He had depended on the test to get him out of a jam, but the stratagem
had failed. If he had passed, he'd have been another experienced pilot
for the _Interplanet_ string and that meant something. Experienced men
were valuable and I. P. would have gone to bat for him.

Not everyone could pass the test and, while it didn't prove that the
man who did was one hundred per cent sane, it was a big argument
in that direction. It was evidence that would have to be respected
publicly, whatever private doubts a psychotherapist might have.

Unwittingly, he had provided additional ammunition against himself.
When the results of the test sifted through the layers of red tape to
the front office, _Interplanet_ would contact the hospital, which would
then really want to orient him to a frazzle.

Orientation sounded nice but it was not for Merrol. If they could
orient everyone he would come in contact with as well--but how much
insulation could a man build up against involuntary laughter? It was
fine to be a comedian on the screen and then step out of character
and relax--but what if you couldn't stop? Nobody could adjust to the
constant expectation of hysterical mirth. But wasn't that a reason
to undergo psychotherapy, so they could blunt the edges of his own
reactions? It ought to be, but somehow it wasn't. He didn't dare
submit.

There was a difference, apparently determined by sex, in the way
people behaved toward him. No man had thus far done more than smile
respectfully while he was near. What they did later, he could guess.
Face to face, they seemed to be reserved and incredulous until they
learned to accept him as a member of their species and sex and
then--how _did_ they act? It would take more than casual thinking to
puzzle _that_ out.

Women saw the big joke instantly and giggled, and he couldn't blame
them. Seconds later, they smirked contritely and tried to touch him, as
if contact could atone for their behavior. _They_ noticed appearance at
all times, whereas men didn't as a rule of their own sex.

He paused to re-examine his thoughts. Something seemed to be missing in
his analysis. What it was, he couldn't tell. It would have to come out
later, as he mingled more with people--if he ever did.

       *       *       *       *       *

And that wasn't all. He had been a pilot, but never would be one
again. His skill had been destroyed by the intrusion of five other
personalities, who each brought his own odd bit of useless knowledge to
the whole Merrol. He should have expected it, but he hadn't, nor had
the doctors.

It was obvious--the brain slices that had replaced his own damaged
tissues had to be in healthy condition or they'd never have functioned
properly--and what did those medical fools think was the function of
any brain? He was in command of the group brain because his was the
dominant fraction, but when he sat down and thought about it, what good
did it do? He was sitting down and it didn't do any good, so he got up.

He took two paces across the room and looked out the window, into
windows that looked into his. Compensation was coming to him.
Ultimately, he'd divide it with Erica and go away. She must know by now
that the man she had spent the night with was actually her own husband.
Intellectually she must have decided to accept him.

He wasn't noble, though. Much as he wanted her, he knew he couldn't
live with anyone who had to stifle her laughter when he stepped out of
the bath or into bed.

He walked the carpet aimlessly until, through the window, he caught a
word from the telecast in the next apartment. He thought it sounded
familiar. He yanked the louvers closed and grunted, but it didn't
help--the word bothered him. He reached out the long arm to turn on his
own screen.

A face came into view and a man's voice whispered. Merrol turned up the
volume, but it didn't get any louder. It was the low-pressure soothing
type. Whatever he was selling, it was a welcome change.

The announcer smiled reassuringly. "Actually, I'm talking to one
person. The rest of you may listen or not for the next five minutes,
after which I'll have something to say to you." It was a clever
approach to insure that the audience didn't switch programs.

"Dan Merrol, this is a personal message to you." Merrol sat up.

"We'd call you if we could, but this is a large city and you've simply
vanished. We have operatives trying to trace you, but with no success
up to now." The announcer leaned forward confidentially.

"Now, Dan, before you become alarmed, let me say you've done nothing
wrong. In fact, at _Interplanet_, we think you've done everything
right--but I'll come to that later."

       *       *       *       *       *

Interplanet? Then it wasn't the hospital or the police. What could I.
P. want of him?

"No doubt the test you took was somewhat of a shock. Don't blame the
psych examiner for the conclusions he formed--he can't be expected to
know more than the leading psychologists. You're probably curious as
to what this test has to do with you and _Interplanet_. We hope so--we
want you to keep on listening.

"The test proved you're no longer a competent pilot--but it also
indicated something much bigger. Dan, _you_ are the answer to a problem
that has been bothering us for generations. Before the accident, you
knew nothing of music or any life science, your math was adequate but
not deep, you often felt awkward in the presence of others when you had
no need to and you lacked confidence in your physical ability.

"Suddenly, you gained something of each and, when we contacted your
doctors, we were able to surmise how it happened. Now you ask--what
good does this do you and what is the problem to which this is the
answer?

"Simply this--_specialization_. You know what constitutes a rocket
crew--pilot, radio man, engineer and several lesser technicians, each
of whom knows only his own job. Although you'll never sit at the
controls again--through you, we can help others."

The announcer lowered his voice now. "You can unlock specialization
for us. In the future, each man will concentrate on what particular
aptitudes he has, then share it, via surgery, with others whose
knowledge complements his own. To do this, we need to study you further
and, of course, we'll pay you well for the opportunity. In addition,
you'll still get your compensation. Please come and talk it over with
us.

"Frankly, we're a little worried about what you may be thinking. If
you have any thoughts of self-destruction because of what must seem a
strange condition, put them aside. You're much saner than the average
man."

       *       *       *       *       *

Merrol listened, smiling at the remark. No matter what they thought, he
couldn't seriously contemplate suicide. There were too many others to
dissuade him.

Nevertheless, it was hard to understand and accept the sudden change of
his status. He had formerly been a mere employee, but now....

The announcer hadn't finished. "In the beginning, Dan, I said you had
done everything right, whether you knew it or not. After we learned
what we did from your test, we checked through our files and found
that we had a few other accident cases on record in which part of
the brain had been replaced. In each case there was a faint trace of
another personality, which we could detect when we knew what to look
for. We rechecked each person we could locate. Unfortunately, the
latent personalities and their share of knowledge had been submerged
beyond recovery by the rigorous psychotherapy the accident victim had
undergone after surgery."

       *       *       *       *       *

The imaginary Wysocki's theorem of self-therapy. He never knew of
anyone by that name, nor had he got it from one of the other five. But,
however nonsensically he had invented it to express the needs he felt
at the time, it was, in fact, not nonsense. When it came to that, who
knew anything about six minds packaged together--and what could have
been done to him in ignorance?

The announcer was finished talking to Dan Merrol alone. "Remember,
all of you," he said briskly. "This man is neither a criminal
nor insane. He is extremely withdrawn, as a result of unpleasant
experiences. If you can induce him to come to _Interplanet_, or lead
our representatives to him, you will receive a substantial reward. Here
is his picture."

Merrol turned off the screen and scowled. He didn't like that last.
He intended to take their offer, but he wanted to be free to walk
the streets. He could settle that easily enough by just calling
_Interplanet_. They'd send someone down to whisk him away. That would
solve all his problems--or would it?

Certainly, it eliminated orientation or any form of psychotherapy.
After what had happened to the others, the psychologists would be
content merely to observe what went on in his mind. They wouldn't want
to give him much privacy, but he'd have to insist on it. They'd listen.

This could be just a job, a very good job while it lasted--say three or
four years--until they had learned all they need to know. Perhaps there
would be other men blended more scientifically than he had been. But he
could accumulate enough money to last the rest of his life, or perhaps
turn his many new talents to something else. There were many things he
would like to do, and he was ahead of everyone else now, even though in
three or four years he would no longer be unique.

Except, of course, in his body.

And there it was again. Was there nothing he could do to get away from
it?

He had no memory of Erica except for the one night, but it was enough
to convince him. What would their future be like in what was sure to
follow? After that broadcast, he would be a person of some note, but
would that stop laughter? Would she wait until he left the room before
she giggled?

He'd come to terms with _Interplanet_, but first he had to come to
terms with himself ... and he hadn't.

How good was his imaginary Wysocki's theorem? Could it take one last
extension? He counted what was left of the money Erica had given him.
It wasn't much, but with it he could leave the city. And he had to.


V

It was dusk when he slipped out of the room and later still when the
plane lifted away from the station. It was an ancient jet, long since
relegated to cheap overnight service where speed was not a factor and
price was.

He knew he was taking a chance and half expected to be stopped, but
apparently not many people had listened to the broadcast. Casual
glances slid off him and didn't linger. Partly, he suspected, because
he had pulled his hat over his face and thrust his hands in the jacket.
He'd gotten away in time, but by the morning there would be people on
the streets looking for him.

He stared at the approximation of a port. When this ship had been
built, there was some feeling against the practice and so the row of
picture tubes had been camouflaged as ports in the wall. There was a
station selector switch, but none for _on_ or _off_. He glowered at the
picture at his elbow and turned to the least annoying thing he could
find. Across the aisle, there were three other programs he could see
distinctly. The one directly opposite was a repeat of the broadcast
he had heard a few hours previously. He scowled and looked away. If
it hadn't been a night plane, in which people sought sleep, he would
certainly have been spotted. Apathy was his best protection. He hunched
down in his seat and dozed off.

When he awakened, the familiar _Interplanet_ program was at his elbow.
He reached to change stations, then on impulse let his hand continue
past the knob until he felt the ash tray. He unfastened the heavy
article and poked it through the screen.

The glass broke, but only a few in the immediate vicinity heard it in
the din. To those who stared at him, he presented a view of his back or
the profile of his hat. They glanced at him indifferently, then looked
away. Outside the orifice, where the tube had been in the outer of two
walls, was an actual port. He gazed through it contentedly.

A finger tapped him. "Yes?" he said in a loud voice.

The man behind him leaned over. "I've been riding in this plane once a
week for five years. I mean, would you mind if I looked out? I've never
seen where I'm going."

"Glad to have you."

The man sat beside him and peered wistfully out. Below were lights,
the patterns of cities, roads and towns and in the distance the glare
of furnaces. There was also a current of cold air seeping from the
space between the double walls. The man looked, shivered, turned up his
collar and finally went back to his seat.

It was cold, but Merrol remained where he was. There was some
satisfaction in asserting himself, but the satisfaction wore off and
the cold didn't.

His attention was caught by the program which was flickering across the
aisle. Doctor Crander--Merrol frowned. Did the hospital want him too?
He listened intently. No, they didn't want him.

       *       *       *       *       *

Crander sounded tired. "This is an emergency appeal and we'll need a
wide response. We have in our care a person with a serious illness we
can't diagnose. With so much interplanetary travel we can't determine
what causes the disease. It may be an organism from a moon of Saturn or
almost anything else.

"Our staff is working at top speed. We feel, if we can keep her alive
for one week, she'll be out of danger. That is by no means a certainty,
but a reasonably accurate forecast.

"We have a new theory, largely untested, but we hope it will work.
Each person differs from the next and though, when we match limbs and
organs, we try to take this into account, we never quite succeed in
effecting a perfect biological match. As a result, the character of the
blood changes, slightly but significantly. It's as if we had lumped
together the various natural immunities of the component bodies and
created an entirely new super-immunity."

Crander paused. "We need persons who have had five or more major
replacements. By major, I mean hands, arms, legs or parts of
them--nothing so trivial as ears, or a few feet of skin, or three or
four fingers.

"It must be at least five, though more are correspondingly better.
Nothing less--and please don't apply with only a minor replacement. Two
donors have volunteered so far and we have fractioned and administered
the blood of one with dramatic, if temporary, results. In a few hours,
we'll have to use the second. After that, I don't know what we'll do."

Merrol stirred. He was deeply suspicious.

"Here's the woman," said Crander. "She needs your help."

The man across the aisle leaned forward and his head was in front of
the picture. Merrol tried to see, but couldn't.

"It's up to you," said Crander as he faded from the screen.

Merrol tapped the man across the aisle. "Please repeat it."

The man glanced around and saw who it was. "Aw, you're the guy who
doesn't like that stuff." He jerked his head at the broken screen.

The memory cell of the picture tube didn't have a long attention span.
It could recall forty-five seconds of the past program and no longer.
The broadcast might be repeated, or it might not. Did he want to wait?

He reached out his arm--the long one--and fastened onto the man's
jacket, giving him a short rough shove.

"Repeat it, I said!"

The man looked down. He wasn't small himself, but it was a large
fist. "Sure thing," he said, jabbing the repeat button. The scene was
replayed.

"Thanks," said Merrol, letting go.

The man looked at his crumpled clothing. "Not at all," he muttered,
sliding away against the wall. "Don't mention it."

       *       *       *       *       *

The woman was Erica. It was too much of a coincidence that, among so
many millions in the city, she should be the one. The hospital and
_Interplanet_ were working together and now they had brought in Erica.
How gullible did they think he was and how much had they offered her
for this? It might not be money, though--they might have convinced
her it was to Dan's own best interest that they get in touch with him
immediately.

They were baiting him crudely and if they weren't, there were others
who could respond as well as he. There must be hundreds in the
vicinity, scores at any rate, who could qualify. There were enough
without him, depending on how often the blood fraction was needed.
Crander hadn't said. It was a trick and Erica wasn't ill--or if she
was, she would be safe without him. He had to make up his mind before
he saw her, and he couldn't. He clenched his hands, both big and
little. He had stretched Wysocki's theorem too far and it had failed.

"I had a wife once." The voice startled him, but he sat still, hoping
to hear it again. Maybe they would tell him what to do. "Not so slender
as Erica. Rather bouncy, in fact, but I liked her. Pity she ran away
with a coleopterist. Never could understand what she saw in him." The
voice grew sad. "_Beetles!_"

"My advice is that wives are easily come by," said a theatrical voice,
modulated for effect. "But before he shuffles off this mortal coil to
the last roundup, every man should have at least one wife like Erica."

"I can't speak of wives or women," said the musician. "There's so
little memory left, mostly music. But you've been subconsciously
humming a tune for days--and I must tell you that Beethoven didn't
write anything called Erica. The correct title is Eroica."

"One fall don't mean nothing, it's always the best two out of three.
The way I see it, you gotta get up. Get close to them, hold them tight,
or they'll throw you outta the ring."

"This is something that can't be figured. There are some odds no one
can live by. You'll have to solve this one yourself."

He sat there, not moving. They were with him always, but sometimes they
weren't much help.

The plane would land on the other side of the continent. He had little
money, but he could get in touch with _Interplanet_ and they would
advance him the fare back. Unfortunately, such a move would take time.
There would be schedules to juggle, to say nothing of the ride back. A
mere matter of hours on a fast ship--yet what if that was too long?

       *       *       *       *       *

He got to his feet and went forward. "You can't go in there," said the
stewardess.

He looked past her into the pilot's compartment. It was securely locked
from this side though not on the other. He glanced down at the girl.
It was a tradition that stewardesses were gorgeous creatures, though
the tradition was simply not true any longer. In an age of space
exploration, air travel had dispensed with glamor. But for unfathomable
reasons, this stewardess was a throwback to the old days. If she didn't
quite achieve real beauty, she came close enough so that no healthy
male could conceivably object to her nearness.

Merrol could take the keys away from her, but she'd scream and a dozen
men would come leaping to her rescue. He didn't care for the odds.

He had met three women and had he misjudged the effect of the
new himself on them? First Erica--her behavior had been strange,
considering that, even from the first, she must have doubted he
was her husband. Then the receptionist--she _had_ gone out of her
way to get him into Crander's office when the latter was upset by
the disappearance of a patient. And finally, the pathetic Miss
Jerrems, who had thawed and would have descended to crooked schemes,
had he encouraged her. Was this some form of pity or something
quite different--or did it matter at all as long as they were not
indifferent? There was a way to find out.

He raised his arm, the shorter one, and laid his hand affectionately on
the stewardess' shoulder. "Isn't there a private room in back?"

She tilted her head and her lips glistened. "Yes, there is."

"Small enough for two?"

"I believe so." Her lashes trembled and lowered and she seemed
surprised that they did. "That is if you--if we snuggled close."

"I'm sure we will. Why don't you find out about that room?"

"It seems like a good idea." She blushed and turned to leave.

"I'll need keys, won't I?" he said.

She leaned against him and the keys dropped into his hand. "I'll be
waiting," she whispered. He watched her walk down the aisle and enjoyed
the enticing sway of her hips. Under other circumstances, he might
have considered joining her.

He had the keys! It had worked! He didn't know why, nor did he have
time to think about it. He inserted the key and stepped inside.

"Hi, Jane," sang out the pilot, not turning, assuming he knew who it
was.

Merrol located the autopilot switch and, reaching past the man, turned
it on. With the same motion he whirled the pilot around. "Listen,
friend, don't you want to go back?"

"No. Why should I?" The pilot was startled, but not intimidated.

"Engine trouble or something. You figure it out. I don't care
what it is, as long as we get back." He half-hoped the man would
object--physical action would be a relief. In an emergency, he could
handle the ship himself--it was simpler than a spaceship.

       *       *       *       *       *

The pilot squinted beyond and behind him. "Engines don't sound so
good," he muttered. He was unexpectedly docile. "Safety first is the
motto of this airline." It was a good rule, but it was questionable
whose safety he was referring to.

The pilot was still having unaccountable difficulty with his
eyes--there was a marked tendency to cross. "Sure, we'll go back," he
said. "Glad you brought it to my attention. But call off your gang,
will you, mister?"

Merrol turned around. He was alone. There was no one behind him, though
the pilot seemed convinced there was.

He had a partial answer to the pilot's strange reaction. He was a
multiple personality and, normally latent, in times of stress the
multi-personality became dominant and impressed itself psychologically
on the observer. And if the mind received the impression of several
men, the eye tried hard to produce evidence that would confirm it.

Not everyone was as successful at self-hypnosis as the pilot, but
the temptation toward it was always there. Now that he thought of
it, men never had laughed at him. Instead they had been respectful.
He apparently had an unsettling effect on those of his own sex he
came in contact with--just how powerful it was, he didn't know yet.
The complete answer would have to await investigation by trained
psychologists.

Women were different. They invariably laughed first--Erica too, in
spite of the general sympathy she must have felt for him. In what did
the difference lie? That too he would have to determine--later.

The pilot looked at him dizzily, beseechingly. Merrol decided he must
be pouring it on, though he felt no different. "Remember, I can get up
here in an awful hurry," said Merrol, "so no tricks." The pilot nodded
and clung helplessly to the controls. He wouldn't cause any trouble.
Merrol raised his arm in a gesture. "Come on, fellows."

As an afterthought, he locked the stewardess in the private compartment
and, as he did so, he could feel the plane swing in a wide arc that
would take them to the station they had started from. The apathetic
dozing passengers didn't even notice.

And then all six of him walked back to his seat and Merrol sat down.


VI

He slid out of the plane while it was still rolling. He didn't want to
argue with the passengers, when they found they were on the wrong coast
and he was to blame. Nor did he particularly want to explain to the
authorities. Later he would have to, but by then he would have powerful
interests behind him to smooth over the incident.

It was late and there were no cabs in sight, in air or on surface. He
crossed the landing strip into the station and out of it and swept
along the dark streets with a loose-jointed stride that made the
distance seem less than it was. Presently, he broke into a trot and his
speed was encouraging.

A hoppicopter--one of the little surface cars that could rise and
fly for a short time to avoid traffic jams--bounced down and rolled
alongside. A window slid open and a head popped out. "In a hurry,
mister?"

He bobbed his head. "Hospital."

"Jump in and we'll take you. We're not doing anything special--just
riding around." The hoppicopter stopped. This was luck--he'd get there
faster.

The man in the front seat opened the door and stepped out, flashing a
light on him. "Just a check. We don't mind taking you, but we want to
be sure we don't pick up some rough character."

The man didn't look so gentle himself--and the light was trained on Dan
too long. If they were afraid, he'd have to refuse their offer and go
on.

"Hey, Carl," the man with the flash called out puzzledly. "Haven't we
seen this guy somewhere before?"

He should have expected something like this and not stopped--but maybe
it would have been worse if he hadn't. So far, he had been lucky that
no one had spotted him--and now was not the time to be discussing
terms with _Interplanet_. He began to edge away.

Carl climbed out of the hoppicopter and circled in the same direction
Merrol was inching toward. "I guess I have at that," said Carl slowly.
He was a big man. "Can't say where, though."

Merrol breathed more easily. He couldn't make a break for it, but
perhaps he wouldn't have to. They might not have seen the broadcast.
"I've got to hurry," he said. "I'll go on."

"Don't get sore," said Carl soothingly. "We'll take you. Climb in."

The man with the light was frowning indecisively. "The guy on the
broadcast?" he asked sharply.

"Nah," said Carl disgustedly. "That guy--you look at his picture and
you have to bust out laughing. Now this fellow here--while he's a
long way from handsome--is clearly the executive type, a man you can
trust." Carl scrutinized him thoughtfully. Before Merrol could stop
him, he reached out and plucked off the hat. "There's only one guy with
three-colored hair, though, and you've got it," he said unbelievingly.

Merrol started to back away, but the body of the hoppicopter stopped
him.

"Mister, you've sure got some disguise," said the other man in an awed
voice. "I could look right at you all day and not tell who it was."

       *       *       *       *       *

It was no disguise, it was the multi-personality again. No one looked
quite the same in real life as in a picture, because the personality
was missing. And with him the difference was far more marked. The
camera could register his features accurately, but men couldn't, not
when he was actually there to inspire trust and respect--and he did
arouse those emotions. Added together, these were some of the reasons
why he hadn't hitherto been recognized.

"Sorry to have bothered you," he said, pushing between them as they
converged on him. "I'm in a hurry."

"Sure, sure," said Carl, apologetically, moving aside.

"But he's money!" the man with the flashlight cried in an anguished
voice.

"So he is!" said Carl. The vision of money seemed to carry a lot of
weight with him. He seemed reluctant to act, but he reached out and
swung Merrol around. "We'll take you to _Interplanet_ and then you can
go to the hospital. Don't worry, we aren't going to do nothing. It
don't _pay_ us to hurt you."

Their original intentions were probably sincere, but now that they
thought they'd found money on the street, they weren't willing to let
it go. But Merrol was not going to accompany them to _Interplanet_. He
jerked away.

"We'll split the reward," said Carl. "Too bad we got to carry him in."

Merrol tried to elude him, but Carl caught his arm in a bone-cracking
hold. That is, it ought to have splintered bone. That it didn't was not
due to lack of skill, but to the proportions of the arm to which it was
applied. The advantage of leverage went to Merrol and he used it. He
broke loose and swung the long arm with the large fist and Carl went
down.

The man with the light dropped it, climbed on Merrol's back and was
pounding away at a nerve. Had he found the nerve, Merrol might have
crumpled to the street. He didn't find it, because it wasn't there. The
nerve had been surgically rerouted.

Merrol peeled him off and tossed him on top of Carl. He tossed him
harder than he meant to and neither man moved.

He climbed into the hoppicopter and rolled it through the dark streets.
They had caused him to lose time and for this they would forfeit the
use of their 'copter. They could pick it up in the morning, if they
felt like claiming it. He got out and hurried into the hospital.

He met others in the corridors--it was a busy place in spite of the
lateness--but the first person he recognized was Erica. "Dan!" she
said. She didn't use anything scientific, but the hold on him was
harder to break than judo. Perhaps because he didn't want to.

Later, he became aware of someone tapping his shoulder. He turned
around. "These things can be consummated in the privacy of one's own
home," murmured Doctor Crander. "But when a life is at stake, passion
should be put aside."

The purely physical elation began to fade. He put Erica down, but
uncertainly holding onto her. It was an ambivalent gesture. "Is this
what you call an emergency?" he asked sarcastically. He had broken a
number of minor laws and nearly his own neck in getting here. He had a
right to be angry, though he was not sure how he felt.

The doctor gave him a scandalized look. "Do you think we're unethical?
There is such a woman as we described, one of our staff. We do have
other donors, but we think you can do more for her. In a fit of
despondency, this woman wandered into the extraterrestrial room without
the customary protection, hoping to catch something--and she did."
Crander frowned. "The only way we altered facts was to use your wife's
photo. It was her idea. Furthermore, it is true that a pretty girl gets
a better response--and, of course, Erica wanted you back."

When he learned who the patient was, he was satisfied with his
decision. After the blood fraction had been administered to Miss
Jerrems, even his untrained eyes could see the improvement.

       *       *       *       *       *

He watched Erica suspiciously as she pattered about in a state of
dishabille that did nothing to enhance her beauty but, perversely,
made her more exciting. That she had been uncertain as to his identity
the last time meant little and he could forgive it. Man and wife were
not thereby distinct species, separate to themselves, unattracted or
repelled by all others of the opposite sex. For himself, he had only to
remember the stewardess.

But it was important to know what her true feelings toward him were.
Laughter at the wrong time could be disastrous to a man's ego!

"This time, you know there's no mistake," he said, hoping that irony
was some protection. "But are you sure you want me as a husband?"

She stopped fiddling with her hair. She tilted her head and looked
at him, at a body that defied the laws of anatomy and the face that
belonged on a clown--except that a clown could take his face off. "Are
you trying to get rid of me?" She was asking questions, not answering
them.

Erica was examining him carefully and he could tell that she, unlike a
male, saw each feature distinctly, saw the nose that had belonged to
someone else and looked it, the jaw, originally very fine, but with
contours that had since melted out of shape.

"I'm not trying to get rid of you," he said. "Maybe you want somebody
nicer." He'd have to know before he could stop feeling tormented.

"Nicer?" she echoed. "Do you want me to answer that?"

       *       *       *       *       *

She came and leaned against him. "A woman ought to have _some_
secrets," she murmured. "But if you have to know, the first time I
saw you I laughed, because you are funny. And after that, well, I saw
traces of the nicest features of nearly every man I ever had a crush
on. That was just the physical side."

She rested her head on his shoulder. "I didn't believe you actually
were Dan. I didn't pay attention to a thing you said."

"But if you didn't believe...."

"Just what you're thinking," she answered. "I couldn't help it. You're
the most exciting challenge a woman can have. Even if she doesn't know
why, as I didn't then, it's still there--half a dozen men, and all of
them in one monogamous package."

Now that she put it that way, he could see why she hadn't been able to
resist. He could see that there were few women who could. He glanced at
a framed photograph of the handsome pre-accident Dan Merrol that stood
on the bureau. He thought, _Poor sucker!_





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Man Who Was Six, by F. L. Wallace

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MAN WHO WAS SIX ***

***** This file should be named 51295.txt or 51295.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/1/2/9/51295/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
