The Project Gutenberg EBook of Fresh Air Fiend, by Kris Neville

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: Fresh Air Fiend

Author: Kris Neville

Release Date: March 1, 2016 [EBook #51335]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FRESH AIR FIEND ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                            Fresh Air Fiend

                            By KRIS NEVILLE

                      Illustrated by KARL ROGERS

           [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from
                 Galaxy Science Fiction February 1952.
         Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
         the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]




            Sick and helpless, he was very lucky to have a
            faithful native woman to nurse him. Or was he?


He rolled over to look at the plants. They were crinkled and dead and
useless in the narrow flower box across the hut. He tried to draw his
arm under his body to force himself erect. The reserve oxygen began to
hiss in sleepily. He tried to signal Hertha to help him, but she was
across the room with her back to him, her hands fumbling with a bowl of
dark, syrupy medicine. His lips moved, but the words died in his throat.

He wanted to explain to her that scientists in huge laboratories with
many helpers and millions of dollars had been unable to find a cure
for liguna fever. He wanted to explain that no brown liquid, made
like cake batter, would cure the disease that had decimated the crews
of two expeditions to Sitari and somehow gotten back to cut down the
population of Wiblanihaven.

But, watching her, he could understand what she thought she was doing.
At one time she must have seen a pharmacist put chemicals into a mortar
and grind them with a pestle. This, she must have remembered, was what
people did to make medicine, and now she put what chemical-appearing
substances she could locate--flour, powdered coffee, lemon extract,
salt--into a bowl and mashed them together. She was very intent on her
work and it probably made her feel almost helpful.

Finally she moved out of his field of vision; he found that he could
not turn his head to follow her with his eyes. He lay conscious but
inert, like waterlogged wood on a river bottom. He heard sounds of her
movement. At last he slept.

       *       *       *       *       *

He awakened with a start. His head was clearer than it had been for
hours. He listened to the oxygen hissing in again. He tried to read the
dial on the far wall, but it blurred before his eyes.

"Hertha," he said.

She came quickly to his cot.

"What does the oxygen register say?"

"Oxygen register?"

He gritted his teeth against the fever which began to shake his body
mercilessly until he wanted to scream to make it stop. He became angry
even as the fever shook him: angry not really at the doctors; not
really at any one thing. Angry because the mountains did not care if
he saw them; angry that the air did not care if he breathed it. Angry
because, between planets, between suns, the coldness of space merely
waited, not giving a damn.

Several years ago--ten, twenty, perhaps more--some doctor had finally
isolated a strain of the filterable virus of liguna fever that could
be used as a vaccine: too weak to kill, but strong enough to produce
immunity against its more virulent brother strains. That opened up the
Sitari System for colonization and exploration and meant that the men
who got there first would make fortunes.

So he went to the base at Ke, first selling his strip mine property and
disposing of his tools and equipping his spaceship for the intersolar
trip; and at Ke they shot him full of the disease. But his bloodstream
built no antibodies. The weakened virus settled in his nervous system
and there was no way of getting it out. The doctors were very sorry
for him, and they assured him it was a one-in-ten-thousand phenomenon.
Thereafter, he suffered recurrent paralytic attacks.

If it had not been for the advance warning--a pain at the base of
his spine, a moment of violent trembling in his knees--he would have
been forced to give up solitary strip mining altogether. As it was,
whenever he felt the warning, he had to hurry to the nearest colony and
be hospitalized for the duration of the attack. He had had four such
warnings on this satellite, and three times he had gone to Pastiville
on Helio and been cared for and come away with less money than he had
gone with.

His bank credit, once large, had slowly dribbled away, and now he
made just about enough from his mining to care for himself during
illness. He could not afford to hunt for less dangerous, less isolated
work. It would not pay enough, for he knew how to do very little that
civilization needed done. He was finally trapped; no longer could he
afford a pilot for the long flight from Helio to a newer frontier, and
he could not risk the trip alone.

He lay waiting for the new spasm of fever and stared at Hertha who,
this time, would care for him here and he would not need to go to a
hospital. Perhaps, after a little while, he would be able to save
enough to push on, through the awful indifference of space, to some new
world where, with luck, there would be a sudden fortune.

Then he could go back to civilization.

He realized bitterly that he was merely telling himself he would go
back. He knew there was only one direction he could go, and that
direction was not back.

Hertha waited, hurt-eyed, moving her pudgy hands helplessly.

When the shaking subsided, he explained through chattering teeth about
the oxygen register across the room, and she went away.

       *       *       *       *       *

The fever vanished completely, leaving him listless. His hand, lying on
the rough blanket, was abnormally white. He wiggled the fingers, but he
could not feel the wool.

His mouth was dry and he wanted a drink of water.

Hertha moved out of his range of vision. He shifted his head on the
damp pillow and watched her out of the corner of his eye.

He had never heard her real name, but she did not seem to object to his
name for her.

    I am that which began;
    Out of me the years roll;
    Out of me God and man;
    I am equal and whole;
    God changes, and man,
    And the form of them bodily;
    I am the soul.

He tried to sit up again, but he was very weak. He wanted to quote
it to her and tell her what he had never told her: that the name of
it was _Hertha_ and that it had been written long ago by a man named
Swinburne, and he wanted to explain why he had named her after a poem,
because it was very funny.

The harsh light hurt his eyes and made him feel dizzy. He lay watching
her as she bent toward the oxygen dial, wrinkling her face in animal
concentration, trying to read it for him. Her puzzled expression was
pathetic; it reminded him of the first time he had seen her.

The walls began to spin crazily, for the hut had been intended for only
one person.

He remembered the first time he saw her, cowering in a filthy alleyway
in the Miramus. At first he thought she had taken some food from a
garbage pail and was trying to conceal it by holding it to her breast.
But when the flare of a rocket leaving the field two blocks away lit
the area for a moment, he saw that she was holding a tiny welikin,
terribly mangled, looking as if it had just been run over by a heavy
transport truck. He took it away from her and threw it into the
darkness, shuddering.

"It was dead," he said.

She continued to stare at him, starting to cry silently, big, round,
salt tears that she brushed at with reddened hands.

"My--my--" she stammered.

He had an eerie feeling that she was trying to say, "My baby," and he
felt a little chill of pity creep up his spine.

"What do you do?" he asked kindly.

"Sweep floors. I work a little for the Commander's wife. Around her
home."

"How did you get here?"

Still crying, she said, "On a rocket."

"Of course. What I meant was...." But he did not need to ask how
she had gotten passed the emigration officers. Some influential
man--such things could happen, especially when the destination was a
relatively new frontier, such as Helio, where there was little danger
of investigation--had seen to it that certain answers were falsified;
and a little money and a corrupt official had conspired to produce a
passport which read, "Mentally and physically fit for colonization."

The influential man had, in effect, bought and paid for a personal
slave to bring with him to the stars. She would not know of her legal
rights. She would be easily frightened and confused. And then something
had happened, and for some reason she had been abandoned to shift for
herself. Perhaps she had run away.

He looked away from her face. This was none of his affair.

"Never mind," he said. He reached into his pocket and gave her a few
coins and then turned and walked rapidly away, suddenly anxious to see
the bright, remembered face of the young colonist, Doris, Don's friend;
a face that would chase away the memory of this pathetic creature.

After a moment, he heard the pad of her feet hopefully, fearfully
following him.

       *       *       *       *       *

She was standing beside his cot again, and he concentrated to make the
walls stop spinning.

"It had a blue line."

"Yes, I know. Where?"

She showed him with her fingers. "This much."

"Halfway up?" he prompted.

Dumbly, she nodded.

He looked at the plants. "Hertha, listen. I've got to talk before the
paralysis comes back. You'll have to listen very carefully and try to
understand. I'll be all right in about ten days. You know that?"

She nodded again.

He took a deep breath that seemed to catch in his throat. "But you'll
have to go outside before then."

Hertha whimpered and fluttered her hands nervously.

"I know you're afraid," he said. "I wouldn't ask you, but it has to be
done. I can't go. You can see that, can't you? It has to be done."

"Afraid!"

"Nonsense!" he said harshly. "There's nothing to be afraid of. Put on
the outside suit and nothing can hurt you."

Moaning in fear, she shook her head.

"Listen, Hertha! You've _got_ to do it. For _me_!" He did not like
to make the appeal personal. He would have preferred to convince her
that fear of the outside was groundless. It was not possible. He had
attempted, again and again, to explain that the tiny satellite with
its poison air was completely harmless as long as she wore a surface
suit. There was no alien life, no possible danger, outside this tiny
square of insulated hut and breathable air. But it was useless. And the
personal appeal was the only course remaining. It was as much for her
sake as his; she also needed oxygen, but she could never understand
that fact.

"For you?" she asked.

He nodded, feeling the fever rise. His face twisted in pain, and he
stared pleadingly into her cow-like eyes: dumb eyes, animal eyes, brown
and trusting and ... loyal. The paralysis struck. His voice would not
come up out of his chest and the dizziness swamped his mind, and, in
fever, he was once again in Pastiville, the nearest planet with an
oxygen atmosphere.

       *       *       *       *       *

Hertha followed him up the alley, out into the cheap glitter of
Windopole Avenue, a rutted, smelly street which was the center of the
port-workers' section. She followed him across Windopole, up Venus,
across Nineshime. He turned into the Lexo Building, which had become
shabby since he had seen it last, when it had been freshly painted. She
did not follow him inside, and he breathed a sigh of relief and tried
to put her out of his mind as he walked up the stairs to the room 17B.

After a moment's hesitation, his heart knocking with pleasant
anticipation, he pressed the buzzer.

"Come in."

He found the knob, twisted open the door, entered.

"Why Jimmy!" the girl said in what seemed to be surprise and heavy
delight. She crossed to him quickly and offered her lips to be kissed.
"It's good to see you!"

He took half a step backward, trying to keep the shock out of his face.

"Oh, it's _so_ good to see you, Jimmy! Sit down. Tell me all about it,
about everything. Did you make loads and loads of money? When did you
get back? How's the lig fever?"

He sat down, scarcely listening, studying the apartment, feeling
vaguely ill. She was chattering, he realized, to overcome her
embarrassment.

"The books you ordered came. I've got them right here. They're all
there but some poetry or other. There was a letter about that, but the
people just said they didn't have it in stock. I opened it to see if it
required an answer. Just a sec. I'll get them for you." She left the
room with quick, nervous strides.

The apartment had been redone since he had seen it. There were now
expensive drapes at the windows, imported from somewhere; a genuine
Earth tapestry hung above the door. Plump silken pillows scattered on
the floor and a late model phono-general in the corner, with a gleaming
cabinet and record spool accessory box.

She came back with the books, neatly done up in a bundle.

"I guess you still read as much as ever? Don said you always were a
great reader."

Uncomfortably, he stood up.

She put the books on a low serving table, moistened her lips to make
them glistening red. "Sit _down_, Jimmy!"

He still stood.

"_Jimmy!_" she said in mock anger. "Sit down! Goodness, it's good to
have a fellow Earthman to talk to. I was so busy when you came by the
other time, we scarcely had a _minute_ to talk. I'd just got here, you
remember.... Well, I'm settled now, so we'll just have to have a nice,
long talk."

He shifted on his feet.

"I don't suppose you've heard from Don?" Her voice was strained, almost
desperate. "Isn't it the oddest thing, him knowing you and me, and both
of us right here?"

"He told me to write how you were getting along?"

"... Oh."

He smiled without humor and felt like an old man. He wanted to explain
how he had looked forward to seeing a person from his own planet again.
Now he wanted to remind her of the girl he remembered: When she had
just arrived, still unpacking, eager to start as a junior secretary for
the League.

"Thank you for letting me send the books here," he said. The sickness
was heavy in the pit of his stomach, and suddenly he was hard and
bitter. He quoted softly:

    "The world forsaken,
    And out of mind
    Honor and labor,
    We shall not find
    The stars unkind."

"Old poetry? I guess you really do read a--" Then understanding made
her eyes wince. "That wasn't intended to be very complimentary, was it,
Jimmy?"

Her name was no longer Doris; it was any of a thousand, and
her perfume, heavy in his nostrils, was not her perfume or any
individual's. She was there before him; she was real. But along with
her were a thousand names and a thousand scents. There was the painful
nostalgia of recognizing a strange room.

Awkwardly he said, "I really must go. I'd like to have a long talk,
but--"

Her lips parting in sudden artificiality, she crossed to him, reached
for his hand with her own.

In his mind was the heavy futility of repeating the same thing
senselessly until it lost all meaning.

"I apologize about the poem," he said, because he knew that it was not
his place to speak of it.

"That's all right," she said with hollow cheerfulness. Her mouth jerked
and her eyes darkened. "Please don't go yet."

The palms of his hands were moist. He looked around the apartment
again, and he did not want to ask, to bring it out in cruel words. It
was not the sort of thing one asked.

"I really must go," he repeated levelly.

She put her hands on his shoulders. "Please...."

And then he saw that she intended to bribe him in the only way she knew
how, and he said, "Don't worry, I won't tell Don."

He saw relief on her face, and then he was out of the apartment,
shaken. He felt as if he had been kicked in the stomach, and he was
sickened and his hand trembled. He wanted to talk to someone and try to
explain it.

Hertha was waiting when he came out to the street.

       *       *       *       *       *

The fever passed; control of his body returned.

"For you?" Hertha asked.

He half propped himself up on the cot. He waved his hand weakly. "Those
dead plants. You must throw them out and bring in more."

He listened tensely, imagining that he could hear the precious oxygen
hiss in from the emergency tank to freshen and revitalize the dead air.
Halfway down on the dial. Not enough for ten days, even for one person,
unless the air was replenished by bringing in plants.

"Hertha, we've got to purify this air. Now listen. Listen carefully,
Hertha. You've seen me dig up those plants on the outside?"

"Yes, I watch when you go out. I always watch, Jimmy."

"Good. You've got to do the same thing. You've got to go out and dig up
some plants. You've got to bring them in here and plant them the way I
did. You know which ones they are?"

"Yes," she said.

He closed his eyes, trying to think of a way to make her see how vital
a thing a tiny plant could be. The complex chemistry of it bubbled to
the surface of his mind. He wanted to tell her why the plants died in
the artificial human atmosphere and had to be replaced every week or
so. He wanted to tell her, but he was growing weaker.

"They purify the air by releasing oxygen. You understand?"

She nodded her head dumbly.

"You must bring in a great many plants, Hertha. Remember that--a
_great_ many. Don't forget that. When you go outside, through the
locks, we lose air. Air is very precious, so you must bring in a great
many plants."

"Yes, Jimmy."

"And you must plant them as I did."

"Yes, Jimmy."

He began to talk faster, in a race with the growing fever.

"I've gathered most of the oxygenating plants around the hut. So you
may have to go into the forest to get enough."

"The--the forest?"

"You _must_, Hertha! You _must_!"

Her mouth twisted as if she were ready to cry. "For you. Yes, for you I
will go into the forest."

The fever came back. His mind wandered away.

       *       *       *       *       *

He was walking in the open air. He walked from Nineshime to Venus, down
Venus to Windopole, up Windopole to "The Grand Eagle and Barrel." He
went in. Hertha came with him and sat down by his side at the bar.

The bartender looked at him oddly. "She with you, Mac?"

He turned to look at her; her dumb, brown eyes met his. He wanted to
snarl: "Get the hell away! Leave me alone!" But he choked back the
words. It was not Hertha he was angry with. She had done him no injury.
She had merely followed him, perhaps because she knew of nothing else
to do; perhaps because of temporary gratitude for the coins; perhaps
in hope that he would buy her a drink. When the anger passed, he felt
sorry for her again.

He said, "Want a drink?"

She shook her head without changing expression.

He looked at her and shrugged and thought that after a while she would
get tired and go away. He ordered, and the bartender brought a bottle
and one glass.

Hertha continued to stare at him; he tried to ignore her.

He drank. He thought it would get easier to ignore her as the level of
the bottle fell. It didn't. He drank some more. It grew late.

"I gotta explain," he said, the liquor swirling in his mind.

She waited, cow-eyed.

"Ernest Dowson. Man's name. He wrote a poem--_Beata Solitudo_. I wanna
explain this. Man lived long, long, long, long time ago. You listenin'?
Okay. That's good. That's fine. He said--it's ver' importan' you should
unnerstan' this--he said how you put honor and labor out of your mind
when you ... you're out here. What he meant, it's ... it's ... you
see.... Now I gotta make you see all this. So you listen real close
while I tell it to you. There was a man named...."

He wanted to explain how the frontier does things to people. He wanted
to explain how society is a tight little box that keeps everything
locked up and hidden, but how society breaks down and becomes fluid
in the stars, and how people explode and forget what they learned in
civilization, and how everything is unstable.

"This man, his name's--" he said.

He wanted to explain how the harsh elements and brute nature and space,
the God-awful emptiness and indifference and the sense of aloneness and
selfishness and....

There were a thousand things he wanted to tell her. They were all the
things he had thought about as he followed the frontier. If he could
get it all down right, he could make her see why he had to follow the
frontier as long as there was anything left inside of him.

Maybe the rest of the people out here were that way, too. Maybe he had
seen it in Doris' eyes tonight. Maybe that was why society broke down
in the stars and civilization came only when men and women like him
were gone.

He did not want to know how the rest felt. He did not know whether it
would be more terrifying to learn that he was alone, or that he was not
alone.

But just for tonight, he could tell the alien creature beside him. It
would be safe to tell her--if the idea had not rusted inside of him so
long that there were no longer any words to fit it.

But first he had to make her see his home planet and the great cities
and the landscaped valleys and the majestic mountains and the people.
He had to make her see the vast sweep of the explorers who first
carried the race to a million planets, who devised faster-than-light
ships and metals to make the ships out of, metals to hold their forms
in the crucible beyond normal space. He had to make her see the
colonists who tied all the world together with spans of steel commerce
and then moved on in ever-widening circles. He wanted to give her the
whole picture.

Then he wanted to explain the surge, the restlessness of the men at the
frontier. Different men, he thought; from the womb of civilization,
but unlike their brothers. The men who pushed out and out. Searching,
always searching. He was afraid to find out if their reasons were the
same as his. For himself, he had seen a thousand planets and a thousand
new life-forms. But it was not enough. There were the vast, blank,
empty, indifferent reaches of space beyond him, and that was what drove
him on.

This he wanted to say to Hertha: No matter how far you go, the thing
that gets you is that there's nothing that cares; no matter how far,
the thing is that nothing cares; the thing is that nothing cares. It
gets you. And you have to go on because some day, somewhere, there may
be--something.

But he lost the trend of his thoughts completely, and he had another
drink.

"Decent people come out here...."

What was he going to say about decent people?

"Stupid!" he cried, slapping her in the face.

She rubbed her cheek. "Stupid?"

He wanted to cry, for he had not known that he was brutal. "Can't you
see?" he screamed, and it was necessary to explain it to her; and then
it was not necessary. "You're like the awful, indifferent, mindless
blackness of space, unreasoning!"

"Unreasoning," she repeated carefully.

"You're _Hertha_!"

"I'm Hertha," she said.

       *       *       *       *       *

The period of calmness that returned after the fever was crystal and
lucid, preceding, he knew, a severe, prolonged seizure.

"I'm afraid," she told him, shivering, "but I will go."

He watched her get into the light surface suit, clamp down the helmet
with trembling hands. He was shaking with nervousness as she hesitated
at the lock. Then she pulled it open. It clicked behind her. He heard
the brief hiss of the oxygen replacing the air that had whooshed out.

And he felt sorry for her, alone, terrified, on the scaly, hard
surface of the tiny satellite. He closed his eyes, pictured her walking
past his strip mine, past the gleaming heap of minerals ready for the
transport.

He felt tears in his eyes and yet he could not entirely explain his
feelings toward her--half fear, sometimes half affection. But more
important than that: Why was she with him? What were her feelings? Had
some sense of gratitude made her come? Affection?

He could not understand her. At times she seemed beyond all
understanding. Her responses were mindless, almost mechanical, and that
frightened him.

He remembered her dumb, apologetic caresses and her pathetically clumsy
tenderness--or reflex; he could never be sure--and her eager yet
reluctant hands and the always slightly hurt, slightly accusing look in
her eyes, as if at every instant she was ready for a stinging blow, and
her great sighs, muted as if fearing to be heard and....

He was drunk, screaming meaninglessly, and the bartender threw him out.
The pavement cut his face. When he awoke, it was morning and he was in
a strange room and she was in bed beside him.

She said, "I am Hertha. I brought you home. I will go with you."

The paralysis set in. He could not move. The tears froze on his cheeks,
and he lay inert, thinking of her almost mindlessly fighting for his
life in the alien outside.

Then she was back in the hut. So soon?

She looked at him, smiled through the transparent helmet at him. He
could hear the precious oxygen hiss in to compensate for the air that
had been lost when she entered.

He could see her eyes. They were proud. Relieved, too, as if she had
been afraid he would be gone when she returned. He felt she had hurried
back to be sure that he was still there.

She knelt by the flower bed and, without removing her suit, she held
up the plant proudly. He could see the hard-packed dirt in the roots.
Fascinated, he watched her scrape a planting hole. He watched her set
the plant delicately and pat the soil with care.

Then she stood up.

He tried to move, to cry out. He could not.

He watched her until she went out of the range of his fixed eyes. She
was going to the airlock again.

After a moment he heard the familiar hiss of oxygen.

She was going to get a great number of plants.

But one at a time.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Fresh Air Fiend, by Kris Neville

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FRESH AIR FIEND ***

***** This file should be named 51335.txt or 51335.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/1/3/3/51335/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
