The Project Gutenberg EBook of Citizen Jell, by Michael Shaara

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: Citizen Jell

Author: Michael Shaara

Release Date: March 2, 2016 [EBook #51342]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CITIZEN JELL ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                             Citizen Jell

                           By MICHAEL SHAARA

                      Illustrated by DICK FRANCIS

           [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from
                     Galaxy Magazine August 1959.
         Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
         the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]




                   The problem with working wonders
                   is they must be worked--even when
                   they're against all common sense!


None of his neighbors knew Mr. Jell's great problem. None of his
neighbors, in truth, knew Mr. Jell at all. He was only an odd old man
who lived alone in a little house on the riverbank. He had the usual
little mail box, marked "E. Jell," set on a post in front of his house,
but he never got any mail, and it was not long before people began
wondering where he got the money he lived on.

Not that he lived well, certainly; all he ever seemed to do was just
fish, or just sit on the riverbank watching the sky, telling tall
stories to small children. And none of that took any money to do.

But still, he _was_ a little odd; people sensed that. The stories he
told all his young friends, for instance--wild, weird tales about
spacemen and other planets--people hardly expected tales like that
from such an old man. Tales about cowboys and Indians they might have
understood, but spaceships?

So he was definitely an odd old man, but just how odd, of course, no
one ever really knew. The stories he told the children, stories about
space travel, about weird creatures far off in the Galaxy--those
stories were all true.

Mr. Jell was, in fact, a retired spaceman.

Now that was part of Mr. Jell's problem, but it was not all of it.
He had very good reasons for not telling anybody the truth about
himself--no one except the children--and he had even more excellent
reasons for not letting his own people know where he was.

The race from which Mr. Jell had sprung did not allow this sort of
thing--retirement to Earth. They were a fine, tolerant, extremely
advanced people, and they had learned long ago to leave undeveloped
races, like the one on Earth, alone. Bitter experience had taught them
that more harm than good came out of giving scientific advances to
backward races, and often just the knowledge of their existence caused
trouble among primitive peoples.

No, Mr. Jell's race had for a long while quietly avoided contact with
planets like Earth, and if they had known Mr. Jell had violated the
law, they would have come swiftly and taken him away--a thing Mr. Jell
would have died rather than let happen.

       *       *       *       *       *

Mr. Jell was unhuman, yes, but other than that he was a very gentle,
usual old man. He had been born and raised on a planet so overpopulated
that it was one vast city from pole to pole. It was the kind of
place where a man could walk under the open sky only on rooftops,
where vacant lots were a mark of incredible wealth. Mr. Jell had
passed most of his long life under unbelievably cramped and crowded
conditions--either in small spaceships or in the tiny rooms of unending
apartment buildings.

When Mr. Jell had happened across Earth on a long voyage some years
ago, he had recognized it instantly as the place of his dreams. He had
had to plan very carefully, but when the time came for his retirement,
he was able to slip away. The language of Earth was already on record;
he had no trouble learning it, no trouble buying a small cottage on the
river in a lovely warm place called Florida. He settled down quietly, a
retired old man of one hundred and eighty-five, looking forward to the
best days of his life.

And Earth turned out to be more wonderful than his dreams. He
discovered almost immediately that he had a great natural aptitude for
fishing, and though the hunting instinct had been nearly bred out of
him and he could no longer summon up the will to kill, still he could
walk in the open woods and marvel at the room, the incredible open,
wide, and unoccupied room, live animals in a real forest, and the sky
above, clouds seen through the trees--_real trees_, which Mr. Jell had
seldom seen before. And, for a long while, Mr. Jell was certainly the
happiest man on Earth.

He would arise, very early, to watch the sun rise. After that, he might
fish, depending on the weather, or sit home just listening to the
lovely rain on the roof, watching the mighty clouds, the lightning.
Later in the afternoon, he might go for a walk along the riverbank,
waiting for school to be out so he could pass some time with the
children.

Whatever else he did, he would certainly go looking for the children.

A lifetime of too much company had pushed the need for companionship
pretty well out of him, but then he had always loved children, and they
made his life on the river complete. They _believed_ him; he could
tell them his memories in safety, and there was something very special
in that, to have secrets with friends. One or two of them, the most
trustworthy, he even allowed to see the Box.

Now the Box _was_ something extraordinary, even to so advanced a man as
Mr. Jell. It was a device which analyzed matter, made a record of it,
and then duplicated it. The Box could duplicate anything.

What Mr. Jell would do, for example, would be to put a loaf of bread
into the Box, and press a button, and presto, there would be _two_
loaves of bread, each perfectly alike, atom for atom. It would be
absolutely impossible for anyone to tell them apart. This was the way
Mr. Jell made most of his food, and all of his money. Once he had
gotten one original dollar bill, the Box went on duplicating it--and
bread, meat, potatoes, anything else Mr. Jell desired was instantly
available at the touch of a button.

       *       *       *       *       *

Once the Box duplicated a thing, anything, it was no longer necessary
to have the original. The Box filed a record in its electronic memory,
describing, say, bread, and Mr. Jell had only to dial a number any time
he wanted bread. And the Box needed no fuel except dirt, leaves, old
pieces of wood, just anything made out of atoms--most of which it would
arrange into bread or meat or whatever Mr. Jell wanted, and the rest of
which it would use as a source of power.

So the Box made Mr. Jell entirely independent, but it did even more
than that; it had one other remarkable feature. It could be used also
as a transmitter and receiver. Of matter. It was, in effect, the Sears
Roebuck catalogue of Mr. Jell's people, with its own built-in delivery
service.

If there was an item Mr. Jell needed, any item at all, and that item
was available on any of the planets ruled by Mr. Jell's people, Mr.
Jell could dial for it, and it would appear in the Box in a matter of
seconds.

The makers of the Box prided themselves on the speed of their delivery,
the ease with which they could transmit matter instantaneously across
light-years of space. Mr. Jell admired this property, too, but he could
make no use of it. For once he had dialed, he would also be billed. And
of course his Box would be traced to Earth. That Mr. Jell could not
allow.

No, he would make do with whatever was available on Earth. He had to
get along without the catalogue.

And he really never needed the catalogue, not at least for the first
year, which was perhaps the finest year of his life. He lived in
perfect freedom, ever-continuing joy, on the riverbank, and made some
special friends: one Charlie, aged five, one Linda, aged four, one Sam,
aged six. He spent a great deal of his time with these friends, and
their parents approved of him happily as a free baby-sitter, and he was
well into his second year on Earth when the first temptation arose.

Bugs.

Try as he might, Mr. Jell could not learn to get along with bugs. His
air-conditioned, antiseptic, neat and odorless existence back home had
been an irritation, yes, but he had never in his life learned to live
with bugs of any kind, and he was too old to start now. But he had
picked an unfortunate spot. The state of Florida was a heaven for Mr.
Jell, but it was also a heaven for bugs.

There is probably nowhere on Earth with a greater variety of insects,
large and small, winged and stinging, than Florida, and the natural
portion of all kinds found their ways into Mr. Jell's peaceful
existence. He was unable even to clear out his own house--never mind
the endless swarms of mosquitoes that haunted the riverbank--and the
bugs gave him some very nasty moments. And the temptation was that he
alone, of all people on Earth, could have exterminated the bugs at will.

One of the best-selling export gadgets on Mr. Jell's home world was
a small, flying, burrowing, electronic device which had been built
specifically to destroy bugs on planets they traded with. Mr. Jell
was something of a technician, and he might not even have had to order
a Destroyer through the catalogue, but there were other problems.

       *       *       *       *       *

Mr. Jell's people had not been merely capricious when they formed their
policy of non-intervention. Mr. Jell's bug-destroyer would kill all the
bugs, but it would undoubtedly ruin the biological balance upon which
the country's animal life rested. The birds which fed on the bugs would
die, and the animals which fed on the birds, and so on, down a course
which could only be disastrous. And even one of the little Destroyers
would put an extraordinary dent in the bug population of the area; once
sent out into the woods, it could not be recalled or turned off, and it
would run for years.

No, Mr. Jell made the valiant decision to endure little itchy bumps on
his arms for the rest of his days.

Yet that was only the first temptation. Soon there were others, much
bigger and more serious. Mr. Jell had never considered this problem
at all, but he began to realize at last that his people had been more
right than he knew. He was in the uncomfortable position of a man who
can do almost anything, and does not dare do it. A miracle man who must
hide his miracles.

The second temptation was rain. In the middle of Mr. Jell's second
year, a drought began, a drought which covered all of Florida. He sat
by helplessly, day after day, while the water level fell in his own
beloved river, and fish died gasping breaths, trapped in little pockets
upstream. Several months of that produced Mr. Jell's second great
temptation. Lakes and wells were dry all over the country, farms and
orange groves were dry, there were great fires in the woods, birds and
animals died by the thousands.

All that while, of course, Mr. Jell could easily have made it rain.
Another simple matter, although this time he would have had to send
away for the materials, through the Box. But he couldn't do that. If he
did, _they_ would come for him, and he consoled himself by arguing that
he had no right to make it rain. That was not strictly controllable,
either. It might rain and rain for several days, once started, filling
up the lakes, yes, and robbing water from somewhere else, and then what
would happen when the normal rainy season came?

Mr. Jell shuddered to think that he might be the cause, for all his
good intentions, of vast floods, and he resisted the second temptation.
But that was relatively easy. The third temptation turned out to be
infinitely harder.

Little Charlie, aged five, owned a dog, a grave, sober, studious dog
named Oscar. On a morning near the end of Mr. Jell's second year, Oscar
was run over by a truck. And Charlie gathered the dog up, all crumpled
and bleeding and already dead, and carried him tearfully but faithfully
off to Mr. Jell, who could fix _anything_.

And Mr. Jell could certainly have fixed Oscar. Hoping to guard against
just such an accident, he had already made a "recording" of Oscar
several months before. The Box had scanned Oscar and discovered exactly
how he was made--for the Box, as has been said, could duplicate
anything--and Mr. Jell had only to dial Oscar number to produce a new
Oscar. A live Oscar, grave and sober, atom for atom identical with the
Oscar that was dead.

       *       *       *       *       *

But young Charlie's parents, who had been unable to comfort the boy,
came to Mr. Jell's house with him. And Mr. Jell had to stand there,
red-faced and very sad, and deny to Charlie that there was anything
he could do, and watch the look in Charlie's eyes turn into black
betrayal. And when the boy ran off crying, Mr. Jell had the worst
temptation of all.

He thought so at the time, but he could not know that the dog had not
been the worst. The worst was yet to come.

He resisted a great many temptations after that, but now for the first
time doubt had begun to seep in to his otherwise magnificent existence.
He swore to himself that he could never give this life up. Here on the
riverbank, dry and buggy as it well was, was still the most wonderful
life he had ever known, infinitely preferable to the drab crowds he
would face at home. He was an old man, grimly aware of the passage of
time. He would consider himself the luckiest of men to be allowed to
die and be buried here.

But the temptations went on.

First there was the Red Tide, a fish-killing disease which often sweeps
Florida's coast, murdering fish by the hundreds of millions. He could
have cured that, but he would have had to send off for the chemicals.

Next there was an infestation of the Mediterranean fruit fly, a bug
which threatened most of Florida's citrus crop and very nearly ruined
little Linda's father, a farmer. There was a Destroyer available which
could be set to kill just one type of bug, Mr. Jell knew, but he would
have had to order it, again, from the catalogue. So he had to let
Linda's father lose most of his life's savings.

Shortly after that, he found himself tempted by a young, gloomy couple,
a Mr. and Mrs. Ridge, whom he visited one day looking for their young
son, and found himself in the midst of a morbid quarrel. Mr. Ridge's
incredible point of view was that this was too terrible a world to
bring children into. Mr. Jell found himself on the verge of saying that
he himself had personally visited forty-seven other worlds, and not one
could hold a candle to this one.

He resisted that, at last, but it was surprising how close he had come
to talking, even over such a relatively small thing as that, and he had
concluded that he was beginning to wear under the strain, when there
came the day of the last temptation.

Linda, the four-year-old, came down with a sickness. Mr. Jell learned
with a shock that everyone on Earth believed her incurable.

       *       *       *       *       *

He had no choice then. He knew that from the moment he heard of the
illness, and he wondered why he had never until that moment anticipated
this. There was, of course, nothing else he could do, much as he loved
this Earth, and much as he knew little Linda would certainly have died
in the natural order of things. All of that made no difference; it had
finally come home to him that if a man is able to help his neighbors
and does not, then he ends up something less than a man.

He went out on the riverbank and thought about it all that afternoon,
but he was only delaying the decision. He knew he could not go on
living here or anywhere with the knowledge of the one small grave for
which he would be forever responsible. He knew Linda would not begrudge
him those few moments, that one afternoon more. He waited, watching the
sun go down, and then he went back into the house and looked through
the catalogue. He found the number of the serum and dialed for it.

The serum appeared within less than a minute. He took it out of the
Box and stared at it, the thought of the life it would bring to Linda
driving all despair out of his mind. It was a universal serum; it would
protect her from all disease for the rest of her life. _They_ would
be coming for him soon, but he knew it would take them a while to get
here, perhaps even a full day. He did not bother to run. He was much to
old to run and hide.

He sat for a while thinking of how to get the serum to her, but that
was no problem. Her parents would give her anything she asked now, and
he made up some candy, injecting the serum microscopically into the
chunks of chocolate, and then suddenly had a wondrous idea. He put the
chunks into the Box and went on duplicating candy until he had several
boxes.

When he was finished with that, he went visiting all the houses of all
the good people he knew, leaving candy for them and their children. He
knew he should not do that, but, he thought, it couldn't really do much
harm, could it? Just those few lives altered, out of an entire world?

But the idea had started wheels turning in his mind, and toward the
end of that night, he began to chuckle with delight. Might as well be
flashed for a rogg as a zilb.

He ordered out one special little bug Destroyer, from the Box, set
to kill just one bug, the medfly, and sent it happily down the road
toward Linda's farm. After that, he duplicated Oscar and sent the dog
yelping homeward with a note on his collar. When he was done with that,
he ordered a batch of chemicals, several tons of it, and ordered a
conveyor to carry it down and dump it into the river, where it would be
washed out to sea and so end the Red Tide.

By the time that was over, he was very tired; he had been up the whole
night. He did not know what to do about young Mr. Ridge, the one who
did not want children. He decided that if the man was that foolish,
nothing could help him. But there was one other thing he could do.
Praying silently that once he started this thing, it would not get out
of hand, he made it rain.

In this way, he deprived himself of the last sunrise. There was nothing
but gray sky, misty, blowing, when he went out onto the riverbank that
morning. But he did not really mind. The fresh air and the rain on
his face were all the good-by he could have asked for. He was sitting
on wet grass wondering the last thought--why in God's name don't more
people here realize what a beautiful world this is?--when he heard a
voice behind him.

The voice was deep and very firm.

"Citizen Jell," it said.

The old man sighed.

"Coming," he said, "coming."





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Citizen Jell, by Michael Shaara

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CITIZEN JELL ***

***** This file should be named 51342.txt or 51342.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/1/3/4/51342/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
