The Project Gutenberg EBook of Dumbwaiter, by James Stamers

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: Dumbwaiter

Author: James Stamers

Release Date: March 16, 2016 [EBook #51478]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DUMBWAITER ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                              Dumbwaiter

                           By JAMES STAMERS

                         Illustrated by DILLON

           [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from
                 Galaxy Magazine February 1960.
         Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
         the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]




       Antimony IX divers can't be seen, of course ... but don't
         have anything in mind when one of them is around you!


The man ahead of me had a dragon in his baggage. So the Lamavic boys
confiscated it. Lamavic--Livestock, Animal, Mineral and Vegetable,
International Customs--does not like to find dragons curled up in a
thermos. And since this antipathy was a two-way exchange, the Lamavic
inspectors at Philadelphia International were singed and heated all
ways by the time they got to me. I knew them well.

"Mr. Sol Jones?"

"That's right," I said, watching the would-be dragon smuggler being
marched away. A very amateur job. I could have told him. There are only
two ways to smuggle a dragon nowadays.

"Any livestock to declare, Mr. Jones?"

"I have no livestock on my person or in my baggage, nor am I
accompanied by any material prohibited article," I said carefully, for
I saw they were recording.

The little pink, bald inspector with a charred collar looked at his
colleague.

"Anything known?"

His colleague looked down at me from six feet of splendid physique,
smiled unpleasantly, and flipped the big black record book.

"'Sol Jones,'" he read, "'Lamavic four-star offender. Galactic
registration: six to tenth power: 763918. Five foot ten inches, Earth
scale. Blue eyes, hair variable and usually nondescript brown, ear
lobes and cranial....' You're not disputing identity, Mr. Jones?"

"Oh, no. That's me."

"I see. 'Irrevocable Galactic citizenship for services to family
of Supreme President Xgol in matter of asteroid fungus, subsequent
Senatorial amnesty confirmed, previous sentences therefore omitted.
Lamavic offenses thereafter include no indictable evidence but total
twenty-four minor fines for introducing prohibited livestock onto
various planets. Suspected complicity in Lamavic cases One through
Seventy-six as follows: mobile sands, crystal thinkers, recording
turtle, operatic fish, giant mastodon.' Mr. Jones, you seem to have
given us trouble before."

"Before what?"

"Before this--er--"

"That," I said, "is an Unconstitutional remark. I am giving no trouble.
I have made a full declaration. I demand the rights of a Galactic
citizen."

He apologized, as he had to. This merely made both inspectors angry,
but they were going to search me anyway. I knew that. Certainly I am a
smuggler, and I had in fact a little present for my girl Florence--a
wedding present, I hoped--but they would never find it. This time I
really had them fooled, and I intended to extract maximum pleasure from
watching their labors.

       *       *       *       *       *

I saw the Lamavic records once. The next leading offender has only
two stars and he's out on Ceres in the penal colony. My four stars
denote that I disapprove of all these rules prohibiting the carrying
of livestock from one planet to another. Other people extend the
Galactic Empire; I extend my Galactic credit. You want an amusing
extraterrestrial pet to while away the two-hour work week, I can
provide one. Of course, this pet business was overdone in the early
days when any space-hopper could bring little foreign monsters back to
the wife and kiddies. Any weird thing could come in and did.

"You are aware, Mr. Jones, that you have declared that you are not
trying to bring in any prohibited life-form, whether animal, mineral,
vegetable, or any or all of these?"

"I am," I said.

"You are further aware of the penalties for a false declaration?"

"In my case, I believe I could count on thirty years' invigorating work
on a penal planet."

"You could, Mr. Jones. You certainly could."

"Well, I've made my declaration."

"Will you step this way?"

Very polite in Philadelphia Spaceport. I followed the inspectors into
the screening cubicles. There was a nasty looking device in the corner.

"I thought those things were illegal," I said.

"Unfortunately, Mr. Jones, you are, as you know, quite right. We may
not employ a telepath instrument on any unconvicted person."

They looked sorry, but I wasn't. A telepath would have told them
immediately where I had Florence's pet, and all about it. I smiled at
them. They paid no attention, took my passport and began turning up the
Lamavic manual on Antimony IX, Livestock of, Prohibited Forms. I had
just come from there and so had Florence's little diver, which I had
brought as a happy surprise. I sat down. The two inspectors looked as
if they were going to say something, then continued flipping pages of
their manual.

"Here it is--Antimony IX."

One of them read out the prohibitions and the other tried to watch me
and the reflex counter behind me at the same time--a crude instrument
which should be used, in my professional view, only to determine a
person's capacities for playing poker with success.

"Ants-water, babblers, bunces, candelabra plants, catchem-fellers,
Cythia Majoris, divers, dunces, dimple-images, drakes, dunking dogs,
dogs-savage, dogs-water, dogs-not-otherwise-provided-for, unspec.,
elephants-miniature, fish-any...."

They went on. Antimony IX is teeming with life and almost every
specimen is prohibited on other planets. We had passed the divers,
anyway. I smiled and gave the reflex counter a strong jerk just as the
smaller inspector was saying "Mammoths." They looked at me in silence.

"Funny man," one said, and they went on reading.

"Okay," the large inspector said at last. "We'll examine him for
everything."

       *       *       *       *       *

For the next three hours, they took blood specimens to see if I had
microscopic livestock hidden there, they X-rayed me and my baggage,
fluoroscoped everything again, put the baggage through an irritator
life-indexer, investigated my orifices in detail with a variety of
instruments, took skin scrapings in case I was wearing a false layer,
and the only thing they found was my dark glasses.

"Why don't you wear modern contact lenses?"

"It's none of your business," I said, "but these old-style spectacles
have liquid lenses."

There was a flurry and they sent away for analysis a small drop from
one of the lenses. There were no signs of prohibited life in the liquid.

"I could have told you that," I said. "It's dicyanin, a vegetable
extract. Diminishes the glare."

I put the glasses on my nose and hooked on the earpieces. The effect
was medieval, but I could see the little diver now. I could also see
disturbing evidence of the inspectors' mental condition. A useful
little device invented by Dr. W. J. Kilner (1847-1920) for the study of
the human aura in sickness and health. After a little practice, which
I was not going to allow the Lamavic inspectors, the retina became
sufficiently sensitive to see the micro-wave aura when you looked
through the dicyanin screen. As was true of most of these psi pioneers
at that time, nothing was done to further Kilner's work when he died.
I noticed, without surprise, that the inspectors had a mental field of
very limited extent and that the little diver had survived the journey
nicely.

"Can I go now?" I asked.

"This time, Mr. Jones."

When I left, the repair staff was building a new inspection barrier
to replace the parts the dragon had got. Such an amateur performance!
Leave smuggling to professionals and we'd have Lamavic disbanded from
boredom in ten years. I nearly slipped on the fine silica dioxide which
had fused in the air when the dragon got annoyed. Nasty, dangerous pets.

The one for Florence was the only contraband I was carrying this
trip, which was purely pleasure. She was waiting for me in her
apartment, tall, golden, luscious, and all mine. She thought I was in
import-export, which in a sense was true.

"I've missed you so much, Sol," she said, twining herself on me and the
couch like a Venusian water-nymph. "Did you bring me a present?"

I lay back and let her kiss me.

"Of course I did. A small but very valuable present."

I let her kiss me again.

"Not--a Jupiter diamond, Sol?"

"Much rarer than that, and more useful."

"Oh. Useful."

"Something to help you in the house when we're married, honey. Now,
don't pout so prettily, or I'll never get around to showing you."

My homecoming was not developing quite as I planned, but I put this
down to womanly, if not exactly maidenly, quirks. When she found out
what I had brought her, I was sure she would be all over me again. I
put on my dark glasses so that I could see where the diver was.

"Would you like a drink, honey?" I asked.

"I don't mind," she said sulkily.

       *       *       *       *       *

I looked at the diver, concentrated hard on the thought of a bottle
from the cabinet, two glasses and a pitcher of ice from the kitchen. He
went revolving through the air obediently and the items came floating
out neatly. Florence nearly shattered the windows with her screams.

"Now calm down, honey," I said, catching her. "Calm down. It's just a
little present I brought you."

The bottle, glasses and pitcher dropped gently onto the table beside us.

"See?" I said. "Service at a thought. Remote control. The end of
housework. Kiss me."

She didn't.

"You mean you did that, Sol?"

"Not me, exactly. I've brought you a little baby diver, honey, all the
way from Antimony IX, just for you. There isn't another one on Earth.
In fact, I doubt if there's another one outside Antimony IX. I had a
lot of trouble securing this rare and valuable present for you."

"I don't like it. It gives me the creeps."

"Honey," I said carefully, "this is a little baby. It couldn't hurt a
mouse. It's about six inches in diameter, and all it is doing is to
teleport what you want it to teleport."

"Then why can't I see it?"

"If you could see it, I wouldn't have been allowed to bring it for you,
honey, because a whole row of nasty-minded Solar Civil Servants would
have seen it too, and they would have taken it from your own sweet Sol."

"They can have it."

"Honey, this is a _rare_ and _valuable_ pet! It will _do_ things for
you."

"So you think I need something done for me. Well! I'm glad you came
right out and said this before we were married!"

The following series of "but--but--" from me and irrelevance from
Florence occupied an hour, but hardly mentioned the diver. Eventually I
got her back into my arms.

My urges for Florence were strictly biological, though intense. There
were little chances for intellectual exchanges between us, but I was
more interested in the broad probabilities of her as a woman. I could
go commune with wild and exotic intelligences on foreign planets any
time I had the fare. As a woman, Florence was what I wanted.

"Back on Antimony IX," I explained carefully, "life is fierce and
rugged. So, to keep from being eaten, these little divers evolved
themselves into little minds with no bodies at all, and they feed off
solar radiation. Now, honey, minds are not made of the same stuff
brains are made of, good solid tissue and gray matter and neural
cortex--"

"Don't be dirty, Sol."

"There is nothing dirty about the body, honey. Minds are invisible
but detectable in the micro-wavelengths on any sensitive counter, and
look like little glass eggs when you can see them--as I can, by using
these glasses. In fact, your diver is over by the window now. But,
having evolved this far, they came across a little difficulty and
couldn't evolve any further. So there they are, handy little minds
for teleporting whatever you want moved, and reading other people's
thoughts."

       *       *       *       *       *

She gasped. "Did you say reading other people's thoughts?

"Certainly," I said. "As a matter of fact, that's what stopped the
divers from evolving further. If they brush against any thinking
creature, they pick up whatever thought is in the creature's conscious
mind. But they also pick up the subliminal activity, if you follow
me--and down at that level of a mind such as man's, his thoughts are
not only the present unconscious thoughts but also a good slice of what
is to him still the future. It's one of those space-time differences.
The divers are not really on the same space-time reference as the
physical world, but that makes them all the more useful, because our
minds aren't either."

"Did you say reading other people's thoughts, like a telepath?" she
persisted.

"Exactly like a telepath, or any other class of psi. We're really
living on a much wider scale than we're conscious of, but our mind only
tracks down one point in time-space in a straight line, which happens
to fit our bodies. Our subliminal mind is way out in every direction,
including time--and when you pick up fragments of this consciously,
you're a psi, that's all. So the divers got thoroughly confused--that's
what it amounts to--and never evolved any further. So you see, honey,
it's all perfectly natural."

"I think you're just dirty."

"Eh?"

"Everyone _hates_ telepaths. You know that."

"I don't."

"Oh, you go wandering all over the Galaxy--but my friends--what could
I say to my friends if they learned I had something like a telepath in
the apartment?"

"It's only a baby diver, I keep telling you, honey. And anyway, you'll
be able to tell what they're really thinking about you."

Florence looked thoughtful. "And what they've been doing?"

"Sometimes they will do what they think they'll do. And sometimes they
don't make it. But it's what their subliminal plans to have happen,
yes."

She kissed me. "I think it's a lovely present, Sol."

She snuggled up to me and I concentrated on bringing the diver over to
her. I thought I'd read her, just for a joke, and see what she had in
mind. I took a close look.

"What's the matter, Sol?"

"Oh, honey! You beautiful creature!"

"This is nice--but what made you say that?"

"I just got the diver to show me your mind, and bits of the next two
weeks you have in mind. It's going to be a lovely, lovely vacation."

She blushed very violently and got angry. "You had no right to look at
what I was thinking, Sol!"

"It wasn't what you were thinking so much as what you will be thinking,
honey. I figure in it quite well."

"I won't have it, Sol! Do you hear me? I think spying on people is
detestable!"

"I thought you liked the idea of tagging your friends?"

"That's different. Either we go somewhere without that whatever-it-is,
or you can marry someone else. I don't mind having it around after
we're married, but not before, Sol. Do you understand?"

I was already reaching for the video yellow pages.

       *       *       *       *       *

I turned on the television-wall in the apartment before we left and
instructed the diver to stay around and watch it. They are very curious
creatures, inquisitive, always chasing new ideas, and I thought that
should hold the diver happily for several days. Meanwhile, I had booked
adjoining rooms at the Asteroid-Central.

The Asteroid-Central advertised in the video yellow pages that it
practiced the Most Rigid Discrimination--meaning no telepaths,
clairvoyants, clairaudients or psychometrists. Life was hard on a psi
outside Government circles. But life was much harder on the rest of the
world seeking secluded privacy and discretion. The Asteroid-Central was
so discreet, you could hardly see where you were going. Dim lights,
elegant figures passing in the gloom, singing perfumes of the gentlest
kind, and "Guaranteed Psi-Free" on every bedroom door.

I was humming idly in my room, with one eye on the communicating door
through which, were she but true to her own mind, Florence would
shortly come, and I turned on the television-wall only to see how
less fortunate people were spending their leisure. An idle and most
regrettable gesture.

There was a quiz-game on International Channel 462, dull and just
finishing. All the contestants seemed to know all the answers. In
fact, the man who won the trip around the Rings of Saturn, did so
by answering the question before the Martian quiz-master had really
finished reading it out. When the winner turned sharply on the other
contestants and knocked them down, yelling, "So that's what you think
of my mother, is it?" the wall was blacked out and we were taken
straight to the Solar Party Convention.

The nominee this decade was human. He seemed to be speaking on his
aims, his pure record and altruistic intentions. The stereo cameras
looked over the heads of the delegates. Starting in the row by the main
aisle, each delegate shot to his feet and started booing and jeering.
It rippled down the rows like a falling pack of cards, each delegate in
turn after the man in front of him, and each row picking up where the
back of the previous row left off. It was as if someone were passing a
galvanizing brush along the heads of the delegates, row by row.

Or as if a diver were refreshing the delegates with a clear picture of
their nominee's mind.

I groaned and called Florence.

"Look," I said when she came. "That damned pet has followed the program
back to the cameras from your apartment, and there he is lousing up the
Convention."

"I vote Earth," she told me indifferently.

"That isn't the point, honey. I'll have to bring the diver here, and
quickly."

"You do that, Sol. I'll be at home when you get rid of it."

By the time the diver picked up my thoughts and came flickering into
the room through the walls, Florence had left.

I felt the diver off the back of my head, made my thoughts as kindly as
possible, and went downstairs to the largest, longest bar.

       *       *       *       *       *

The evening passed profitably because I was invited to join a threesome
of crooks at cards. With the aid of the little diver, I was able to
shorten the odds to a pleasant margin in my favor. But this was doing
nothing about Florence. A not altogether funny remark about teleporting
the cards did, however, suggest the answer.

After the transaction was over, I sent the diver off to a friend on
the faculty of Luke University, where they had a long history of psi
investigation and where the diver could be guaranteed to be kept busy
rolling dice and such. This was easy to fix by a video call. There had
been times in the past when certain services to the Extra-terrestrial
Zoology and Botanical Tanks had made me discreetly popular with the
faculty, and anyway they thought I was doing them a favor. They
promised to keep the little diver busy for an indefinite period.

I reported to Florence, and after a certain amount of feminine
shall-I-shan't-I, she came back to the Asteroid-Central.

This time I did not turn on the television-wall. I lay still. I said
nothing. I hardly thought at all. And after several years compressed
themselves into every minute, my own true honey, Florence, slid open
the communicating door and came into the room.

She walked shyly toward me, hiding modestly within a floating nightgown
as opaque as a very clear soap bubble.

I stood up, held out my arms and she came toward me, smiling--and
stopped to pick up something on the carpet.

"Ooo, Sol! Look! A Jupiter diamond!"

She held up the largest and most expensive diamond I have ever seen.

I was just going to claim credit for this little gift when another
appeared, and another, and a long line marching over the carpet like an
ant trail. They came floating in under the door.

Now love is for vacations, and between my own sweet Florence and a
diamond mine there is no comparison. I put on my dicyanin glasses and
saw the baby diver was back and at work teleporting. I said so, but
this time there were no hysterics from Florence.

"I was just thinking of him," she said, "and wishing you had brought me
a Jupiter diamond instead."

"Well, honey, it looks as if you've got both."

I watched her scrambling on the carpet, gathering handfuls of diamonds
and not in the least interested in me.

On Antimony IX, the little divers switched from one space-time point
to another simultaneously, and the baby diver had come back from the
Solar Party Convention the same way. I thought of it and it came;
Florence had just thought of it and here it was. But now it seemed to
be flitting lightly from Earth to Jupiter and back with diamonds, so
perhaps there was no interplanetary distance to a mind.

This had a future. I could see myself with a winter and a summer planet
of my own, even happily paying Earth, Solar and Galactic taxes.

"Well, honey, don't you worry," I said. "You don't like divers, so I'll
take it back and give you something else. Just leave it to Sol."

"Take your foot off that diamond, Sol Jones! You gave me this dear
little diver and he's mine!"

       *       *       *       *       *

She sat back on her heels and thought. The evidence of her thinking
immediately came trickling through the door--Venusian opals set in
a gold bracelet half a pound heavy, Martian sleeze furs, spider-web
stockings, platinum belts. The room was beginning to look like a video
fashion center, a Galactic merchandise mart. And after Florence put on
a coat and opened the door, her ideas began to get bigger.

"This is fun!" she cried, teleporting like mad. "Why, I can have
anything in the Galaxy just by thinking about it!"

"Now, honey, think of the benefits to humanity! This is too big to be
used for personal gain. This should be dedicated--"

"This is dedicated to me, Sol Jones, so just you keep your fingers off
it. Why, the cute little thing--look, he's been out to Saturn for me!"

I made a decision. Think wide and grand, Sol Jones, I said. Sacrifice
yourself for the greater good.

"Florence, honey, you know I love you. Will you marry me?"

That stopped her. "You mean it, Sol?"

"Of course."

"It's not just because of this diver?"

"Why, honey, how could you think such a thing? If I'd never brought it
in for you, I'd still want to marry you."

"You never said so before," she said. "But okay. If you do it now.
Right now, Sol Jones."

So the merchandise stopped coming in while we plugged into the video
and participated in a moving and legal ceremony. The marriage service
was expensive, but after all we could teleport in a few thousand credit
blanks from the Solar Treasury. Immediately after we had switched off,
we did so.

"Are you sure you married me for myself, Sol?"

"I swear it, honey. No other thought entered my head. Just you."

I made a few notes while Florence planned the house we would have,
furnished with rare materials from anywhere. I thought one of the
medium asteroids would do for a base for Sol Jones Intragalactic
Transport. I could see it all, vast warehouses and immediate delivery
of anything from anywhere. I wondered if there was a limit to the
diver's capacity, so Florence desired an encyclopedia and in it came,
floating through the doorway.

"It says," she read, "not much is known about Antimony IX divers
because none have ever been known to leave their planet."

"They probably need the stimulus of an educated mind," I said. "Anyway,
this one can get diamonds from Jupiter and so on, and that's what
matters."

       *       *       *       *       *

I kissed the wife of the President of Sol Jones Intragalactic and
was interrupted by discreet tapping on the door. The manager of the
Asteroid-Central beamed at us.

"Excuse," he said. "But we understand you have just been married, Mr.
and Mrs. Jones."

"Irrevocably," I said.

"Felicitations. The Asteroid-Central will be sending up complimentary
euphorics. There is just a small point, Mr. Jones. We notice you have a
large selection of valuable gifts for the bride."

He looked round the room and smiled at the piles of stuff Florence had
thought of.

"Of course," he went on, "we trust your stay will be pleasant and
perhaps you will let us know if you will be wanting anything else."

"I expect we will, but we'll let you know," I said.

"Thank you, Mr. Jones. It is merely that we noticed you had emptied
every showcase on the ground floor and, a few moments ago, teleported
the credit contents of the bar up here. Not of importance, really; it
is all charged on your bill."

"You saw it and didn't stop it?" I yelled.

"Oh, no, Mr. Jones. We always make an exception for Antimony IX divers.
Limited creatures, really, but good for our business. We get about one
a month--smuggled in, you know. But the upkeep proves too expensive.
Some women do shop without more than a passing thought, don't they?"

I saw what he meant, but Mrs. Sol Jones took it very philosophically.

"Never mind, Sol--you have me."

"Or vice versa, honey," I said.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Dumbwaiter, by James Stamers

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DUMBWAITER ***

***** This file should be named 51478.txt or 51478.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/1/4/7/51478/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
