The Project Gutenberg EBook of Blueblood, by Jim Harmon

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: Blueblood

Author: Jim Harmon

Release Date: March 19, 2016 [EBook #51499]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BLUEBLOOD ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                               BLUEBLOOD

                             By JIM HARMON

                          Illustrated by WOOD

           [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from
                    Galaxy Magazine December 1960.
         Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
         the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]




               There were two varieties of aliens--blue
              and bluer--but not as blue as the Earthmen!


Even if I'm only a space pilot, I'm not dumb. I mean I'm not _that_
dumb. I admit that Dr. Ellik and Dr. Chon outrank me, because that's
the way it's got to be. A pilot is only an expendable part. But I had
been the first one to see the natives on this planet, and I was the
first one to point out that they came in two attractive shades of blue,
light blue and dark blue.

Four Indigos were carrying an Azure. I called the others over to the
screen.

"A sedan chair," identified Lee Chon. "Think the light-skinned one is a
kind of a priest?"

Mike Ellik shook his head. "I doubt it. The chair isn't ornate enough.
I think that's probably the standard method of travel--at least for a
certain social elite."

"Do you notice anything unusual about those bully boys?"

"You tell me what you see," Ellik evaded.

"Three of them are mongoloid idiots," said Chon.

"I thought so," Ellik said, "but I wasn't quite sure--aliens and all."

"They're humanoids," Chon said, "and humanoids are my specialty. I
know."

"The fourth one doesn't look much better."

"His features are slack and his jaw is loose, all right, but they
aren't _made_ that way. It's an expression he could change. His head
isn't shaped like that."

"Um. The man in the chair is a striking specimen. No cerebral damage in
him."

"I don't think the answer is brain damage. If the 'noble' trusts those
four to carry him, their actions and reflexes must be pretty well
coordinated. They can't have anything like palsy or epilepsy."

"They must breed a special type of slave for the job," Ellik suggested.

"They aren't slaves, Mike," I told him.

"No?" Ellik said, like talking to a kid. "And what are they, Mike?"

       *       *       *       *       *

I breathed out hard, a little disgusted that big brains like Ellik and
Chon couldn't see the translucent truth. "They are just four dumb slobs
who can't get a better job, so they are hauling His Highness around
because they have to make a living the hard way."

"That doesn't quite cover it, Johnny," Chon said. "The carriers are a
completely different race."

"What's different about them?" I asked. "They've got hands to work
with, eyes to see with, noses to smell with. If you kick one of them, I
bet he'll hurt. It's just their bad luck to be dumb slobs."

Ellik grunted. "Unfortunately, Johnny, there are subtler differences.
The darker aliens, the indigo-colored ones, seem to be definitely down
further on the scale of local evolution. They must be an inferior race
to the lighter, azure species."

Chon had been looking at us and listening to everything. Finally he
said, "You can't be sure of that, Mike. You haven't seen all of the
Indigos. Some of them may not be as far down as the common carriers."

Ellik sighed. "Explorers have to make snap decisions on insufficient
data. We don't have time to see the whole damned planet before we write
up a report."

"Yes, explorers have to make snap decisions," Chon repeated to himself.
"Are you going to take a look at those buildings, see if it's a
village?"

"I thought I'd see if our blueblood friend out there wants to show it
to me," said Mike Ellik.

"He won't," I said.

They both looked at me.

"You don't have any chair and nobody to carry you," I went on. "He'll
think you're just a slob."

"Jonathan," Ellik said, "you show occasional flashes of genius."

I smiled and shrugged it off. "I know I'm not nearly as smart as you
boys. But that doesn't mean I can't think _at all_."

Ellik clapped me on the shoulder. "Of course it doesn't."

But his grip was too strong.

"Johnny," Ellik said gravely, "do you think _you_ could carry me?"

"Wait a minute. You want me to act like one of those slobs? That's
asking a lot."

"But could you?"

"Not all the way to those buildings. What was the gravity reading, Lee?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Chon closed his eyes a second. "Point nine seven three."

"There!" I said. "I couldn't tote you three or four miles piggy-back."

"Look," Chon said, "we can strip down a magnetic flyer and you can ride
the seat, Mike. Johnny can pretend to carry you, like on a platter.
It'll impress the yokels with the strength of our flunkies."

"_Mike_ could carry _me_," I pointed out.

Chon laid a delicate hand on my back. "But, buddy, Mike outranks you."

I shook my head. "Not that way, he doesn't."

"We may be going to a lot of trouble for nothing," Mike said. "That
gang may jump us as soon as we decant and try to have us for dinner."

"There's always that risk," Chon agreed solemnly, "but naturally I will
remain on duty at the controls of the stun cannon."

"Securely inside," Ellik added.

"Always on duty," Chon said.

"Always inside," Ellik said.

"It's in the records, Ellik. I took the last one." Lee said it a little
too sharp and it cut the kidding.

"Go soak your soft head in brine," Ellik said, disgruntled.

"Wait a minute," Chon called.

Ellik turned back. "Yeah?"

"Don't forget to take your communicator with you." Chon's voice was
choked. "You may get out of line of sight if you go off with that
troupe."

"I know this business," Ellik said, turning away.

"Mike, I'm sorry if I offended you. Shake, huh?"

Ellik smiled sourly. "Forget it."

"Come on, shake."

"Okay, we're buddies. Do I actually have to pump your clammy paw?"

"Please!"

"Oh, for Pete's sake!" Ellik turned around and kissed Chon on the
forehead.

Ellik was just sore, of course. But the manual warns against that sort
of horseplay when you've been out a long time.

"Satisfied now?" Ellik asked.

"No." Chon's voice was strained tight. "It should have been me to kiss
you." Chon turned to me. "Luck out there, Johnny."

I grabbed his hand and levered it fast, before he could decide I needed
kissing. "Sure thing, Lee. Thanks."

       *       *       *       *       *

The buildings weren't much to see, but they were a step above primitive
huts. They were adobe, or maybe plastic. The aliens understood the
stress principles of the dome, Ellik said, because all the buildings
had curved roofs. Unbaked pottery was what they looked like to me,
and they looked as if they would be brittle as coffee-colored chalk.
Actually, their ceramic surfaces were at least as hard as steel.

The Azure had welcomed Ellik with an outstretched hand. Mike wasn't one
to jump to conclusions, so he just held out his own hand. The native
grabbed and let it go after pulling it some.

The alien saw me apparently carrying Ellik on a seat cushion with one
hand, and he kicked me in the leg. To test my muscles, I guess. I
managed to keep from yelling or jumping. The Azure looked impressed and
the Indigos did a bad job of hiding a lot of envy and hate.

As the Indigos toted their man along on the litter and I guided Ellik's
seat cushion along the channel of magnetic feedback, the two riders
began talking. Ellik's translator collar broke the language barrier,
of course. It was a two-way communicator on a direct hook-up to our
cybernetic calculator on the ship. The brain analyzed the phonetic
structure of the alien language under various systems of logic or
anti-logic and fed the translation into Ellik's ear. Then it went
through its memory banks and played back the right sounds to translate
Ellik's talk into the alien language. I understand things like that.
I'm a pretty good mechanic.

I didn't have my translator turned on, but it seemed to me that somehow
I could understand what the plug-uglies, the Indigos, were saying.

Ellik told me that it was because all their speech was based on the
one universal humanoid sound, "mama." Everything good in the way of
nouns and verbs (there were no other particles of speech) was some
inflection of "m-m" and everything bad was "uh-m-m."

Ellik was pretty "uh-m-m."

I was _plenty_ "uh-m-m." I threatened their jobs, they thought.

They were a real miserable bunch of slobs, those Indigos.

We passed through the wide places between the houses--I wouldn't call
them streets--and saw a lot of Indigos crouched in doorways, watching
us, and Azures being toted around.

The clothing they wore was also pretty universal for sentient bipeds--a
tunic or sarong, kind of. For the Azures, it was smooth and colorful;
and for the Indigos, a loincloth of some rough, dun-colored stuff.

Ellik chinned off his translator switch and leaned down toward my ear.
"They are two distinct races, Johnny. Notice that _all_ the Indigos
are menials. There does not appear to be anything to correspond to a
freedman or even a higher-ranked house servant. The Azures treat the
Indigos only as animals."

"Slobs," I said. "Poor dumb slobs."

The nuclear flash washed over us, peppering us with a few excess
roentgens.

We couldn't look at the spaceship going up, but we knew it was going.
It was making a dawn.

The aliens were all frightened. They fell on the ground and started
praying to the ship, all of them, the Azures and the Indigos.

"What's wrong with that crazy Chinaman?" Ellik yelped.

"Lee knows what he's doing," I said.

Ellik unsnapped his communicator from his belt. "Johnny says you know
what you're doing, Chon. _Do you?_"

"I know." Chon's voice sounded right beside us, perfectly natural. Belt
communicators work just as well as those consoles. People only buy
consoles for prestige.

"Well?" Ellik demanded. "What _are_ you doing, Lee?"

I thought maybe something had gone wrong with the communicator.

Chon's voice finally reached us.

"I'm leaving you and Johnny on this planet, Mike," he said.

       *       *       *       *       *

An Indigo brought us in our morning supply of fruit.

Ellik kicked the Indigo. "It's overripe, blockhead. _Amum, amum._"

The Indigo backed out, bowing, eyes very round.

Ellik felt me looking at him.

"Well, I don't _like_ kicking the oaf, but that's all he's been
conditioned to understand as a sign of disapproval."

"Sure," I said.

Ellik passed through the scimitar of gray shadow into the sunlight that
washed lines and years out of his face. He braced a hand against the
doorframe and craned his head back. It stopped and steadied.

"He's still there," Ellik said. "Sometimes I wish his orbit would decay
enough to burn him up in this damned sour air." He coughed into his
fist.

"He could probably correct," I suggested.

Ellik sneered. "He hasn't got the brains."

"Pretty hard for one man to manage a takeoff. He was lucky to make it
into orbit."

"I just wish he would come down. Somehow, someway, I'd get to him, no
matter where he went on this planet."

"I suppose that's why he stays up."

Ellik slammed his fist into his palm. "I'm going to call him again. He
can't get away without us. If he fouled up a takeoff that badly, he's
not going to try to solo into hyperspace."

"I don't think anyone would solo into hyperspace. I don't think he
would be able to come back."

"Oh, what do you know about it?" Ellik said shortly. "He's just
building up his courage to try the big jump. He's yellow, sure, but
sooner or later he'll get desperate enough, or scared enough, to
actually go. Then we'll be stranded for fair. This planet may not be
colonized for centuries!"

"Probably never," I said. "Not after Lee's reports."

"You think he would falsify reports?" Ellik asked, blinking at me.

"I suppose he'll have to."

Ellik held his head with his hands. "Of course, of course. There's no
limit to the depths to which he would plummet." He ran over to the
corner and snatched a communicator off the pile of our gear. "I'm going
to call him and tell him what I think of him and his wild obsession."

I didn't remind Ellik that he had been telling Chon just that at least
once a day for a month. I knew his nerves got tighter and tighter and
cussing out Chon helped release them and make him feel better.

"Come down, Lee!" Ellik called. "The three of us can make the jump
together. You're martyring yourself for a crazy reason!"

"We've talked this over before," Chon answered. "This is the last time
I'm going to respond to your call. I've made it clear to you that I
think knowledge of this world will cause great suffering, a lot of
death, among the majority of Earth's people."

"You're talking prejudice, Lee! _Your_ prejudice. People aren't like
that any more."

"We haven't gone _that_ far, Mike. The bigots, the hatemongers, the
pettiness and xenophobia lurking in everybody haven't been asleep
that long. Just look at it from _my_ side, Mike. What will the white
people of Earth think about the Orientals, Negroes and Indians of
Earth when they find out the dark-skinned humanoids of another
planet are--measurably, unquestionably, vastly--_inferior_ to the
light-skinned race of the same world? I ask you, Mike!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Mike Ellik said, "It's an inept analogy, Lee, and you know it."

"But most people reason by analogy," said Lee Chon. "No, Mike. I have
to leave you and Johnny to prevent a recurrence of racial hatred,
intolerance and all the ugly consequences on both sides. This is the
last time I'll answer you, Mike. I'm getting lonesome. In a few years,
I'll get hungry for human companionship. I don't want to be tempted
down. Good-by, Johnny. So long, Mike."

Ellik screamed. "Wait! Answer one more call, Lee. It's the least you
can do for me. I don't know when I'll make it. It may be in a few weeks
or a few years. It won't be just argument, Lee. I'll have something
you'll _want_ to tell Earth about this place and these people."

"I'm still here. Tell it to me now," Chon's voice said.

"No. I want to get proof. Let me rig up some kind of video circuit for
you. I can use parts out of our tape camera and the translators. I want
to get it all across to you."

I could hear Chon breathing. "Very well. I'll answer your next call."

"Lee," I called out, "Mike and me will be expecting you to answer."

Chon laughed. "I'm not going anywhere, Johnny. Only around this world
every couple of hours."

"You couldn't make the jump through hyperspace without us, Lee," Ellik
said.

"That's right, Mike. I'm--I'm sorry to quarantine you two down there."

"_Quarantine!_" Ellik stormed. "_We're_ not sick, Lee. _You_ are the
sick one!"

There wasn't any sound, not even of breathing.

"You have an idea to change Lee's mind, Mike?" I asked.

He cupped his hand on the back of my neck. "Affirmative, Jonathan. A
pretty damned good one, too."

Ellik stood staring out the door, gnawing on one of his knuckles,
letting the sun turn the front of him into gold, so he looked like half
a statue, and half a man.

"I suppose it had to come out in him sooner or later," he said.

"What, Mike?"

"What could we expect? It's the basic quality of treachery in the
Oriental mind."

       *       *       *       *       *

When the shadows were at their longest and the alien sun was down the
closest to the horizon without actually going under, Ellik marched up
the path shoving a new Indigo. The Azures supplied Mike with all the
flunkies he wanted to gather food and the like for him, as his natural
right. But I thought we had enough of them hanging around our quarters.
I couldn't imagine what he would want with another one.

The alien hovered at the door. Ellik kicked him in the calf to make him
understand he was to go inside.

"Look at him, Johnny," Ellik said, pushing the fellow forward. "Not a
mongoloid, would you say?"

"No."

The alien looked stupid--blue and stupid. His face was hanging there,
but it wasn't pushed out of shape any more than the faces of the
Azures. The Indigo blinked back at me. What he also looked was not
friendly.

Ellik took the Indigo's cheeks in his hand and angled the face toward
the light. "He's a half-breed, Johnny, or otherwise the gene was
recessive. He wasn't damaged before birth, only after--when he started
to breathe."

"What do you mean, Mike?"

"You ever hear of cyanosis, Johnny?"

"No."

"Well, these creatures have something like it. The Indigos don't get
enough oxygen in their blood cells. It makes them sluggish; it turns
them blue like the pictures of 'blue babies' in the old books."

"I never saw a picture like that in an old book," I said.

"Did you ever _see_ a book? Sorry, Johnny. Just kidding." Ellik
rubbed his hands together. "Well! I theorized that there is no basic
difference in the Azures and the Indigos except improper aeration of
their blood. So, you see, an Indigo is only a _sick_ Azure, and I am
going to make this Indigo _well_."

"How can you do that?"

"It's simple," Mike said irritably. "The Indigos must have a
malformation of the heart causing an abnormal communication between
the venous and arterial side of the circulation system. A little
surgery and I adjust a valve in the heart. No more communication.
Proper aeration. Enough oxygen. The deep blue color goes, leaving only
the lighter blue of the natural pigmentation. The patient feels better,
acts better, thinks better, looks better. In short, he is no longer an
Indigo but an Azure."

"Is--is this what you're going to show Lee?" I ventured.

"Of course! It proves the Indigos _aren't_ an inferior race. They are
the same as the Azures except that they are sick. Their being sick
can't reflect unfavourably on any terrestrial colored race. There is no
analogy. But I have to prove it to Chon. We're going to tape the whole
process and feed it to him."

"I think," I said, "that that might get to him."

"Sure it will." Ellik's jaw muscles flexed. "I should ruin Lee with
this thing, but I won't. I'm not a vindictive man. Lee and I will
probably be working together for years. But whenever he gets out of
line--has some stubborn idea about doing something his way--don't think
I won't remind him of this!"

Suddenly, he was smiling again. He turned to the gawking Indigo. He
pointed two fingers at him.

"_Mmr?_" Ellik asked.

The alien tapped himself on his chest cavity twice. "_Mhaw_," he gave
his name.

"_Mhaw M'i uh M'i m M'm'-uh?_" Ellik asked him, without even using the
translators.

"_M-m-M-m-M_," the alien went, slapping himself on the chest with his
opened palms.

Ellik turned to me, grinning. "I asked him if he wanted to stop being
an Indigo and become an Azure. He thinks I can do anything and he's all
for it."

       *       *       *       *       *

After we fed Mhaw a dose of null-shock from our packs, Doc Ellik
started to slice him open with a ceramic knife he had borrowed from the
Azures.

But Ellik had forgotten that the alien might get frightened seeing
himself cut open, even if he couldn't feel any pain. It had never
happened to him before.

The alien lumbered to his feet, his chest hanging open, showing his
heart beating like some animal caught inside a blueberry pudding.

I drove a right cross into his jaw, and felt the jar all the way up to
my shoulder.

He melted back down onto the pallet.

"Good work, Johnny," Ellik said, stooping and starting his work.

Right away, Mhaw started to lose that Indigo color and get real
light--lighter than the Azures, in fact. None of the blue of the race
was actually in the pigmentation, Mike found out. Even the Azures
suffered some degree of improper aeration of the blood.

"You going to call Lee Chon now?" I asked Mike. "You going to show him
the tape we had running during the operation and all?"

"Not quite yet, Johnny," he said. "First I want to educate Mhaw a bit,
up to the Azure level or better. That should convince Lee."

Mhaw learned fast, probably faster than the Azures, even. Almost the
first thing he wanted was for us to stop calling him Mhaw and start
using an Azure name, Aedo.

Once a day, Ellik left our hut to take some exercise--a walk along
the alien esplanade, he called it. I used to stay with the doctored
alien, now Aedo, but we finally learned we could trust him to follow
our orders--which were to stay inside, away from the others, since we
didn't know how they would take him. So I got to walking along with
Ellik.

As dusk lengthened, we could see the spark that was our ship in its
orbit along the retreating horizon.

Ellik twisted back his head and the side of his mouth. "Look at him up
there--_look!_"

The spark burned brighter and danced in another direction.

"He's gone! He left us!" Ellik said.

"It's okay. He's still there. Just corrected the orbit a little, I
guess."

"No, no, no," Ellik said. "He started to make another try. But he got
afraid to try to go into hyperspace alone."

"He was just correcting for orbital decay."

"You don't understand, Johnny. He's a coward. That makes him dangerous.
He's getting desperate. That desperation will burst the dam of his own
weakness and wash away our hope, _our lives_."

His voice hushed. He stood staring starkly ahead, his palms
outstretched at his sides.

"Maybe he isn't _that_ cowardly," I said hopefully.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Finished," Ellik announced. He meant he had finished editing the tape
showing the operation on the alien and his recovery from his blue
disease, from being an Indigo to better than an Azure.

"The transmitter is finished too," I said.

Ellik had suggested a way of switching the tape camera to a video
converter for one of the audio communicators, and I had been able to
do it easy. It took parts from both our communicators and translators
too.

Ellik fitted the coiled snake of tape into place. "This will be a great
day for your people, Aedo. After our friend from heaven lands, we will
be able to teach you a way to cure all of your sick, to make all the
Indigos like you."

"Like me? Make like me?" Aedo said in the pidgin terrestrial that Mike
Ellik had taught him.

"Yes. We'll show them how we cured you and how all can be cured."

"You make show fellow like me? Make tell make that fellow like fellow
like me?"

"Everything's ready, Mike," I called.

"That's right, Aedo," Mike said. "You'll show your people the way to
equality."

"Make all fellow like this fellow?" Aedo asked.

"Shall I call in Lee?" I asked Mike.

"Yes, that's right, Aedo. Just right."

"No," Aedo said.

The alien stomped the tape camera and the communicator to bits before I
could get a hammerlock on him.

Ellik just stared at the complete wreck of our only means of
communication with the spaceship.

"I be much man now. I much smart. Much smart than Azure hicks and
Indigo slobs. I much smart all. I much man! Not to be all same now.
_No._" The snarl hung on in Aedo's throat.

Ellik lifted his head and sort of smiled. But not quite.

"Well," he said slowly and sadly, "what could you expect in the way of
gratitude from a dirty alien?"

       *       *       *       *       *

The Azures did accept Aedo all right. They seem to think he must have
come from some other tribe. They don't associate him with the Indigo
that disappeared. No Indigo ever became an Azure before.

Of course, Azures sometimes become Indigos, we found out.

It seems there's a virus of what Ellik called pseudo-cyanosis in the
air. The Azures have become a pretty resistant breed to it, while the
Indigos are all easy victims. But once in a while an Azure will come
down with it and turn Indigo.

Mike Ellik caught it too.

It happened pretty fast. By the time we realized what it was, he was
already too stupid to finish the operation he started on himself. I had
to sew him up, not very neatly.

Ellik is treated pretty much like the rest of the Indigos. So am I. He
takes it all pretty calm. He can still talk a little Earth. Whenever
anybody kicks him, Ellik just mutters something about, "What can fellow
expect bunch lousy creeps like those fellow?"

I guess I'll get it too. I think I am getting it.

It won't be so bad for me. Just like maybe going around drunk all the
time, not being able to think or coordinate very well.

It will be kind of bad being a member of an inferior race, but the
thing I'll hate about it the most isn't that, or even leaving old Lee
up there, circling around and waiting for our call forever.

No, the thing I hate is having it happen _now_, just when I'm beginning
to _learn_ something.

I'm not dead sure I know just exactly what I learned, but I think maybe
I do:

You get just what you damned well expected all along from a bunch of
blue-blooded mongrels!





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Blueblood, by Jim Harmon

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BLUEBLOOD ***

***** This file should be named 51499.txt or 51499.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/1/4/9/51499/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
