The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Celestial Hammerlock, by Donald Colvin

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: The Celestial Hammerlock

Author: Donald Colvin

Release Date: March 23, 2016 [EBook #51533]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE CELESTIAL HAMMERLOCK ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                       The Celestial Hammerlock

                           By DONALD COLVIN

                         Illustrated by NORRIS

           [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from
                 Galaxy Science Fiction October 1951.
         Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
         the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]


                 This bigtime space promoter could get
              the Horsehead Nebula in a flying mare--but
                    pinning a planetoid is tougher!


SPACEGRAM

From: Jed Michaels,

Ryttuk, Eros

To: H. E. Horrocks,

Interplanetary Amusement Corp.,

Cosmopolis, Earth

I QUIT, YOU BALLOON BRAIN.

JED

       *       *       *       *       *

ROCKET MAIL (Second Class)

Dear Michaels:

Your last message indicates you wish to leave the employment of the
Interplanetary Amusement Corp. Under our employee policy, this is
allowable, effective upon completion of your current assignment. Under
precedent set as long ago as 2347 A. D. the company will even pay the
cost of your message of resignation.

However, the words "you balloon brain" do not seem a necessary part of
that message and will be deducted from your salary.

Furthermore, I have a few words of my own to say. You march straight
into my office, Michaels, just as soon as you get back from Eros. Eros?
WHAT IN HELL ARE YOU DOING ON EROS?

Horrocks

       *       *       *       *       *

ROCKET MAIL (First Class)

Mr. H. E. Horrocks

Dear Balloon Brain:

If you paid a little more attention to your office and less to that
golf course on Venus, you'd know what I am doing on Eros. I got here
two days ago via Mars with a herd of six wrestlers, in accordance with
your own written memorandum. We were to appear at an Auruchs club
smoker.

Upon arrival, I found that no preparations had been made for us and
nobody knows anything about an Auruchs club.

The people here are nuts. They talk in six syllable words and their
idea of a good time is to sniff flowers and do five dimensional
calculus. They have less use for wrestlers than I have for you.

Michaels

       *       *       *       *       *

ROCKET MAIL (Second Class)

Michaels, you nitwit:

That wasn't _Eros_, you idiot! You were supposed to go to _Erie_--Erie,
Pa., right here on Earth!

If you remembered even your sixth grade Solar System history, you
would know that the planetoid Eros was settled in 2141 by a group of
longhairs headed by Prof. M. R. Snock, a philosopher with a dozen
university degrees.

He wanted to show that war, crime and all forms of violence would
disappear if people thought only beautiful thoughts.

The planetoid is lousy rich with erydnium ore and the people keep in
luxury selling it to space freighters. They spend their time being
gentle and thinking beautiful. There hasn't even been a spitball thrown
there in eight generations.

A _fine_ place for you to show up mahouting six wrestlers with no
foreheads. You're lucky they haven't thrown you in jail.

Horrocks

       *       *       *       *       *

ROCKET MAIL (Postage Due)

Mr. H. E. Horrocks

Dear Jellyhead:

What do you mean lucky? We _are_ in jail.

Right after we got here, the boys decided they had been cramped in that
local spaceship and needed a workout to limber up. As soon as they got
started, they were surrounded by a bunch of scrawny males, all sniffing
hollyhocks.

Their spokesman, a bald bird with rosebuds in his whiskers, touched
me with a gold-headed cane and said that apparently we were not yet
attuned to the high mental plane of the planetoid, and would we mind
going into protective custody while they worked over our egos and cured
our kineticism.

I said suppose we wouldn't. He looked shocked and waved his flower and
said that then, although it had never happened before, he supposed
he would have to call the space patrol and have us thrown into the
hoosegow on Ganymede.

I translated that into basic wrestler for the boys and we agreed we'd
better go along. We'd heard about the jail those tough space patrol
babies operate on Ganymede.

The flower lovers took us to an old erydnium pit and asked us to
please go down. Now they're perfuming us every hour and feeding us
flower bulbs to make us gentle.

We could climb out of this rat-hole whenever we wanted, but that would
be climbing straight into a striped spacesuit.

I think about you all the time. And if you think they're beautiful
thoughts, you're as crazy as I've always suspected.

Michaels

P.S. The boys asked that I enclose this note from them:

Dear Mr. Horox:

We do not like it here Mr. Horox. The Grub is no good. You come get us.
Plese Mr. Horox. Come soon.

Gorilla Man Thorpe

Choker Jonas

R. Z. Zbich, light-heavyweight champion of the Moon, Mercury and the
inner rings of Saturn

Gorgeous Gordon

Barefoot Charles Anya

X, the Faceless Wonder

       *       *       *       *       *

ROCKET MAIL (First Class)

Mr. Jed Michaels

Mr. Michaels:

Don't think you can sit around doing nothing and collect pay from the
Interplanetary Amusement Corp. You're suspended until you get out of
there.

Horrocks

       *       *       *       *       *

SPACEGRAM (Collect)

Mr. H. E. Horrocks,

Cosmopolis, Earth

MY RESIGNATION IS A MISTAKE. I WITHDRAW IT. YOU ARE BEST OF ALL
POSSIBLE BOSSES. IMPROBABLE AS IT SEEMS, I LOVE YOU.

JED

       *       *       *       *       *

SPACEGRAM

Mr. Jed Michaels,

Ryttuk, Eros

ONLY ONE POSSIBLE CAUSE FOR YOUR LAST SPACEGRAM. HAS SHE A SISTER?

HANK

       *       *       *       *       *

ROCKET MAIL (Second Class)

Mr. H. E. Horrocks

My dear employer and pal:

Eros is a _wonderful_ asteroid!

Toward the end of the second day in the pit, the wrestlers limbered
up. Zbich and the Gorilla Man worked out on headlocks, Gorgeous Gordon
did calisthenics, and Barefoot Charley, Choker Jonas and the Faceless
Wonder got themselves into a grunting free-for-all.

After that got under way, I heard a squeal and a girl came bounding
down the pit side. She was young and dark-haired and pretty. She
might have been as intellectual as the president of Harvard above the
shoulders, but what a framework she had to hold up that brain!

She went over to Gorgeous Gordon and she said, "Ooh!" With all the
flower lovers around here, it was probably the first man with muscles
she had ever seen.

The big ham swelled up. He flexed his arms and stuck out his chest.
"OOH!" said the girl, and went bounding back up the side of the pit.

I stopped the exercise and the wrestlers sat and mused blankly at each
other.

In a few minutes, our little visitor was back again. With her were
about a dozen pals, differing in details, but resembling her in the
important points.

The leader was a tall, brown-haired, gray-eyed girl, with a face where
intellect fought a losing battle with a dimple. The others helped her
down the pit side as if she were something fragile and precious, like
maybe a new bottle of perfume.

Then our pal went back to Gorgeous Gordon. "More ooh!" said the girl
guide.

You know how wrestlers are. They'll slap each other silly to get the
cheers of four kids on a street corner, or commit mayhem for a purse
big enough to buy a ham hock. In five seconds, we had going one of the
finest wrestling matches in the history of good, clean sportsmanship.
And over the cracking of wrestler's bones rose the shrieks of the
girls, showing that their throats were in the right place, even if
their brains weren't.

The gray-eyed girl sat with me on a flange of unmined ore. She was
Aliana, a direct descendant of the leader of the Eros pioneers. As
such, she was princess of the planetoid, although she left most of the
governing to a council of elders, apparently as outstanding an array of
mossbacks as ever smelled a gardenia or just plain smelled.

"I sometimes think, Mr. Michaels," Aliana told me, "that we of Eros
have laid too much stress upon the cerebral. I wonder if our lives
would not be fuller if we also included some of the more vigorous
activities, such as the one in which those men are now engaged."

"If it's a vacation for your mind that you want, Princess," I agreed,
"those boys are your meat."

Just then the Gorilla Man got a leg split on Barefoot Charley and began
to braid his toes.

"How stimulating," breathed Aliana. "What is proper for the onlooker to
remark in such a situation?"

"A satisfactory outcry, Princess," I explained, "is, 'Break it off!'"

"Break it off!" encouraged Aliana.

I had to wind it up, finally, before the wrestlers reduced themselves
to blubber, thereby forcing the Interplanetary Amusement Corp. to go
out and lasso itself another herd.

The girls went giggling up the side of the pit. At the top, Aliana
waved at me. The others blew kisses, not caring much where they landed,
as long as the receiver had muscles.

Next morning, a young man came into the pit. He announced that, upon
Princes Aliana's orders, we were to have the freedom of Eros, so that
contact with the planetoid culture could win us from our uncouth ways.

He was too young to be wholly gentled by the flowers and the council
of elders. So the Choker showed him a wristlock. And when the Choker
tossed him on his ear in the erydnium ore, he said words that were not
beautiful. Maybe there's something to the people of this asteroid.

Anyway, everything is great now. We wander wherever we please, as long
as we return to the pit to sleep. When nobody is looking, we sneak into
the royal palace courtyard and put on a wrestling show for the girls.

And the nights! Ah, the nights!

Don't turn entirely green with envy, Hankus. At least leave your nose
the familiar red.

Jed

       *       *       *       *       *

SPACEGRAM

To: Jed Michaels, Ryttuk, Eros

FINE WORK. RETURN IMMEDIATELY. WILL MEET YOU AT MARS. MAYBE YOU CAN
PERSUADE SOME OF THE GIRLS TO ACCOMPANY YOU THAT FAR. AM SENDING THE
WRESTLERS TO SATURN.

HANK

       *       *       *       *       *

ROCKET MAIL (First Class)

To: H. E. Horrocks,

Cosmopolis, Earth

Dear Hank:

Go to Mars, the man says. I can't go anywhere. The elders caught us
giving a rassle when Aliana was away and we're in again.

These flower roots taste terrible.

Jed

       *       *       *       *       *

SPACEGRAM

To: Jed Michaels,

Ryttuk, Eros

YOU BLUNDERING BABOON, YOU'RE FIRED.

HORROCKS

       *       *       *       *       *

ROCKET MAIL

(Free, Royal Frank)

Royal Palace, Eros

To: H. E. Horrocks,

Cosmopolis, Earth

Dear melon brain:

I gather from your last message that you wish to discharge me. I accept
the offer, fat boy. In fact, under royal Eros precedent, which I made
up three minutes ago, we will even pay for your message. However,
the words "you blundering baboon" do not seem a necessary part of
that message, and their cost will be taken out of the first bit of
business that the royal house of Eros decides to honor your puny little
corporation with.

If any.

Times are changed, Hankus. I'm a big shot now.

A few hours after we got back in the pit, Aliana came back and sneaked
down to see us. She said she thought it was about time to end this
council of elders' nonsense and she asked our help.

I told her plan to the wrestlers in words of one syllable or less. They
all agreed except the Faceless Wonder.

"I don't see why I should have nothing to do with no book," he said. It
seems he had had a book once and chewed up the first three chapters
before he found put it wasn't something to eat.

I signaled to the boys. Zbich clamped a headlock on him. The Choker got
a hammerlock. The Gorilla Man took him in a scissors. Gorgeous Gordon
got a toehold and Barefoot Charley stood by to jump on his stomach.

"Do you understand now?" I asked politely.

"Sure, Jed, sure," said the Faceless Wonder. "Why didn't ya explain it
to me in the first place?"

So the next morning, we yelled for books. And for the following days,
whenever anybody was around, we were busy sniffing flowers and reading.
Between times, I tried to explain to the wrestlers why there weren't
more pictures in the books.

A week later, we sprang the trap. I told the stablehand who brought us
our fodder that I had taken in so much culture that I was breathing
beauty. Zbich, gagging a little, asked for a second helping of flower
roots. Gorgeous Gordon requested a needle and thread; he said he had
fallen behind in his needlepoint.

A report of the conversation got to the council of elders and it
brought them to the lip of the pit, looking like something the glue
factory had refused to accept. Aliana was with them.

I bowed from the waist and made a speech. I thanked the elders for
showing me the error of my ways. I said that, after staying in the
lovely erydnium pit, I was enraptured with flowers, crazy about culture
and practically engaged in five dimension calculus. I asked that I and
the boys could have the priceless boon of walking freely around Eros,
swapping beautiful thoughts with the local yokels.

The elders went into a deep state of flutter. Most of them were for
accepting our proposition out of hand--which was bad. Our old pal with
the beard saved us.

"But I saw these men romping," he shrilled. He lowered his voice to a
high alto. "Positively romping!"

"Perhaps these men could prove their sincerity," Aliana said, winking
at me. "Perhaps one of them would consent to illustrate what he has
learned here by giving a public talk on some scientific subject."

"I should be glad," I answered, "to hack off a lecture for the good
folk of Eros. Suppose I give it on anatomy."

And so it was decided.

Exactly as we had planned.

There was an amphitheater which the inhabitants of Eros had been using
for ballets, string quartets and lectures by such of the longhairs as
got stuffed so full of long words that they couldn't keep them to
themselves. I had ringposts and ropes set up on the platform, saying I
needed them to illustrate my talk. I got into the ring with Gorgeous
Gordon and Zbich, who were dressed in trunks and bathrobes.

The wit and beauty of Eros was assembled there, the beauty being
represented by the girls, and the wit--such as it was--by the council
of elders. The rest of the seats were filled with other forms, some of
them tolerably easy to look at.

I had picked out the subject of anatomy in the belief that none of the
inhabitants of Eros knew anything about it.

The men didn't notice and the women had nothing at all to look at,
anyway.

I went into my act.

"Kind hosts, friends and unfortunate incidents," I said. "My topic is
the science of anatomy. Now, the science of anatomy is copacetic to the
point of mopery. The cerebellum is distended and the duodenum goes into
a state of e pluribus unum. Incalculably, thrombosis registers and the
ectoplasm becomes elliptic. Or, in the vernacular, the eight ball in
the side pocket."

The crowd sat stunned. Here and there, a flower sniffer looked down at
his own rack of bones to check my statement.

"Let me illustrate," I said. I drew the bathrobes off the wrestlers.

The boys' muscles rippled as they strutted around the ring. From the
women spectators came a long, deep sigh. From that moment, we had half
the audience with us--the female half.

"In anatomy," I said, shaking my finger to emphasize the point, "the
wingback shifts outward for a lateral. In the words of the great
philosopher Hypocritus, the coil should always be kept clean between
the barrel and the tap and all excess collar should be removed with a
spatula."

Nobody was listening to me; they were looking at the wrestlers, which,
of course, was what I'd figured on. Most of the men were comparing the
grunters' muscles to their own, and here and there a few were dropping
their flowers onto the floor.

I signaled and in a second the boys were an omelet of flying legs. The
crowd gasped, then leaned forward intently. The shrieking began when
Gordon got a headlock on Zbich. It grew when Zbich flipped Gorgeous
with a flying mare. By the time Gordon got in a billygoat butt, the
amphitheater sounded like feeding time at the zoo.

But there was another sound, too. Old Whiskers was tottering down the
aisle, shrieking, "This is romping! Mere romping!"

I signaled and the boys stopped.

"We need a third man to illustrate the next point," I said. "Perhaps
the gentleman in the aisle will volunteer."

Two wrestlers grabbed Old Whiskers and tossed him into the ring. Making
fast double talk, I took off his shirt and he stood there, stripped to
the waist, blinking in the sun and looking like a dehydrated squab.

The crowd noted the contrast between his scrawniness and the muscles of
the wrestlers. A roar of laughter swept it.

"Perhaps," I said, "the gentleman would like to romp."

Zbich made a grab for him and he scuttled out of the ring, falling over
the lower rope. A woman in the first row slugged him with a gardenia.

"Sit down, you old fool!" She turned to the wrestlers. "Break it off!"
she shouted.

The match went on.

In my career, including my medicine show days, I've had lots of easy
marks, but nothing to compare to the crowd at Eros' first wrestling
match. When Gorgeous took the first fall with a body scissors, they
went mad; when Zbich evened it up, they went hysterical; when Zbich
took the deciding fall, they were delirious. And at the end of the
match between Choker Jonas and the Faceless Wonder, they were reduced
to a jelly. We had to call off the third match for fear we would have
to take them home in jars.

At the end, we went in a body, led by the wrestlers, and threw the
council of elders into the erydnium pit. We are keeping them now on a
diet of raw meat.

The amphitheater has been converted into a permanent wrestling arena.
We've laid out a football and a baseball field in the lyceum grove, and
next week we'll start turning the botanical garden into a golf course.

To carry out the full program, we shall have to buy some equipment
and hire some talent. Whether we toss some of the business to
Interplanetary depends, Hankus boy, entirely on what attitude
Interplanetary takes toward you know who.

When you write your crawling letter, you worm, address me as "Your
Mightiness." I am minister of athletics on Eros now and the second most
important person on the planetoid.

My work takes me close to the Princess Aliana. Very close.

Come to think of it, I wish there was a moon on Eros. It's not
essential, but it helps.

So long, peasant.

JED





End of Project Gutenberg's The Celestial Hammerlock, by Donald Colvin

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE CELESTIAL HAMMERLOCK ***

***** This file should be named 51533.txt or 51533.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/1/5/3/51533/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
