The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Sweeper of Loray, by Finn O'Donnevan

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: The Sweeper of Loray

Author: Finn O'Donnevan

Release Date: March 24, 2016 [EBook #51545]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SWEEPER OF LORAY ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                         THE SWEEPER OF LORAY

                          By FINN O'DONNEVAN

                        Illustrated by GOODMAN

           [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from
                      Galaxy Magazine April 1959.
         Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
         the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]




                You wish a universal panacea? A simple
               boon to grant--first decide what part of
               you it is that you wish to have survive!


"Absolutely impossible," declared Professor Carver.

"But I saw it," said Fred, his companion and bodyguard. "Late last
night, I saw it! They carried in this hunter--he had his head half
ripped off--and they--"

"Wait," Professor Carver said, leaning forward expectantly.

They had left their spaceship before dawn, in order to witness the
sunrise ceremonies in the village of Loray, upon the planet of the same
name. Sunrise ceremonies, viewed from a proper distance, are often
colorful and can provide a whole chapter for an anthropologist's book;
but Loray, as usual, proved a disappointment.

Without fanfare, the sun rose, in answers to prayers made to it the
preceding night. Slowly it hoisted its dull red expanse above the
horizon, warming the topmost branches of the great rain-forest that
surrounded the village. And the natives slept on....

Not _all_ the natives. Already the Sweeper was out, cleaning the
debris between huts with his twig broom. He slowly shuffled along,
human-shaped but unutterably alien. The Sweeper's face was a stylized
blank, as though nature had drawn there a preliminary sketch of
intelligent life. His head was strangely knobbed and his skin was
pigmented a dirty gray.

The Sweeper sang to himself as he swept, in a thick, guttural voice. In
only one way was the Sweeper distinguishable from his fellow Lorayans:
painted across his face was a broad black band. This was his mark of
station, the lowest possible station in that primitive society.

"Now then," Professor Carver said, after the sun had arisen without
incident, "a phenomenon such as you describe could not exist. And it
most especially could not exist upon a debased, scrubby little planet
like this."

"I saw what I saw," Fred maintained. "I don't know from impossible,
Professor. I saw it. You want to pass it up, that's up to you."

       *       *       *       *       *

He leaned against the gnarly bole of a stabicus tree, folded his arms
across his meager chest and glowered at the thatch-roofed village. They
had been on Loray for nearly two months and Fred detested the village
more each day.

He was an underweight, unlovely young man and he wore his hair in a
bristling crewcut which accentuated the narrowness of his brow. He
had accompanied the professor for close to ten years, had journeyed
with him to dozens of planets, and had seen many strange and wonderful
things. Everything he saw, however, only increased his contempt for
the Galaxy at large. He desired only to return, wealthy and famous, or
wealthy and unknown, to his home in Bayonne, New Jersey.

"This thing could make us rich," Fred accused. "And _you_ want to pass
it up."

Professor Carver pursed his lips thoughtfully. Wealth was a pleasant
thought, of course. But the professor didn't want to interrupt his
important scientific work to engage in a wild goose chase. He was
now completing his great book, the book that would fully amplify and
document the thesis that he had put forth in his first paper, _Color
Blindness Among the Thang Peoples_. He had expanded the thesis in his
book, _Lack of Coordination in the Drang Race_. He had generalized it
in his monumental _Intelligence Deficiencies Around the Galaxy_,
in which he proved conclusively that intelligence among Non-Terrans
decreases arithmetically as their planet's distance from Terra
increases geometrically.

Now the thesis had come to full flower in Carver's most recent work,
his unifying effort, which was to be titled _Underlying Causes of the
Implicit Inferiority of Non-Terran Peoples_.

"If you're right--" Carver said.

"Look!" Fred cried. "They're bringing in another! See for yourself!"

Professor Carver hesitated. He was a portly, impressive, red-jowled
man, given to slow and deliberate movement. He was dressed in a
tropical explorer's uniform, although Loray was in a temperate zone. He
carried a leather swagger stick, and strapped to his waist was a large
revolver, a twin to the one Fred wore.

"If you're right," Carver said slowly, "it would indeed be, so to
speak, a feather in the cap."

"Come on!" said Fred.

       *       *       *       *       *

Four srag hunters were carrying a wounded companion to the medicine
hut, and Carver and Fred fell in beside them. The hunters were visibly
exhausted; they must have trekked for days to bring their friend to the
village, for the srag hunts ranged deep into the rain-forest.

"Looks done for, huh?" Fred whispered.

Professor Carver nodded. Last month he had photographed a srag, from
a vantage point very high in a very tall, stout tree. He knew it for
a large, ill-tempered, quick-moving beast, with a dismaying array of
claws, teeth and horns. It was also the only non-taboo meat-bearing
animal on the planet. The natives had to kill srags or starve.

But the wounded man had not been quick enough with spear and shield,
and the srag had opened him from throat to pelvis. The hunter had bled
copiously, even though the wound had been hastily bound with dried
grasses. Mercifully, he was unconscious.

"That chap hasn't a chance," Carver remarked. "It's a miracle he's
stayed alive this long. Shock alone, to say nothing of the depth and
extent of the wound--"

"You'll see," Fred said.

The village had suddenly come awake. Men and women, gray-skinned,
knobby-headed, looked silently as the hunters marched toward the
medicine hut. The Sweeper paused to watch. The village's only child
stood before his parents' hut, and, thumb in mouth, stared at the
procession. Deg, the medicine man, came out to meet the hunters,
already wearing his ceremonial mask. The healing dancers assembled,
quickly putting on their makeup.

"Think you can fix him, Doc?" Fred asked.

"One may hope," Deg replied piously.

They entered the dimly lighted medicine hut. The wounded Lorayan was
laid tenderly upon a pallet of grasses and the dancers began to perform
before him. Deg started a solemn chant.

"That'll never do it," Professor Carver pointed out to Fred, with the
interested air of a man watching a steam shovel in operation. "Too late
for faith healing. Listen to his breathing. Shallower, don't you think?"

"Absolutely," Fred said.

Deg finished his chant and bent over the wounded hunter. The Lorayan's
breathing was labored. It slowed, hesitated....

"It is time!" cried the medicine man. He took a small wooden tube out
of his pouch, uncorked it, and held it to the dying man's lips. The
hunter drank. And then--

Carver blinked, and Fred grinned triumphantly. The hunter's breathing
was becoming stronger. As they watched, the great gash became a line of
scar tissue, then a thin pink mark, then an almost invisible white line.

The hunter sat up, scratched his head, grinned foolishly and asked for
something to drink, preferably intoxicating.

Deg declared a festival on the spot.

       *       *       *       *       *

Carver and Fred moved to the edge of the rain-forest for a conference.
The professor walked like a man in a dream. His pendulous lower lip was
thrust out and occasionally he shook his head.

"How about it?" Fred asked.

"It shouldn't be possible," said Carver dazedly. "No substance in
nature should react like that. And you saw it work last night also?"

"Damned well right," Fred said. "They brought in this hunter--he had
his head pulled half off. He swallowed some of that stuff and healed
right before my eyes."

"Man's age-old dream," Carver mused. "A universal panacea!"

"We could get any price for stuff like that," Fred said.

"Yes, we could--as well as performing a duty to science," Professor
Carver reminded him sternly. "Yes, Fred, I think we should obtain some
of that substance."

They turned and, with firm strides, marched back to the village.

Dances were in progress, given by various members of the beast cults.
At the moment, the Sathgohani, a cult representing a medium-sized
deerlike animal, were performing. They could be recognized by the three
red dots on their foreheads. Waiting their turn were the men of the
Dresfeyxi and the Taganyes, cults representing other forest animals.
The beasts adopted by the cults were taboo and there was an absolute
injunction against their slaughter. Carver had been unable to discover
the rationale behind this rule. The Lorayans refused to speak of it.

Deg, the medicine man, had removed his ceremonial mask. He was seated
in front of his hut, watching the dancing. He arose when the Earthmen
approached him.

"Peace!" he said.

"Sure," said Fred. "Nice job you did this morning."

Deg smiled modestly. "The gods answered our prayers."

"The gods?" said Carver. "It looked as though the serum did most of the
work."

"Serum? Oh, the sersee juice!" Deg made a ceremonial gesture as he
mentioned the name. "Yes, the sersee juice is the mother of the Lorayan
people."

"We'd like to buy some," Fred said bluntly, ignoring Professor Carver's
disapproving frown. "What would you take for a gallon?"

"I am sorry," Deg said.

"How about some nice beads? Mirrors? Or maybe a couple of steel knives?"

"It cannot be done," the medicine man asserted. "The sersee juice is
sacred. It must be used only for holy healing."

"Don't hand me that," Fred said, a flush mounting his sallow cheek.
"You gooks think you can--"

"We quite understand," Carver broke in smoothly. "We know about sacred
things. Sacred things are sacred. They are not to be touched by
profane hands."

"Are you crazy?" Fred whispered in English.

"You are a wise man," Deg said gravely. "You understand why I must
refuse you."

"Of course. But it happens, Deg, I am a medicine man in my own country."

"Ah? I did not know this!"

"It is so. As a matter of fact, in my particular line, I am the highest
medicine man."

"Then you must be a very holy man," Deg said, bowing his head.

"Man, he's holy!" Fred put in emphatically. "Holiest man you'll ever
see around here."

"Please, Fred," Carver said, blinking modestly. He said to the medicine
man, "It's true, although I don't like to hear about it. Under the
circumstances, however, you can see that it would not be wrong to give
me some sersee juice. On the contrary, it is your priestly duty to give
me some."

The medicine man pondered for a long time while contrary emotions
passed just barely perceptibly over his almost blank face. At last he
said, "It may be so. Unfortunately, I cannot do what you require."

"Why not?"

"Because there is so little sersee juice, so terribly little. There is
hardly enough for the village."

Deg smiled sadly and walked away.

       *       *       *       *       *

Life in the village continued its simple, invariant way. The Sweeper
moved slowly along, cleaning with his twig broom. The hunters trekked
out in search of srags. The women of the village prepared food and
looked after the village's one child. The priests and dancers prayed
nightly for the sun to rise in the morning. Everyone was satisfied, in
a humble, submissive fashion.

Everyone except the Earthmen.

They had more talks with Deg and slowly learned the complete story of
the sersee juice and the troubles surrounding it.

The sersee bush was a small and sickly affair. It did not flourish in
a state of nature. Yet it resisted cultivation and positively defied
transplantation. The best one could do was to weed thoroughly around it
and hope it would blossom. But most sersee bushes struggled for a year
or two, then gave up the ghost. A few blossomed, and a few out of the
few lived long enough to produce their characteristic red berries.

From the berry of the sersee bush was squeezed the elixir that meant
life to the people of Loray.

"And you must remember," Deg pointed out, "how sparsely the sersee
grows and how widely scattered it is. We must search for months,
sometimes, to find a single bush with berries. And those berries will
save the life of only a single Lorayan, or perhaps two at the most."

"Sad, very sad," Carver said. "But surely some form of intensive
fertilization--"

"Everything has been tried."

"I realize," Carver said earnestly, "how important the sersee juice is
to you. But if you could give us a little--even a pint or two--we could
take it to Earth, have it examined, synthesized, perhaps. Then you
could have all you need."

"But we dare not give any. Have you noticed how few children we have?"

Carver nodded.

"There are very few births. Our life is a constant struggle against
the obliteration of our race. Every man's life must be preserved until
there is a child to replace him. And this can be done only by our
constant and never-ending search for the sersee berries. And there are
never enough," the medicine man sighed. "Never enough."

"Does the juice cure _everything_?" Fred asked.

"It does more than that. Those who have tasted sersee add fifty of our
years to their lives."

Carver opened his eyes wide. Fifty years on Loray was roughly the
equivalent of sixty-three on Earth.

The sersee was more than a healing agent, more than a regenerator. It
was a longevity drug as well.

He paused to consider the prospect of adding another sixty years to his
lifetime. Then he asked, "What happens if a man takes sersee again
after the fifty years?"

"We do not know," Deg told him. "No man would take it a second time
while there is not enough."

Carver and Fred exchanged glances.

"Now listen to me carefully, Deg," Professor Carver said. He spoke of
the sacred duties of science. Science, he told the medicine man, was
above race, above creed, above religion. The advancement of science
was above life itself. What did it matter, after all, if a few more
Lorayans died? They would die eventually anyhow. The important thing
was for Terran science to have a sample of sersee.

"It may be as you say," Deg said. "But my choice is clear. As a priest
of the Sunniheriat religion, I have a sacred trust to preserve the
lives of my people. I cannot go against this trust."

He turned and walked off. The Earthmen frustratedly returned to their
spaceship.

       *       *       *       *       *

After coffee, Professor Carver opened a drawer and took out the
manuscript of _Underlying Causes for the Implicit Inferiority of
Non-Terran Races_. Lovingly he read over the last chapter, the chapter
that dealt with the specialized inferiorities of the Lorayan people.
Then he put the manuscript away.

"Almost finished, Fred," he told his assistant. "Another week's work,
two weeks at the most!"

"Um," Fred replied, staring at the village through a porthole.

"This will do it," Carver said. "This book will prove, once and for
all, the natural superiority of Terrans. We have proven it by force of
arms, Fred, and we have proven it by our technology. Now it is proven
by the impersonal processes of logic."

Fred nodded. He knew the professor was quoting from the book's
introduction.

"Nothing must interfere with the great work," Carver said. "You agree
with that, don't you?"

"Sure," Fred said absent-mindedly. "The book comes first. Put the gooks
in their place."

"Well, I didn't exactly mean that. But you know what I mean. Under the
circumstances, perhaps we should forget about sersee. Perhaps we should
just finish the job we started."

Fred turned and faced his employer. "Professor, how much do you expect
to make out of this book?"

"Hm? Well, the last did quite well, you will remember. This book should
do even better. Ten, perhaps twenty thousand dollars!" He permitted
himself a small smile. "I am fortunate, you see, in my subject matter.
The general public of Earth seems to be rather interested in it, which
is gratifying for a scientist."

"Say you even make fifty thousand. Chicken feed! Do you know what we
could make on a test tube of sersee?"

"A hundred thousand?" Carver said vaguely.

"Are you kidding? Suppose a rich guy was dying and we had the only
thing to cure him. He'd give everything he owned! Millions!"

"I believe you're right," Carver agreed. "And it _would_ be a valuable
scientific advancement.... But the medicine man unfortunately won't
give us any."

"Buying isn't the only way." Fred unholstered his revolver and checked
the chambers.

"I see, I see," Carver said, his red face turning slightly pale. "But
have we the right?"

"What do _you_ think?"

"Well, they _are_ inferior. I believe I have proven that conclusively.
You might indeed say that their lives don't weigh heavily in the scheme
of things. Hm, yes--yes, Fred, we could save Terran lives with this!"

"We could save our own lives," Fred said. "Who wants to punk out ahead
of time?"

Carver stood up and determinedly loosened his gun in its holster.
"Remember," he told Fred, "we are doing this in the name of science,
and for Earth."

"Absolutely, Professor," Fred said, moving toward the port, grinning.

       *       *       *       *       *

They found Deg near the medicine hut. Carver said, without preamble,
"We must have some sersee."

"But I explained to you," said the medicine man. "I told you why it was
impossible."

"We gotta have it," Fred said. He pulled his revolver from its holster
and looked ferociously at Deg.

"No."

"You think I'm kidding?" Fred asked. "You know what this weapon can do?"

"I have seen you use it."

"Maybe you think I won't use it on you."

"I do not care. You can have no sersee."

"I'll shoot," Fred warned, his voice rising angrily. "I swear to you,
I'll shoot."

The villagers of Loray slowly gathered behind their medicine man.
Gray-skinned, knobby-headed, they moved silently into position, the
hunters carrying their spears, other villagers armed with knives and
stones.

"You cannot have the sersee," Deg said.

Fred slowly leveled the revolver.

"Now, Fred," said Carver, "there's an awful lot of them. Do you really
think--"

Fred's thin body tightened and his finger grew taut and white on the
trigger. Carver closed his eyes.

There was a moment of dead silence. Then the revolver exploded. Carver
warily opened his eyes.

The medicine man was still erect, although his knees were shaking.
Fred was pulling back the hammer of the revolver. The villagers had
made no sound. It was a moment before Carver could figure out what had
happened. At last he saw the Sweeper.

The Sweeper lay on his face, his outstretched left hand still clutching
his twig broom, his legs twitching feebly. Blood welled from the hole
Fred had neatly drilled through his forehead.

Deg bent over the Sweeper, then straightened. "He is dead," the
medicine man said.

"That's just the first," Fred warned, taking aim at a hunter.

"No!" cried Deg.

Fred looked at him with raised eyebrows.

"I will give it to you," Deg said. "I will give you all our sersee
juice. Then you must go!"

He ran into the medicine hut and reappeared a moment later with three
wooden tubes, which he thrust into Fred's hands.

"We're in business, Professor," Fred said. "Let's get moving!"

They walked past the silent villagers, toward their spaceship.
Something bright flashed in the sunlight. Fred yipped and dropped his
revolver. Professor Carver hastily scooped it up.

"One of those gooks cut me," Fred said. "Give me the revolver!"

A spear arced high and buried itself at their feet.

"Too many of them," said Carver. "Let's run for it!"

They sprinted to their ship with spears and knives singing around them,
reached it safely and bolted the port.

"Too close," Carver said, panting for breath, leaning against the
dogged port. "Have you got the serum?"

"I got it," said Fred, rubbing his arm. "Damn!"

"What's wrong?"

"My arm. It feels numb."

       *       *       *       *       *

Carver examined the wound, pursed his lips thoughtfully, but made no
comment.

"It's numb," Fred said. "I wonder if they poison those spears."

"It's quite possible," Professor Carver admitted.

"They did!" Fred shouted. "Look, the cut is changing color already!"

The edges of the wound had a blackened, septic look.

"Sulfa," Carver said. "Penicillin, too. I wouldn't worry much about it,
Fred. Modern Terran drugs--"

"--might not even touch this stuff. Open one of those tubes!"

"But, Fred," Carver objected, "we have so little of it. Besides--"

"To hell with that," Fred said. He took one of the tubes and uncorked
it with his teeth.

"Wait, Fred!"

"Wait, nothing!"

Fred drained the contents of the tube and flung it down. Carver said
testily, "I was merely going to point out that the serum should be
tested before an Earthman uses it. We don't know how it'll react on a
human. It was for your own good."

"Sure it was," Fred said mockingly. "Just look at how the stuff is
reacting."

The blackened wound had turned flesh-colored again and was sealing.
Soon there was a line of white scar tissue. Then even that was gone,
leaving firm pink flesh beneath.

"Pretty good, huh?" Fred gloated, with a slight touch of hysteria. "It
works, Professor, it works! Drink one yourself, pal, live another sixty
years. Do you suppose we can synthesize this stuff? Worth a million,
worth ten million, worth a billion. And if we can't, there's always
good old Loray. We can drop back every fifty years or so for a refill.
The stuff even tastes good, Professor. Tastes like--what's wrong?"

Professor Carver was staring at Fred, his eyes wide with astonishment.

"What's the matter?" Fred asked, grinning. "Ain't my seams straight?
What you staring at?"

Carver didn't answer. His mouth trembled. Slowly he backed away.

"What the hell is wrong!" Fred glared at Carver. Then he ran to the
spaceship's head and looked in the mirror.

"_What's happened to me?_"

Carver tried to speak, but no words came. He watched as Fred's features
slowly altered, smoothed, became blank, rudimentary, as though nature
had drawn there a preliminary sketch of intelligent life. Strange knobs
were coming out on Fred's head. His complexion was changing slowly from
pink to gray.

       *       *       *       *       *

"I told you to wait," Carver sighed.

"_What's happening?_" asked Fred in a frightened whimper.

"Well," Carver said, "it must all be residual in the sersee. The
Lorayan birth-rate is practically nonexistent, you know. Even with the
sersee's healing powers, the race should have died out long ago. Unless
the serum had another purpose as well--the ability to change lower
animal forms into the Lorayan form."

"That's a wild guess!"

"A working hypothesis based upon Deg's statement that sersee is the
mother of the Lorayan people. I'm afraid that is the true meaning of
the beast cults and the reason they are taboo. The various beasts must
be the origins of certain portions of the Lorayan people, perhaps
all the Lorayan people. Even the topic is taboo; there clearly is
a deep-seated sense of inferiority about their recent step up from
bestiality."

Carver rubbed his forehead wearily. "The sersee juice has," he
continued, "we may hazard, a role-sharing in terms of the life of the
race. We may theorize--"

"To hell with theory," Fred said, and was horrified to find that his
voice had grown thick and guttural, like a Lorayan voice. "Professor,
do something!"

"There's nothing I can do."

"Maybe Terran science--"

"No, Fred," Carver said quietly.

"_What?_"

"Fred, please try to understand. I can't bring you back to Earth."

"What do you mean? You must be crazy!"

"Not at all. How can I bring you back with such a fantastic story? They
would consider the whole thing a gigantic hoax."

"But--"

"Listen to me. No one would believe! They would consider, rather, that
you were an unusually intelligent Lorayan. Your very presence, Fred,
would undermine the whole thesis of my book!"

"You can't leave me," Fred said. "You just can't do that."

Professor Carver still had both revolvers. He stuck one in his belt and
leveled the other.

"I am not going to endanger the work of a lifetime. Get out, Fred."

"No!"

"I mean it. Get out, Fred."

"I won't! You'll have to shoot me!"

"I will if I must," Carver assured him. "I'll shoot you and throw you
out."

He took aim. Fred backed to the port, undogged it, opened it. The
villagers were waiting quietly outside.

"What will they do to me?"

"I'm really sorry, Fred," Carver said.

"I won't go!" Fred shrieked, gripping the edges of the port with both
hands.

Carver shoved him into the waiting hands of the crowd and threw the
remaining tubes of sersee after him. Then, quickly, not wishing to see
what was going to happen, he sealed the port.

Within an hour, he was leaving the planet's atmospheric limits.

       *       *       *       *       *

When he returned to Earth, his book, _Underlying Causes of the Implicit
Inferiority of Non-Terran Peoples_, was hailed as a milestone in
comparative anthropology. But he ran into some difficulty almost at
once.

A space captain named Jones returned to Earth and maintained that,
on the planet Loray, he had discovered a native who was in every
significant way the equal of a Terran. And he had tape recordings and
motion pictures to prove it.

Carver's thesis seemed in doubt for some time, until Carver examined
the evidence for himself. Then he pointed out, with merciless logic,
that the so-called super-Lorayan, this paragon of Loray, this supposed
equal of Terran humanity, occupied the lowest position in the Lorayan
hierarchy, the position of Sweeper, clearly shown by the broad black
stripe across his face.

The space captain admitted that this was true.

Why then, Carver thundered, was this Lorayan Superior not able, in
spite of his so-called abilities, to reach any higher position in the
debased society in which he dwelt?

The question silenced the space captain and his supporters, demolished
the entire school, as a matter of fact. And the Carverian Doctrine of
the Implicit Inferiority of Non-Terrans is now accepted by reasoning
Terrans everywhere in the Galaxy.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Sweeper of Loray, by Finn O'Donnevan

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SWEEPER OF LORAY ***

***** This file should be named 51545.txt or 51545.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/1/5/4/51545/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
