The Project Gutenberg EBook of Shatter the Wall, by Sydney Van Scyoc

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: Shatter the Wall

Author: Sydney Van Scyoc

Release Date: March 27, 2016 [EBook #51576]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SHATTER THE WALL ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                           SHATTER THE WALL

                          By SYDNEY VAN SCYOC

                          Illustrated by WEST

           [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from
                    Galaxy Magazine February 1962.
         Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
         the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]




               They were a charming family and everybody
                loved them to death--especially Amanda!


There he stood, Bass McDowall, life-size on the Wall. She made herself
look at the hateful broad-shouldered image with the deliberately
penetrating black eyes. She made herself watch his boy-image bend over
Kippie's slender girl-image, made herself listen to his mellow voice
gasp, "Kippie, sweetie-bug."

Savagely she thrust upward on the ebony lever. Bass McDowall, Wall
idol, and Kippie lurched and disappeared. Lights glowed from fixtures
recessed into the ceiling, illuminating the long, windowless Wall room.

Kathryn, whose hair was a snug, dark Kippie-cap, leaped from the Wall
seat. "Don't turn it off now! Couldn't you even tell, Mother? He's
going to kiss her! Turn it back on this minute!"

Amanda stationed herself before the lever, shaking her head. "Not until
I've spoken to you," she said. "Kathryn, I don't think you realize
yet what it means, but you're the youngest person, the very youngest,
living in this city."

"Quit calling me that! Everyone has to call me Kippie." She cocked her
dark head, Kippie-like. The red mark caused by the constant prodding
of her index finger against her cheek glared. "Bass loves Kippie. He
called her sweetie-bug."

"I refuse to call you Kippie." She folded her arms. "I don't want to
discuss your name again, Kathryn."

"It will be Kippie." She squirmed into a Kippie-like position. "Soon as
I'm twenty-one, I'll change it. You wait!"

"Perhaps you will, Kathryn. But I'll never call you Kippie."

"Oh, quit being silly and turn it on. He might kiss her again." She
focused her blue eyes upon the Wall. "Turn it on."

"Kathryn, I want to talk to you, and I intend to do so without Bass
McDowall staring over my shoulder." She sat down beside her daughter.
"Now, Kathryn, you're nineteen years old, and you're certainly
attractive by any--"

"I don't have dimples like Kippie does." Remembering, she poked her
finger back into her cheek.

"I'm not talking about Kippie." She stared at the finger sunk into her
daughter's cheek, wondering how many times she had explained that it
wouldn't cause a dimple. "I want you to get married, Kathryn."

       *       *       *       *       *

"I've told you a million times, I won't. You're always after me!" she
wailed. "Bass won't ever marry anyone, not even Kippie, and she's got
dimples. Bass says--"

"Bass McDowall is not a real person. He's only an actor."

"He's the realest thing in the world. But he won't marry me, so you'd
better forget it." She stepped to turn the Wall on again.

Instantly the ash tray was in Amanda's hand, the massive glass tray
Dell had given her. She hurled it at the Wall, which shattered with a
brittle explosive splintering.

Kathryn jumped back, wailing. "I hate you!" Frantically she manipulated
the lever and twisted the ebony dials. "Bass, come back. Bass!"

Amanda patted the Wall seat. "Sit down, Kathryn."

Finally the girl sat down, sullenly rubbing her eyes with her fists.

"Kathryn, have you noticed that we never see infants on the Wall? We
never see small children, either, because, Kathryn, you're the youngest
person in this city. The week after you were born, the city hospital's
obstetrical ward closed permanently."

Kathryn sobbed convulsively. "Who needs babies? I want Bass!"

"The human race needs babies! Kathryn, you sit so complacently in front
of your Wall and pretend there isn't a world! There won't be unless you
wake up."

"Don't be silly!"

"I'm not. Kathryn, you may be the youngest person in the world, for
all I know. Forty or fifty years from now this planet will be cluttered
with blank Walls. There'll be no one to watch them."

"Well, there's nothing I can do about it. I'm not different, like you."

"Kathryn, marry. Have children. Persuade your friends at the office--"

She laughed shrilly, rocking back against the Wall seat. "Friends! They
hate me, every one of them, and I hate them. Even if Bass did marry me,
they'd only take him away."

Amanda clutched her fists. "I don't want you to marry Bass. You must
find some nice boy your own age."

"Oh, Mother! You want me to marry some stupid, ugly boy! You can't make
me!"

"Kathryn, he needn't be dull. There are hundreds of boys, each
interesting in--"

       *       *       *       *       *

Hearing a sound, she looked up to see Dell, thin and red-headed,
standing in the doorway staring at the shattered Wall.

Kathryn jumped up. "Mother broke it. She threw that big green ash tray
and broke it all to pieces."

Dell looked questioningly at Amanda. "Honey, why'd you do that?"

"She's jealous of Bass!"

"Now isn't Bass pretty young for you, honey?" He stooped to remove the
ash tray from inside the shattered Wall. "Now, how can I watch Alice
this evening? She promised me a special dance in that red dress she was
showing me last night."

"Showing you?" She sprang up. "She showed it to every man in the
country, Dell."

He frowned. "Well, I'll call Replacements. They'll have a new Wall in
before Alice comes."

"And I'll smash it too. I'll smash every replacement you can buy!"

"Now, Amanda." He regarded her mildly. "You're not jealous of Alice!
Honey, if you'd watch Lester, you wouldn't care about Alice and me."

She took the intact ash tray from him. "I'm not jealous of Alice, and I
haven't been for twenty years. But Dell, do you realize Kathryn was the
last child born in this city?"

The girl's voice was harsh. "She wants me to marry some stupid, ugly
boy. And I won't do it! I love Bass."

Dell's pale eyes were rebuking. "Amanda, how can you expect Kippie to
do that?"

She stepped back. "Kippie?" she said harshly. "Dell, that girl standing
there is Kathryn, our daughter--not Kippie."

"Don't let such little things upset you, baby. I'll go call
Replacements, and we'll all sit down together when Alice and Lester
come." He turned.

She seized his arm. "I will _not_ watch Lester," she said. "I will not
sit and stare at that big, gray-haired ape and pretend I'm in love with
him."

Dell frowned. "You don't really think he looks like an ape, do you,
baby? I was--well, thinking of changing my name to Lester."

Kathryn leaped to hug him. "Oh Daddy! It'll be so wonderful. Lester,
Lester, Lester! If we had an Alice and a Bass, we'd be almost like a
real family."

She stared at them. "I'd hoped to put you in a favorable frame of mind
for this, Kathryn," she said. "You'll remember that three years ago the
Watsons, next door, had Wall failure and couldn't get service until
morning. I invited them to watch our Wall."

Dell nodded. "Haven't seen them since, now that I think of it."

"You haven't. But tonight Mrs. Watson is lending me her son Gerald.
He's coming at seven."

"Mother!" Kathryn cried, releasing Dell. "How terrible! Gerald! What a
stupid name. I love Bass, and you can't take him away from me."

"That wasn't very nice, was it, Amanda?"

"It's done," she said. "He's twenty-two, and I want you to talk to him,
Kathryn."

Kathryn scowled.

"And I've arranged for you to go over to their house to watch Alice, if
you must, Dell."

Dell forgot he was indignant. "Well, Kippie, maybe this one time you
can do as your mother wants," he said. "Surely Bass won't mind if you
miss him this once. He's an understanding sort of chap."

Kathryn thought for a moment, scowling. "All right, I'll do it--if
you'll call me Kippie, Mother."

Amanda studied her. "All right--Kippie," she said finally.

       *       *       *       *       *

After agreeing reluctantly not to call Replacements until Gerald had
come and gone, Kippie wriggled into a Kippie-like position and poked
her finger deep into her cheek again.

Gerald, who arrived promptly at seven, wore his light hair combed
into a Bass-like curl low over his forehead. He speared Amanda with a
penetrating stare, making her shiver as she led him to the Wall room.

Kippie sulked angrily on the Wall seat.

Amanda introduced them, and they looked at each other, their glances
revealing no interest.

"You're trying to comb your hair like Bass," Kippie accused.

Gerald grinned. "Sure thing, sweetie-bug."

"Then you should dye it. It's the wrong color. Bass doesn't have blond
hair. And why is your name still Gerald? Don't you ever want to be
Bass?"

Gerald looked slapped. "I tried. Honest, I really did. But you know
there's a limit, and the man at the bureau said there were too many
Basses already." His face brightened. "But my parents call me Bass all
the time."

"Oh."

Gerald shuffled his feet. Gingerly he sat down.

"Uh, did you see them last night?" he asked.

"Of course. I always see them, except when my mother does something
stupid."

Quickly Amanda excused herself and went to the Food Center. She leaned
against the counter, trying to overhear their conversation.

They spoke in broken murmurs momentarily, then were silent.

Kippie cleared her throat irritably.

"Uh, nice weather," Gerald said loudly.

"I haven't been out."

They were silent again. She tried to make her fingers stop picking at a
spot on the counter surface.

Suddenly Kippie emerged hurriedly from the Wall room, looking put upon.

"Where are you going?" Amanda demanded.

"He can't talk like Bass, even when he tries. And his hair is the wrong
color, and he has blue eyes."

"But Kathryn--Kippie, those are external characteristics! You can't
judge a person by the color of his hair and his eyes. You must get
acquainted with him."

"I won't do it. I don't love him. I love Bass!" She cocked her head,
Kippie-like. "And besides, he loves the real Kippie. And I'll never
have dimples. I'm going to call Replacements."

Amanda seized her arm. "Call them, and I'll break the new Wall too.
I'll break every Wall you bring into this house. Don't you understand
what's happening?"

"Quit being stupid."

"I'll break every Wall you have installed."

"And every time you do it, I'll order a new one." She broke loose and
ran to the communicator.

       *       *       *       *       *

She had to do something. She wondered briefly, must I do something? It
could only be the survival instinct driving her. Perhaps, she thought
wryly, she was the only person who still possessed that particular
instinct.

She could never break every Wall in the world, no matter how she tried.

She picked up the magazine Kippie had thrown down that morning. Running
her finger over the cover, she poked it through Bass's penetrating eye.
She poked Kippie in the nose.

She flipped the magazine open and went through it, mutilating the
pages. "There's a hole in your head, Lester....

"One less eye for you, Alice....

"Poor little Kippie, I tore your chin. Right through the dimple. Will
Bass love you now, Kippie?

"Goodby, Bass." She crumpled him into a ball and threw him at the sink.

On the next page was a print of a restaurant. She read the caption.

"For two hours each evening, while filmed sequences are shown to the
home audience, the stars retire to Antola's for sandwiches, drinks and
shop talk."

She tried to stop her thoughts as they went to the sleeping alcove and
the old gun in the top shelf of the built-ins. Dell hadn't bothered to
unload it since he'd cleaned it last.

She dropped the magazine and went to the top shelf of the built-ins.
The gun was there.

       *       *       *       *       *

It didn't take her long to drive downtown. There were no other cars on
the streets, and the current to the traffic lights had been cut three
years before. She passed only a prowling squad car, and the two police
stared at her curiously.

She parked a block from Antola's. Leaving the car, she slung her purse,
heavy with the gun, over her arm. Briskly she walked down the deserted
street.

Antola, standing behind the bar, was tall, thin and red-headed. He
stared at her incredulously, wiping his hands repeatedly on his long
white apron.

She went past the bar to a small table.

Antola continued to wipe his hands, as if they would not quite come
dry. "You want something?"

"Yes, bring me a bacon and tomato sandwich and milk."

"Don't have bacon and tomato. Kippie, she likes tuna. Bass hamburg.
Lester and Alice, they both take grilled cheese. Which do you want?"

"Bring me tuna and milk."

"Kippie, she says milk don't go with tuna. Makes a big blob inside."

"I said tuna and milk."

"Okay, if you want a blob inside. Kippie don't." He ambled away.

Not knowing how long she might have to wait, she nibbled at her
sandwich.

Soon she heard voices approaching the restaurant. She snaked her hand
toward the purse, opened it and clutched the gun.

Alice entered first, her hair a disciplined halo of red-gold, her eyes
vivid green. She was quarreling with Bass, who cheerfully ignored her,
his penetrating eyes staring greedily at the bottles behind the bar.

Small, precocious-seeming Kippie followed, her dark hair ruffled by the
wind. She stared lovingly up into Lester's eyes.

When the door had closed behind them, Amanda stood and raised the gun.
They hadn't noticed her, they'd been too anxious to mount the bar
stools. Ducks in a shooting gallery, she thought.

Alice was sitting nearer her, combing her hair with her fingers.
Holding the gun out before her with both hands, Amanda aimed it at
Alice's hair. She pulled the trigger.

At the sound, they all tried to duck, except Alice, who folded quietly
to the floor. Amanda aimed again, and this time Lester crumpled.

Ducks in a shooting gallery, she thought. See if you can make that big
drake, Bass, fall off his stool.

Bass fell. Kippie screamed, banishing her dimples, and fell beside him.

Antola had disappeared. It didn't matter. She returned the gun to her
purse. She hadn't decided what to do next. Suddenly feeling hungry, she
sat down to finish her sandwich.

       *       *       *       *       *

When she was through, she rose, slung her purse over her arm again and
stepped past the four bodies. They hardly seemed real, lying in their
separate pools of crimson.

The two policemen came in, staring at her again.

"Catch her!" Antola cried from beneath the bar. "She done it! She
killed them all! Poor little Kippie!"

The florid policeman locked his hand about her wrist, while the other
cried for Antola to come out.

Her wrists were quickly handcuffed, and the florid policeman escorted
her to the police car. He shoved her into the back seat.

She didn't move, didn't think. The world seemed frozen.

It didn't begin to thaw again until the second squad car and the
ambulances arrived. They came slowly, without sirens or flashing
lights. She wondered why they came so casually.

The florid policeman returned to the car. "All dead," he said. "Even
poor little Kippie."

Silently they drove the deserted streets. She looked out at the
buildings, knowing the people inside them soon would be shocked by
the news of the stars' deaths.

When they reached police headquarters, she had to run to keep up with
the florid policeman as he pulled her up the stone steps. They walked
endless corridors, gray and gloomy, until they emerged into a small,
dim room.

A man in a tweed coat, who smoked a pipe and spoke suavely, stepped
from the group of men in street clothes.

"Did you kill them?" he asked. "Don't be afraid to tell me. I only want
to know if you killed them."

She nodded. "Certainly I did it."

He took her purse from the uniformed policeman and removed the gun.
"But why, tell me. Were you jealous of Alice, perhaps?" His pipe jumped
as he smiled confidentially.

"Certainly not!" she said. "I did it to save the human race from
suicide."

The men smiled, amused.

"Lock her up until we decide," the man in tweed instructed the florid
policeman. He gave her the purse, minus the gun.

       *       *       *       *       *

A bony, disapproving matron led her to a cell and locked her into it.
Amanda requested pencil and paper.

The matron frowned but brought them. Placing the paper against her
purse, she began composing a statement to the press, making clear her
motives.

The filmed sequence still played on the small Wall opposite her cell.
She glanced up occasionally at the faces and smiled.

She had almost completed the statement when the filmed sequence ended.
The small, oily emcee appeared upon the Wall. "Ladies and gentlemen,"
he said.

She waited expectantly for the death announcement.

"Our stars!" He flung out his arms dramatically.

And the four stars pranced, smiling, across the Wall. Kippie, Bass,
Alice and Lester.

Amanda jumped to the bars. It was not a film.

"Matron!" she screamed. "Matron!" Frantically she stared at the four
actors whom she had murdered and who were alive and smiling.

"Matron!"

The bony matron unlocked the cell. "Come with me."

"Matron, I killed them. I shot them!"

"Come with me."

The matron led her into a small, dim room.

The tweedy man smiled confidentially around his pipe. "Are you ready to
go home, Mrs. Davis?"

"But I murdered them. You have to keep me here!" She tried to catch
the lapels of his suit.

He smiled again. "Who did you murder, Mrs. Davis?"

"All of them. You know I did it. I shot them, and they were all dead.
He said so--the policeman." Her hands shook.

"Look over there." He pointed to a small Wall. "They're alive and
performing, aren't they, Mrs. Davis?"

She looked at the Wall. Alice and Lester were planting a small rose
bush together.

"You see, occasionally women do suffer from delusions like yours," he
said. "But now that you've recovered, I'll drive you home. After a
quiet night you'll forget all this."

"They aren't delusions," she insisted. "I did it, with my husband's
gun. I waited until they closed the door, then I aimed--I know I did
it."

"Yes, certainly," he said, leading her to the door. "Now come along
home, Mrs. Davis."

She continued to protest, but he pulled her through the corridors and
down the steps to a waiting car. He nudged her into the front seat.

       *       *       *       *       *

They passed darkened buildings. She saw the neon sign atop the _Herald_
offices ahead. If no one knew she'd killed them, no one would awaken.
No one would live again. The world would end after all.

She opened the door and jumped from the moving car. Stumbling, she ran
toward the _Herald_ offices.

She stumbled into the building and began seeking through its bright
corridors. Stopping to stare at each office door, she finally found the
one labeled "Editorial. Mr. Gray." She pushed into the office.

The little man behind the desk wore horn-rim glasses and smoked a pipe
that was a copy of Lester's. He smiled paternally. "Yes, dear?"

"I killed them! They're all dead!"

Realizing excitement did nothing to make her words more believable, she
forced herself to be calm.

Editor Gray wore his gray hair combed straight back, Lester-like. He
stood, putting one hand into his trouser pocket, as Lester always did.

"Who did you kill?" he asked quietly. "Calm down, dear. Tell me who you
killed."

"Lester and all the rest. You have to print it. I shot them--they're
dead. Print it in your paper."

He crossed the room to his Wall. Bass and Kippie were rolling pie dough
together, one on either end of the rolling pin.

"I'm afraid you're imagining these things, my dear." He sucked his
pipe, looking lovingly at Kippie. "I could love that child, but of
course Alice would be jealous."

She backed away from him into the arms of the tweedy man, who had come
into the office.

"I'm sorry to bother you, sir," he said. "This poor woman is suffering
from delusions. I was driving her home when she escaped me."

"That's all right," Editor Gray said mildly. "Perhaps she needs
professional help. Have you considered that, my dear?"

But Amanda was staring at Bass. She stared at his penetrating eyes, his
broad shoulders, at the curl of hair combed low over his forehead. The
curl was swirled left, not right.

The tweedy man took her arm, guided her from the building and nudged
her into the car.

Do they curl a dead actor's hair differently, she wondered. She had
killed them. Why weren't they dead?

       *       *       *       *       *

When they reached her house, it was completely dark. Either Dell and
Kippie had gone to bed or the Wall had been replaced and was playing.

"I'm sorry I had to bring you away so abruptly," the tweedy man said.
"We can't afford to have the press print unfavorable reports about the
force, you understand." He fingered his pipe. "Now, Mrs. Davis, get a
good night's sleep. Tomorrow you'll realize it was all a bad dream. You
wouldn't kill the stars."

Woodenly she walked up the front walk. Hearing Bass's mellow voice from
the Wall room, she knew Kippie and Dell were up.

She entered the room. Kippie sat curled on the Wall seat.

Amanda stared at the handsome face on the Wall. Bass McDowall, Wall
idol. Why wasn't he dead?

His curl was still curled wrong. She looked more closely at his face as
he leaned toward Kippie, gasping, "Sweetie-bug."

There was a small scar beneath his left eye. The tiniest, most
insignificant scar, but it had never been there before.

"Poor Bass, he looks so tired," the Kippie on the Wall seat said. "See
how his face looks thinner when he's tired? I wonder if she notices it."

Dell said, "After all, Bass has worked hard today, Kippie."

Bass's face was indeed thinner. Thinner face, small scar that hadn't
been there before, curl that curled wrong--what did it mean?

Suddenly she realized the image on the Wall wasn't Bass. She corrected
herself. He was a different Bass. He wasn't the one she had shot, but
his almost identical double.

She stared at her daughter, who looked more like Kippie each time she
assumed another of her characteristics or poses. There were hundreds
of young people wanting to be Bass or Kippie, hundreds of young men
combing their hair the way Bass did, smiling as he did, learning to use
their eyes as he did. And if the time should come when a new Bass was
needed, there he was, hundreds of him.

She frowned. Undoubtedly they had several doubles waiting conveniently
nearby to perform if something should happen to one of the stars.

       *       *       *       *       *

She felt a choking in her throat. It would be as impossible to kill all
the Basses and Kippies as it would be to break every Wall in the world.
There was no way to get rid of them, no way to make people listen to
what was happening. No way to prevent humanity from watching itself to
extinction.

As they grew older, she guessed, the actors would grow older too.
Gradually Bass would be thirty, then thirty-five, and Lester and the
others would age too. But no one would notice; everyone would be aging
at the same rate.

But some day someone would notice. Some day all the Lesters would
die, and there would be no more Lester to smile at Alice and look
thoughtful. And people would look around and see that her daughter,
Kathryn, was the youngest person in the world.

But by then even Kathryn would be past the child-bearing age.

Stunned, she sat down beside Dell. He squeezed her hand. She looked up
at the Wall, into Bass's penetrating dark eyes. His eyes were so deep,
she thought. His hands were strong, and his face was intelligent. How
could she ever have hated him?

"Where've you been, baby?" Dell asked.

She shook her head irritably. "Be quiet," she said. "Can't you see he's
going to kiss her?"

Perhaps she should change her name to Alice. Then they'd have Kippie,
Alice and Lester. All they needed was a Bass, and they would be almost
like a real family.

It would be so easy to forget this way, looking deep into Bass's dark
eyes.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Shatter the Wall, by Sydney Van Scyoc

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SHATTER THE WALL ***

***** This file should be named 51576.txt or 51576.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/1/5/7/51576/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
