The Project Gutenberg EBook of Oh, Rats!, by Miriam Allen deFord

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: Oh, Rats!

Author: Miriam Allen deFord

Release Date: April 13, 2016 [EBook #51751]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK OH, RATS! ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                               OH, RATS!

                        By MIRIAM ALLEN DEFORD

                          Illustrated by WOOD

           [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from
                    Galaxy Magazine December 1961.
         Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
         the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]




                    Orthedrin, maxiton and glutamic
                   acid--they were the prescription
                   that made him king of his world!


SK540, the 27th son of two very ordinary white laboratory rats,
surveyed his world.

He was no more able than any other rat to possess articulate speech, or
to use his paws as hands. All he had was a brain which, relative to its
size, was superior to any rat's that had hitherto appeared on Earth. It
was enough.

In the first week of gestation his embryo had been removed to a more
suitable receptacle than the maternal womb, and his brain had been
stimulated with orthedrin, maxiton and glutamic acid. It had been
continuously irrigated with blood. One hemisphere had been activated
far in excess of the other, since previous experiments had shown that
increased lack of symmetry between the hemispheres produced superior
mentality. The end-result was an enormous increase in brain-cells
in both hemispheres. His brain showed also a marked increase in
cholinesterase over that of other rats.

SK540, in other words, was a super-rat.

The same processes had been applied to all his brothers and sisters.
Most of them had died. The few who did not, failed to show the desired
results, or showed them in so lopsided and partial a manner that it was
necessary to destroy them.

All of this, of course had been mere preparation and experimentation
with a view to later developments in human subjects. What SK540's gods
had not anticipated was that they would produce a creature mentally the
superior, not only of his fellow-rats, but also, in some respects, of
themselves.

He was a super-rat: but he was still a rat. His world of dreams and
aspirations was not human, but murine.

What would you do if you were a brilliant, moody young super-rat, caged
in a laboratory?

SK540 did it.

What human beings desired was health, freedom, wealth, love, and
power. So did SK540. But to him health was taken for granted; freedom
was freedom from cages, traps, cats, and dogs; wealth meant shelter
from cold and rain and plenty to eat; love meant a constant supply of
available females.

But power! It was in his longing for power that he most revealingly
displayed his status as super-rat.

Therefore, once he had learned how to open his cage, he was carefully
selective of the companions--actually, the followers--whom he would
release to join his midnight hegira from the laboratory. Only the
meekest and most subservient of the males--intelligent but not too
intelligent--and the most desirable and amiable of the females were
invited.

Once free of the cages, SK540 had no difficulty in leading his troop
out of the building. The door of the laboratory was locked, but a
window was slightly open from the top. Rats can climb up or down.

Like a silver ribbon they flowed along the dark street, SK540, looking
exactly like all the rest, at their head. Only one person in the
deserted streets seems to have noticed them, and he did not understand
the nature of the phenomenon.

       *       *       *       *       *

Young Mr. and Mrs. Philip Vinson started housekeeping in what had once
been a mansion. It was now a rundown eyesore.

It had belonged to Norah Vinson's great-aunt Martha, who had left it
to her in her will. The estate was in litigation, but the executor had
permitted the Vinsons to settle down in the house, though they weren't
allowed yet to sell it. It had no modern conveniences, and was full of
rooms they couldn't use and heavy old-fashioned furniture; but it was
solidly built and near the laboratory where he worked as a technician,
and they could live rent-free until they could sell the house and use
the money to buy a real home.

"Something funny happened in the lab last night," Philip reported,
watching Norah struggle with dinner on the massive coal-stove.
"Somebody broke in and stole about half our experimental animals. And
they got our pride and joy."

"The famous SK540?" Norah asked.

"The same. Actually, it wasn't a break-in. It must have been an inside
job. The cages were open but there were no signs of breaking and
entering. We're all under suspicion till they find out who-dunit."

Norah looked alarmed.

"You too? What on earth would anybody want with a lot of laboratory
rats? They aren't worth anything, are they--financially, I mean?"

"Not a cent. That's why I'm sure one of the clean-up kids must have
done it. Probably wanted them for pets. They're all tame, of course,
not like wild rats--though they can bite like wild rats if they want
to. Some of the ones missing are treated, and some are controls. It
would just be a nuisance if they hadn't taken SK540. Now they've
got to find him, or do about five years' work over again, without
any assurance of as great a success. To say nothing of letting our
super-rat loose on the world."

"What on earth could even a super-rat do that would matter--to human
beings, I mean?"

"Nobody knows. Maybe that's what we're going to find out."

       *       *       *       *       *

That night Norah woke suddenly with a loud scream. Philip got the
gas lighted--there was no electricity in the old house--and held her
shaking body in his arms. She found her breath at last long enough to
sob: "It was a rat! A rat ran right over my face!"

"You're dreaming, darling. It's because I told you about the theft at
the lab. There couldn't be rats in this place. It's too solidly built,
from the basement up."

He finally got her to sleep again, but he lay awake for a long time,
listening. Nothing happened.

Rats can't talk, but they can communicate. About the time Norah Vinson
dropped off after her frightened wakening, SK540 was confronting a
culprit. The culprit was one of the liberated males. His beady eyes
tried to gaze into the implacable ones of SK540, but his tail twitched
nervously and if he bared his teeth it was more in terror than in
fight. They all knew that strict orders had been given not to disturb
the humans in the house until SK540 had all his preparations made.

A little more of that silent communication, and the rat who had run
over Norah's face knew he had only two choices--have his throat slit or
get out. He got.

"What do you know?" Philip said that evening. "One of our rats came
back."

"By itself?"

"Yeah. I never heard of such a thing. It was one of the experimental
ones, so it was smarter than most, though not such an awful lot. I
never heard of a rat with homing instinct before. But when we opened up
this morning, there he was, sitting in his cage, ready for breakfast."

"Speaking of breakfast, I thought I asked you to buy a big box of
oatmeal on your way home yesterday. It's about the only thing in the
way of cereal I can manage on that old stove."

"I did buy it. Don't you remember? I left it in the kitchen."

"Well, it wasn't there this morning. All I know is that you're going to
have nothing but toast and coffee tomorrow. We seem to be out of eggs,
too. And bacon. And I thought we had half a pound left of that cheese,
but that's gone too."

"Good Lord, Norah, if you've got that much marketing to do, can't you
do it yourself?"

"Sure, if you leave the car. I'm not going to walk all that way and
back."

So of course Philip did do the shopping the next day. Besides, Norah
had just remembered she had a date at the hairdresser's.

       *       *       *       *       *

When he got home her hair was still uncurled and she was in hysterics.
One of the many amenities great-aunt Martha's house lacked was a
telephone; anyway, Norah couldn't have been coherent over one. She cast
herself, shuddering and crying, into Philip's arms, and it was a long
time before he got her soothed enough for her to gasp: "Philip! They
wouldn't let me out!"

"They? Who? What do you mean?"

"The--the rats! The white rats. They made a ring around me at the front
door so I couldn't open it. I ran to the back and they beat me there
and did the same thing. I even tried the windows but it was no use. And
their teeth--they all--I guess I went to pieces. I started throwing
things at them and they just dodged. I yelled for help but there's
nobody near enough to hear. Then I gave up and ran in our bedroom and
slammed the door on them, but they left guards outside. I heard them
squeaking till you drove up, then I heard them run away."

Philip stared at her, scared to death. His wife had lost her mind.

"Now, now, sweetheart," he said soothingly, "let's get this straight.
They fired a lab boy today. They found four of our rats in his home.
He told some idiotic story of having 'found' them, with the others
missing, running loose on the street that night, but of course he stole
them. He must have sold the rest of them to other kids; they're working
on that now."

Norah blew her nose and wiped her eyes. She had regained her usual calm.

"Philip Vinson," she said coldly, "are you accusing me of lying, or
just of being crazy? I'm neither. I saw and heard those rats. They're
here _now_. What's more, I guess I know where that oatmeal went, and
the eggs and bacon too, and the cheese. I'm--I'm a hostage!

"I don't suppose," she added sarcastically, "that your SK540 was one of
the ones they found in the boy's home?"

"No, it wasn't," he acknowledged uneasily. A nasty little icy trickle
stole down his spine. "All right, Norah, I give in. You take the poker
and I'll take the hammer, and we'll search this house from cellar to
attic."

"You won't find them," said Norah bitterly. "SK540's too smart. They'll
stay inside the walls and keep quiet."

"Then we'll find the holes they went through and rout them out."

They didn't, of course. There wasn't a sign of a rathole, or of a rat.

They got through dinner and the evening somehow. Norah put all the
food not in cans inside the old-fashioned icebox which took the place
of a refrigerator. Philip thought he was too disturbed to be able to
sleep, but he did, and Norah, exhausted, was asleep as soon as her head
touched the pillow.

His last doubt of his wife's sanity vanished when, the next morning,
they found the icebox door open and half the food gone.

       *       *       *       *       *

"That settles it!" Philip announced. "Come on, Norah, put your coat
on. You're coming with me to the lab and we'll report what's happened.
They'll find those creatures if they have to tear the house apart to do
it. That boy must have been telling the truth."

"You couldn't keep me away," Norah responded. "I'll never spend
another minute alone in this house while those dreadful things are in
it."

But of course when they got to the front door, there they were,
circling them, their teeth bared. The same with the back door and all
the first floor windows.

"That's SK540 all right, leading them," Philip whispered through
clenched jaws. He could smash them all, he supposed, in time, with what
weapons he had. But he worked in the laboratory. He knew their value to
science, especially SK540's.

Rats couldn't talk, he knew, and they couldn't understand human speech.
Nevertheless, some kind of communication might establish itself.
SK540's eyes were too intelligent not to believe that he was getting
the gist of talk directed to him.

"This is utterly ridiculous," Philip grated. "If you won't let us out,
how can we keep bringing food into the house for you? We'll all starve,
you and we together."

He could have sworn SK540 was considering. But he guessed the implicit
answer. Let either one of them out, now they knew the rats were there,
and men from the laboratory would come quickly and overwhelm and carry
off the besiegers. It was a true impasse.

"Philip," Norah reminded him, "if you don't go to work, they know we
haven't a phone, and somebody will be here pretty soon to find out if
anything's wrong."

But that wouldn't help, Philip reflected gloomily; they'd let anyone
in, and keep him there.

And he thought to himself, and was careful not to say it aloud: rats
are rats. Even if they are 25th generation laboratory-born. When the
other food was gone there would be human meat.

He did not want to look at them any more. He took Norah's arm and
turned away into their bedroom.

They stayed there all day, too upset to think of eating, talking and
talking to no conclusion. As dusk came on they did not light the gas.
Exhausted, they lay down on the bed without undressing.

After a while there was a quiet scratching at the door.

"Don't let them in!" Norah whispered. Her teeth were chattering.

"I must, dear," he whispered back. "It isn't 'them,' I'm sure of
it--it's just SK540 himself. I've been expecting him. We've got to
reach some kind of understanding."

"With a rat?"

"With a super-rat. We have no choice."

Philip was right. SK540 alone stood there and sidled in as the door
closed solidly again behind him.

How could one communicate with a rat? Philip could think of no way
except to pick him up, place him where they were face to face, and talk.

"Are your--followers outside?" he asked.

A rodent's face can have no expression, but Philip caught a glance of
contempt in the beady eyes. The slaves were doubtless bedded down in
their hideaway, with strict orders to stay there and keep quiet.

"You know," Philip Vinson went on, "I could kill you, very easily." The
words would mean nothing to SK540; the tone might. He watched the beady
eyes; there was nothing in them but intelligent attention, no flicker
of fear.

"Or I could tie you up and take you to the laboratory and let them
decide whether to keep you or kill you. We are all much bigger and
stronger than you. Without your army you can't intimidate us."

There was, of course, no answer. But SK540 did a startling and touching
thing. He reached out one front paw, as if in appeal.

Norah caught her breath in astonishment.

       *       *       *       *       *

"He--he just wants to be free," she said in a choked whisper.

"You mean you're not afraid of him any more?"

"You said yourself he couldn't intimidate us without his army."

Philip thought a minute. Then he said slowly:

"I wonder if we had the right to do this to him in the first place. He
would have been an ordinary laboratory rat, mindless and contented;
we've made him into a neurotic alien in his world."

"You're not responsible, darling; you're a technician, not a
biochemist."

"I share the responsibility. We all do."

"So what? The fact remains that it was done, and here he is--and here
we are."

The doorbell rang.

Philip and Norah exchanged glances. SK540 watched them.

"It's probably Kelly, from the lab," Philip said, "trying to find out
why I wasn't there today. It's just about quitting time, and he lives
nearest us."

Norah astonished him. She picked up SK540 from the bed-side table where
Philip had placed him, and hid him under her pillow.

"Get rid of whoever it is," she said defensively. Philip stared for an
instant, then walked briskly downstairs. He was back in a few minutes.

"It was Kelly, all right," he told her. "I said you were sick and I
couldn't leave you to phone. I said I'd be there tomorrow. Now what?"

SK540's white whiskers emerged from under the pillow, and he jumped
over to the table again. Norah's cheeks were pink.

"When it came to the point, I just couldn't," she explained
shamefacedly. "I suddenly realized that he's a _person_. I couldn't let
him be taken back to prison."

"Aren't you frightened any more?"

"Not of him." She faced the super-rat squarely. "Look," she said, "if
we take care of you, will you get rid of that gang of yours, so we can
be free too?"

"That's nonsense, Norah," Philip objected. "He can't possibly
understand you."

"Dogs and cats learn to understand enough, and he's smarter than any
dog or cat that ever lived."

"But--"

The words froze on his lips. SK540 had jumped to the floor and run to
the door. There he stood and looked back at them, his tail twitching.

"He wants us to follow him," Norah murmured.

There was no sign of a hole in the back wall of the disused pantry.
But behind it they could hear squeaks and rustlings.

SK540 scratched delicately at almost invisible cracks. A section of the
wall, two by four inches, fell out on the floor.

"So that's where some of the oatmeal went," Norah commented. "Made into
paste."

"Sh!"

SK540 vanished through the hole. They waited, listening to
incomprehensible sounds. Outside it had grown dark.

       *       *       *       *       *

Then the leader emerged and stood to one side of the long line that
pattered through the hole. The two humans stared, fascinated, as the
line made straight for the back door and under it. SK540 stayed where
he was.

"Will they go back to the lab?" Norah asked.

Philip shrugged.

"It doesn't matter. Some of them may ... I feel like a traitor."

"I don't. I feel like one of those people who hid escaped war prisoners
in Europe."

When the rats were all gone, they turned to SK540. But without a glance
at them he re-entered the hiding-place. In a minute he returned,
herding two white rats before him. He stood still, obviously expectant.

Philip squatted on his heels. He picked up the two refugees and looked
them over.

"Both females," he announced briefly. "And both pregnant."

"Is he the father?"

"Who else? He'd see to that."

"And will they inherit his--his--"

"His 'super-ratism'? That's the whole point. That's the object of the
entire experiment. They were going to try it soon."

The three white rats had scarcely moved. The two mothers-to-be had
apparently fallen asleep. Only SK540 stood quietly eying the humans.
When they left him to find a place where they could talk in private he
did not follow them.

"It comes down to this," Philip said at the end of half an hour's
fruitless discussion. "We promised him, or as good as. He believed us
and trusted us.

"But if we keep to our promise we're _really_ traitors--to the human
race."

"You mean, if the offspring should inherit his brain-power, they might
overrun us all?"

"Not might. Would."

"So--"

"So it's an insoluble problem, on our terms. We have to think of this
as a war, and of them as our enemies. What is our word of honor to a
rat?"

"But to a super-rat--to SK540--"

As if called, SK540 appeared.

Had he been listening? Had he understood? Neither of them dared to
voice the question aloud in his presence.

"Later," Philip murmured.

"We must eat," said Norah. "Let's see what's left in the way of food."

       *       *       *       *       *

Everything tasted flat; they weren't very hungry after all. There was
enough left over to feed the three rats. But they had evidently helped
themselves earlier; they left the scraps untasted.

Neither of the humans guessed what else had vanished from the pantry
shelves--what, when he had heard enough, SK540 had slipped away and
sprinkled on the remaining contents of the icebox, wherever the white
powder would not show.

They did not know until it was too late--until both of them lay
writhing in their last spasms on their bedroom floor.

By the time the house was broken into and their bodies found, SK540 and
his two wives were far away, and safe....

And this, children, is the true account, handed down by tradition from
the days of our great Founder, of how the human race ceased to exist
and we took over the world.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Oh, Rats!, by Miriam Allen deFord

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK OH, RATS! ***

***** This file should be named 51751.txt or 51751.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/1/7/5/51751/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
