The Project Gutenberg EBook of Death's Wisher, by Jim Wannamaker

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: Death's Wisher

Author: Jim Wannamaker

Release Date: April 15, 2016 [EBook #51767]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DEATH'S WISHER ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                            DEATH'S WISHER

                           BY JIM WANNAMAKER

                      Illustrated by DICK FRANCIS

           [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from
                    Galaxy Magazine February 1960.
         Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
         the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]




               There's just one way to disarm a bomb--be
               at least a step ahead of it--but what if
               it's always at least a step ahead of you?


Flinn took the seat that Wilmer indicated, dropped his overnight bag
beside it, and tried to relax. He'd had five hours of inactivity on
the plane, but the peremptory manner with which he had been routed out
of his California apartment and conveyed to Washington, D. C, had so
filled his mind with unanswered questions that he still found rest to
be impossible. He had been told simply that the government needed him;
and when federal wheels started turning, there wasn't much a private
citizen could do to stop them.

He watched the tall, lean, dark-haired man, who had been introduced as
Dr. Jackson Wilmer, nuclear physicist, disappear through a door.

Flinn looked around.

The room in which he sat--comparatively small, one of hundreds in the
vastness of the Pentagon--seemed to be a sort of minor office. At least
there were several desks and filing cabinets. Besides himself, there
were now only two other men in the room.

One, a complete stranger, sat at a desk across the room with his back
turned toward Flinn.

The other leaned against the wall near the door. All Flinn knew about
him, despite the fact that they had been as close as boy and dog for
the past seven hours, was that his name was Hayes and that he was a
special agent of the Federal Bureau of Investigation. There was a
muscular hardness about this young man that betrayed an athletic
background. He was about thirty, had a craggy face beneath short brown
hair, hard gray eyes, and his nose had been broken at least once. There
was a light trace of beard beginning to show on the agent's face, but
his brown summer suit still looked neat, and the man himself seemed
something less than tired.

Looking at him, Flinn felt a sense of his own shabbiness. He needed a
shave as badly as his slacks and sports jacket needed pressing.

At forty-two, Flinn was somewhat taller than average and slightly
underweight from overwork and the irregularities of a bachelor
existence. His black hair, beginning to recede a little, was peppered
with silver, and his normally relaxed face was now tight, and the
whites of his hazel eyes were bloodshot.

       *       *       *       *       *

The door beside Hayes opened and Wilmer entered, carrying a brown
folder. He was in his shirtsleeves, his necktie pulled down and his
collar open, and, as he approached, Flinn noted that the deeply tanned
face of the physicist was as stubbled and tired-looking as his own
felt. He was about the same age as Flinn.

Wilmer tossed the folder on the desk in front of Flinn and then perched
on one corner of the desk. He gazed at the parapsychologist for a long
few seconds, his eyes startingly ice-blue in his dark face.

"Well," he said presently, "I guess you're wondering what this is all
about."

"Yes, I guess I am," Flinn said wryly. "This bird dog--" he indicated
Hayes with a nod of his head, and the agent retaliated with a flash
of teeth--"hauls me away from an important experiment, loads me on an
Air Force jet, and, after a high-altitude flight at God only knows
what kind of fantastic speeds, I find myself in the holiest of holies,
surrounded by MPs and--yes, you might say I'm wondering what this is
all about."

Wilmer nodded patiently and rubbed one hand across his eyes.

"When you find out, you'll understand the reason for the secrecy." He
faced Hayes. "How long have we been on this thing now, Fred? It seems
like weeks."

"Ten days," the FBI man answered.

Wilmer shook his head slowly, then reached for the folder, opened
it, and took out several scientific journals that Flinn recognized
instantly. The physicist opened one of them.

"'Advanced Experiments in TP, by Patrick Flinn,'" he read. He laid
the publication aside and picked up another. "'A Monograph on the
Probabilities of TH,' same author."

He quoted at random from the introductory page: "'It is therefore
my belief, based upon recent preliminary experimentation, that not
only can one mind be used to scan the thoughts of another, but that
ideas and suggestions may be implanted upon another's mind without
the knowledge of the receptor. This is not to be confused with simple
telepathic 'sending,' where the receptor is completely aware of the
other's transmission. This to which I refer may, at least in one
phase, be described as hypnotic in effect. The possibilities of such
influence over the mind-matter of another are more than somewhat
considerable....'"

He paused, lowered the journal and gazed speculatively at Patrick
Flinn. "Telepathy, telehypnosis," he said, rolling out the words as if
they left a strange taste in his mouth. "Very interesting. Just how
much truth is there in all this stuff? I mean, how far along are you,
really?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Flinn considered the question for a few seconds. It was one he had
heard often, especially from his colleagues at the small California
college where he held an assistantship in psychology. But after
twenty years of skepticism--he had first discovered his rudimentary
telepathic abilities just after graduating from college, and had been
experimenting and advancing ever since--he had become immune to
criticism.

"Very few people bother to read my articles," Flinn said evenly, "and
still fewer understand them, and the _fewest_ believe. But I can tell
you I'm far enough along in my research to know that the human mind
has latent powers that are, to quote my article, more than somewhat
considerable."

Wilmer and Hayes exchanged glances.

"That's fine," Wilmer said, "but abstruse, wouldn't you say? What I'm
getting at is, I want to see a practical demonstration."

"Put up or shut up, eh?" Flinn said.

"I'd rather call it an examining of credentials," the physicist
countered.

"All right. I don't see any connection between my work and nuclear
physics, but what do you want me to do? First, though, I'd better
explain that I might fail. I'm really just on the threshold."

"Granted. So I'll make it easy. Suppose--" He looked over his shoulder,
faced Flinn again, and continued in a low voice: "Suppose you tell me
what the man at the far desk is thinking."

Flinn glanced past the physicist at the stranger across the room. The
man seemed completely unaware of the others. He was poring over some
papers that were spread out upon the desk.

Flinn focused his eyes upon the man's head. His mind was really too
steeped in fatigue for this sort of thing, but it was a chance not
to be missed, a chance to demonstrate his talents in the presence
of a responsible scientist, so he willed himself into a gradually
deepening concentration. His eyes seemed to go myopic, out of focus. A
gray, ethereal haze came into his consciousness, like swirling smoke.
_Easy?_ But presently a picture began to form, blurred at first, then
fragmentary, then coming into identifiable clarity.

Flinn held it for a moment, before snapping back into objective
consciousness. He was grinning slightly as his eyes refocused and came
to rest on Wilmer.

"Well?" the physicist asked.

"What's his name?" Flinn said.

"Barnes. Robert Barnes."

"Say, Bob!" Flinn called out. The smallish, partially bald man at the
far desk looked up and swiveled around to face him. "Tell me something,
Bob," Flinn went on. "Do you act that way with all women, or just
blondes?"

Barnes' placid face suddenly underwent a marvelous transformation.
First he blushed furiously. Then his jaw dropped open and the high
color began to drain away. He stared across the room, his face pallid.

"My God!" he managed to blurt in a stricken voice.

       *       *       *       *       *

There was dead silence in the room as Wilmer and Hayes looked from
Barnes' shocked face to Flinn's smiling one.

"I think it's obvious--" Hayes started to say.

"Me, too," Wilmer agreed. He looked sharply at Flinn. "Can you tell
what I'm thinking at this moment?"

Flinn shrugged. "Not without a special effort, and I'm not going to
make that effort unless I have to."

The physicist sighed and his tanned face relaxed a little. He looked at
Flinn with a new respect. "I guess I'd better put you in the picture."
He reopened the folder and extracted several newspaper clippings. "What
I'm about to divulge is so unbelievable that--well, I'd best break it
to you gradually. You know my job. That fact and this tan--" he pointed
to his face--"should give you an inkling of what I've been up to the
last few weeks."

Flinn thought, and nodded. "I'm to assume that you've been out in the
Pacific, is that right?"

"Yes," Wilmer said. "Eniwetok. Have you been following our progress in
the papers?"

"Not really. I've been a little too busy, I'm afraid."

"No matter." The physicist handed the clippings to Flinn. "Read these."

Flinn scanned the first clipping. It bore a recent date.

"'... Reliable sources,'" he read aloud, "'report that a civilian,
believed to be a scientist, is being held incommunicado in the
Pentagon. All efforts on the part of newsmen to gain additional
information have been met with polite but firm rebuffs. Spokesmen
from the AEC have refused to confirm or deny theories that the man's
detention is in some way connected with the recent fiasco at Eniwetok
Atoll ...'"

He read the second. It was date-lined Honolulu, a week before the other.

"'Beyond the terse comment that there were "no casualties," all
official sources are silent today concerning the news leak of the
failure of a nuclear device in our Pacific Test Area. It has been
understood that this device, the third in a series of thermonuclear
test shots, failed to detonate. Since this test was scheduled to have
been a "tower shot," under rigid instrumental control, much speculation
has arisen ...'"

Flinn looked up hopelessly. "I don't understand. Does this concern you?
I mean--"

"It concerns _all_ of us," Wilmer said grimly. "But I know what you're
getting at. No, I'm not the man they mention. I was in charge of that
particular test."

Hayes cleared his throat abruptly and Wilmer nodded.

"I want you to understand, Mr. Flinn, before we go any further, that
everything you hear and see, and have heard and seen from the time Fred
first contacted you, is to be held in the strictest confidence. Is that
clear?"

"Yes."

"All right. How much do you know about atomic physics?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Flinn spread his hands. "I'm somewhat past the Democritus stage, but I
don't claim to be an expert."

"Well, basically, in a thermonuclear explosive device, hydrogen is
transformed into helium," said Hayes. "In the process there is a loss
of mass. This loss results in a tremendous and sudden release of
energy. Are you familiar with the energy-mass relationship, E = MC^2?"

Flinn nodded.

"Okay. In other words, the nuclei of hydrogen atoms are fused under the
influence of great heat, resulting in a different element, less mass, a
release of energy, and an explosion."

"I'm with you so far," Flinn said.

"Then you realize that once this fusion process commences, nothing in
God's great universe can stop it?"

"Yes."

"And that after certain things are done, fusion _must_ result?"

"Surely."

"Well, so all of us believed, too. But we were wrong about it."

"I don't understand. You just said--"

"So I _said_. But let me try to describe to you the situation as it
happened." He paused, not for dramatic effect, but to take a moment
to force himself to recall what Flinn could see must have been a very
painful experience.

"We are on the command ship," Wilmer continued, "at a safe distance
from the atoll. Everything is in readiness, checked and double-checked
by me, personally. The automatic firing process is in progress. The
last countdown has commenced. Five, four, three, two, one, zero.
_Nothing happens._

"I'll simplify the subsequent chain of events. After a reasonable
interval, a volunteer pilot and myself and one other man fly by
helicopter to the atoll. We climb the tower. I'm sweating and so are
the others. We're standing beside a _live hydrogen bomb_. I disconnect
the power sources and do various things to render the device safe.
Then we check. Everything--_everything_--is in working order. There is
absolutely no reason why the thing failed to detonate. Yet it did fail.

"We fly back to the command ship. We hold an emergency conference.
We're sitting there staring at each other. Then this--this man, Dobbs,
starts to laugh. We think it is hysterics, due to the tremendous
strain that everyone has been under. But apparently it isn't. He laughs
and laughs and laughs. Finally he manages to say: 'You can't figure
it out, can you? Well, I know. Old Dobbsie knows. _It didn't explode
because I willed it not to!_'"

Flinn's mind was almost too tired to accept what he had heard. "Are you
trying to tell me--"

"Figure it out for yourself," Wilmer said flatly. "It's your field.
Telepathy, telehypnosis, and what's left?"

"_Psychokinesis_," Flinn said in a stifled voice.

"Right. Psychokinesis. Mind over matter."

       *       *       *       *       *

Ordinarily, Patrick Flinn would have used the morning ride over
Washington's broad avenues to good advantage--this was his first visit
to the nation's capital--but his mind was too filled with the preceding
day's revelations to permit anything save minimal sightseeing.

"I hate to keep repeating myself," Wilmer was saying, "but I must be
certain you understand what's at stake here."

"I know," Flinn answered with some impatience. "I'm not to reveal,
under any circumstances, the fact that I have telepathic powers."

"Correct." The physicist sat in the seat beside Flinn, and Hayes was in
front beside the driver. "Your job is to find out just how much this
man can do. We'd like to know the _way_ he does it, too, but that's
secondary."

"It strikes me," Flinn mused, "that anyone who can influence a fusion
bomb can do anything."

"That's what we're afraid of." Wilmer looked soberly at the
parapsychologist. "I think I can understand what's going on in your
mind. This is your special love and you're finding it difficult to
divorce yourself from pure clinical investigation. You want, really,
to talk to Dobbs as one scientist to another. But I must warn you that
this is impossible. If he gets the least inkling that you're a special
mind, something disastrous may result. As long as he gets what he
wants, fine, but rub him the wrong way and--"

"And yet you have him a virtual prisoner and he doesn't object?"

"Well, at least not strenuously," Wilmer said. "I don't profess to
understand a warped mind, but apparently Dobbs realizes that his
confinement is mostly protective custody. It's to his own advantage.
After all, he doesn't have to stand up at a public forum and shout
threats. All he has to do is contact the few to reach the many. And if
he has the powers he says he has, full use of them would result in his
own destruction. And he doesn't want that. He's too interested, right
now, in satisfying his own animal appetites. But faced with losing
everything--"

"Our biggest immediate worry," Hayes said from the front seat, "is
keeping all this from the public. That's why we put Dobbs out of sight
in a hurry. There have been some leaks already, but so far most people
consider the papers' theories as just so much wild speculation. And
thank God for that. You can understand why all recognizable public
figures are keeping as far away from Dobbs as possible."

       *       *       *       *       *

Flinn nodded; it was self-evident. There were other phases of the
problem that bothered him more. He was still vaguely and, as it seemed,
illogically worried about the several questions he had raised the day
before.

The fact that Dobbs might have read his articles and hence might put
two and two together, despite a cover identity, was the least of
them. Flinn had never lectured in public, his efforts had received no
publicity except in specialized psychological circles, and his latest
monograph on TH had been published when Dobbs was working at the atoll.

Wilmer, Hayes, and others had managed to assuage reasonable fears on
the other point. Flinn had always assumed that psychokinesis would be
the logical result of advanced telepathy, that they were links in
the same chain. Now it seemed that a person could be one without the
other. Either you possessed a latent ability to scan mind-matter, or an
affinity for material substance, but not necessarily both.

Earlier, Wilmer and Hayes had devised a test to check the possibility
that Dobbs was an advanced telepath. They had mentally vilified him
beyond the ability of even an accomplished actor to resist, over
prolonged periods of time, and yet Dobbs had shown not the least
indication that he had intercepted their thoughts. But there was one
additional point.

"You used the expression 'warped mind' in describing Dobbs," Flinn said
to Wilmer. "Is it your opinion then that he is definitely psychopathic?
The reason I ask is that scanning a confused mind may prove to be more
than I can handle."

"I used that expression for want of a better," Wilmer answered
cautiously. "Put it this way--suppose you suddenly found you were able
to control, even in a minor way, the stuff of the universe; would you
use those powers for the benefit of mankind, or would you leap over the
traces and reach for all the things that had been denied you over the
years for moral, or legal, or whatever reasons?"

"You paint a lurid picture," Flinn said.

They turned down a side street in a residential district and drew up in
front of what appeared to be a large two-story private home.

Flinn took a deep breath. He was rested now, but still uncertain
whether he was up to what lay ahead.

After the preliminary discussion with Wilmer, Hayes, and Barnes--the
latter had proved to be a military intelligence man--the previous
afternoon, Flinn had been closeted immediately with a number of
generals, admirals, and high-ranking civilians from both houses of
Congress, the Defense Department, the Department of State, and various
security agencies.

There had been the usual skepticism until he had performed some simple
but histrionic "mind-reading" feats, and then there had been much talk
about the responsibilities that had now become incumbent upon him and
how perhaps even the fate of the nation was in his hands. It had left
him wandering in a jungle of doubts and fears. Yet he had managed to
sleep.

"The wonderful ability of the human mind to reject unpleasantness," he
had told himself.

As a matter of fact, he had fallen into deep, untroubled
unconsciousness within an hour of the time his head had first touched
the pillow in the comfortable hotel room the government had provided.
Hayes had been with him. "Security," Hayes had said.

And now, clean-shaven, his clothes neatly pressed, the substantial
breakfast still warm in his stomach, and fatigue no longer in his
muscles and nerves, Flinn told himself that he was as ready as he would
ever be.

       *       *       *       *       *

They got out of the conservative, unmarked sedan and approached the
house. There was a man mowing the lawn, another clipping hedges, and
still another polishing a car that was parked in the driveway just
outside the spacious garage.

"How's it going?" Hayes said to the hedge trimmer.

"All quiet," the man answered without looking up.

They went around the house and entered unchallenged through a side
door. It was all very casual, yet Flinn did not have to be told that
they were under constant scrutiny.

The room in which he found himself was just off the kitchen. Three men
in working clothes sat around a table, drinking coffee. They looked
up and nodded. They seemed to be cut from much the same cloth as Fred
Hayes, even to the expression.

"Well, well," one of them said, "the brain trust." He surveyed Flinn
with frank interest, then faced Hayes. "Say, buddy, how does a man get
a transfer out of this outfit?"

Hayes grinned his wolfish grin. "All in good time, partner." He pointed
with his chin upstairs and raised his eyebrows.

The man who had spoken, a large, broad-shouldered youngster with an
affably homely face, got up, stepped back from the table, and went into
a vaudevillian travesty of a bow. "The great man has been prepared and
awaits your presence." Then his expression changed. "What a party! I
never saw so much liquor in my life! It's a lucky thing the rumpus room
is soundproof."

"And girls!" one of the seated men said. "Man, oh, man!"

Flinn looked at Wilmer, and Wilmer shrugged as if to say, "That's the
way it is."

"Just don't forget what you're here for," Hayes said harshly.

"Don't fret," the big man said. "None of us touched a drop."

"Neither did Dobbs," one of the seated men interjected. "I guess that's
the only reason he's alive today." He guffawed loudly and suggestively.

Hayes leading, they entered a hallway and turned toward a flight of
stairs.

"Your boys seemed very off-hand about all this," Flinn said to the
government agent.

"Don't kid yourself," Hayes replied. "They're as nervous as cats."

       *       *       *       *       *

"Come in, gentlemen," Dobbs called amiably from the rear of the
spacious bedroom. There was an unobtrusive man in a dark suit with him,
but he left immediately.

Now that he was face to face with the enigmatic Mr. Dobbs, Flinn felt a
momentary sense of disappointment.

Malcolm Dobbs sat in a straight-backed chair beside the large bed.
Next to him was a table laden with empty breakfast dishes. Dobbs was
dressed in an ordinary bathrobe. He appeared to be in his mid-forties
and had a full head of dark hair, slightly gray at the temples. His
mild, undistinguished face was only slightly less tanned than Wilmer's,
and he was of average size and weight. His dark eyes were the only
things that belied the man's composed exterior; they were intelligent,
interested, and intently watchful. A tiny smile lingered upon Dobbs'
lips, as if he were sharing only with himself some form of immensely
funny but eminently private joke.

Flinn's total impression of the man was that he was not the sort one
would look at twice in a crowded room--under different circumstances.

"Another delegation?" Dobbs asked. "Hello, Jack, Hayes."

"Mal this is Mr. Dugan," Wilmer said, indicating Flinn. "He's from the
government."

Even as he acknowledged the introduction, Flinn paused momentarily
over the casual familiarity between the physicist and the apparent
psychokinetic, until he was reminded that they were both nuclear
physicists and had been together for weeks at the atoll. Flinn found
himself wondering how close they had been and what thoughts must
be going through Wilmer's mind at the moment. But he squelched his
curiosity. He was here to scan Dobbs' mind, nobody else's.

"Be unobtrusive," he had been warned. "Stay in the background as much
as possible and let Wilmer and Hayes carry the ball. And do the job
quickly."

Dobbs looked Flinn over carefully, then seemed to dismiss him from his
mind, as if he had decided Flinn was of no particular importance--or no
immediate threat.

"You boys should have been here last night," Dobbs smiled. "We had
quite a party." His smile faded and he added petulantly: "The only
thing--some of the girls weren't as cooperative as I had hoped."

"We'll be more selective next time," Hayes promised quickly.

"See to it," Dobbs said.

They seated themselves, Hayes and Wilmer close to Dobbs, and Flinn just
far enough away to seem deferential without raising suspicion.

"Now, what can I do for you?" Dobbs queried. "Another demonstration, I
assume?"

"That's right," Wilmer said. "How about that disappearance thing again?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Dobbs sighed. "You boys just can't get it through your skulls that what
I do isn't some sort of trick, can you? Even faced with the evidence of
the bomb."

Wilmer raised his hands. "It's not that so much, although what you can
do, you'll have to admit, is rather unbelievable. It's the fact that
Mr. Dugan here has never seen any evidence of your powers, and the
report he will deliver to his superiors may cause even more commotion
in high places--to your advantage."

Flinn was amazed that such a flimsy appeal to the appetites and ego of
a man as intelligent as Malcolm Dobbs could be successful. Yet it not
only could, it was.

Dobbs looked again at Flinn, the strange smile playing upon his lips;
then he reached across the table, picked up an opaque glass water
carafe, poured out its remaining liquid into an empty cereal bowl, and
replaced it on the table.

"We don't want water spilled over everything, do we?" he said.

Wilmer slipped one arm behind the back of his chair and signaled
urgently to Flinn.

Since entering the room, Flinn had been gathering all his resources
for a quick and powerful effort, and, at the sight of Wilmer's waving
fingers, he began.

He was startled that, despite the interaction and interference of
the other thought patterns in the room, he was able to make so quick
a contact. Just before reaching Dobbs' mind, the thought impressed
itself upon Flinn that the reason was the immense mental power that was
building within, and generating from, Dobbs. It was the simplest piece
of telepathic scanning with which Flinn had ever been involved.

For a matter of seconds, nothing happened. Then the water carafe
abruptly disappeared, its passage into apparent nothingness coincident
with a faint "pop" as the air of the room rushed in to fill the vacuum.

Dobbs turned triumphantly and saw Flinn still in the trancelike stupor
of the telepath-in-contact. Hayes stood up to screen him, but Flinn
shook his head and managed to clear his mind quickly.

"Your friend seems somewhat astounded," Dobbs chuckled.

"My God!" was all Flinn could say.

Wilmer and Hayes looked at him questioningly, and Hayes muttered: "I
think he's seen enough. Let's get out of here."

"Come back anytime, gentlemen," Dobbs said.

His laughter followed them as they retreated through the door and down
the hall to the stairs.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Well?" Wilmer said.

They sat around the table in the room just off the kitchen, steaming
cups of coffee in front of them. The three security agents who had been
in the room were gone now to their respective duties.

Flinn gazed down into the dark depths of the coffee, trying to organize
his thoughts; trying to interpret and evaluate what he had seen.

Wilmer and Hayes sipped their coffee, waiting with forced patience for
the parapsychologist to speak.

Presently, Flinn shivered and looked up at them. "If he says he can
control a critical mass, or erase Washington, D. C., or destroy the
nation, you'd better believe him."

"He's telling the truth then," Hayes said grimly.

"Yes," Flinn answered. "Here are my findings. Somehow Dobbs has
established rapport with the atom. Any atom. Probably any number
of atoms. I doubt if he can move one single mass in the ordinary
conception of psychokinesis. That is, I doubt if he can cause a pebble,
say, to shift one millimeter. What he _can_ control are the forces that
bind atoms into molecular structures, or that hold nuclei together. Do
you understand what I mean? For example, what he did up there just
now was to get rid of the space between atoms in the molecules of that
water carafe. I saw it clearly; there's no mistake. The space ceased to
exist, the atoms crashed in upon each other, and the carafe seemed to
disappear. The mass is the same. It's simply in a different form."

He paused and scanned the numb faces of the government agent and the
nuclear physicist beside him.

"Let's get down to specifics," he continued. "What's his trump card?
What is it he's holding over our heads?"

"The atmosphere," Wilmer said painfully.

"Oxygen," Flinn mused. "Suppose Dobbs concentrated upon the oxygen
atoms all around us and caused their nuclei suddenly to fuse. What
would happen?"

"Nobody on the face of the Earth would know what hit him," Wilmer said.
"The Moon would probably be blasted out of its orbit. And if there is
any intelligent life on Mars, they'd be treated to a sight they'd never
forget--if they survived it."

"Well, then," Flinn said, "we've done what we came here to do. What's
the answer?"

Hayes' face set into a hard mask. "There'll be a meeting of the brass,
of course. But I can tell you what the result will be. I'll be assigned
to kill him."

       *       *       *       *       *

A buzz of excited conversation filled the Pentagon conference room.
Flinn sat in one of the several dozen chairs between Wilmer and Hayes
and looked at a glass ashtray that lay on the part of the long table
just in front of him. One day perhaps he, too, might be able to
influence the molecular structure of such an object. Or, more likely,
one of his descendants, because he would never be able to discover the
short-cuts now.

Planned murder. All the resources and brains of the government, the
champion of the rights and dignity of the individual, gathered together
to plot the deliberate destruction of one man.

It filled Flinn with sadness. It was inevitable. It had to be done. No
one had the right to put himself above the rules of social conduct and
the welfare of several billion innocent souls. And yet--

He found himself wondering what the Founding Fathers would think of
such a move. "... all men are endowed by their Creator with certain
unalienable rights ... Life, Liberty and the pursuit of Happiness."
Executions of criminals were the result of lengthy legal processes,
during which all the rights of the individual were scrupulously
observed. But this--was he also one of the judges? Let the punishment
fit the crime. What about the judging?

"Isn't there some other way?" Wilmer broke into his thoughts. "That's
what you're thinking, correct?"

Flinn managed a faint smile. "And I'm supposed to be the telepath."

"Let's be entirely rational about it," Wilmer said. "Dobbs is a
brilliant man, granted. But he is also a lecher and a coward."

"There's some of the pig and the wolf in every man," Flinn said.

"Depends on the extent," Wilmer went on. "Dobbs is way overboard.
And he's a craven. I know it's hard to picture a man who voluntarily
crosses a bridge into the unknown as anything but brave. I suppose
there is a sort of bravado in it. But when he turns that bridge into a
club to threaten the rest of mankind--is this courage?" He turned to
the FBI man. "What do you think about it, Fred?"

Hayes pulled himself out of the shell of disciplined impassivity
into which he had retreated shortly after passing his own unofficial
death sentence upon Dobbs. He looked at the physicist and the
parapsychologist.

"Nothing," Hayes said bluntly. "Absolutely nothing. I'm just one of the
expendables."

"Aren't we all?" Wilmer said. He shrugged at Flinn. "That's why we were
chosen originally. Me because I was there at the atoll when all this
started, and was acquainted with Dobbs, and capable of understanding
the implications of his acts. Hayes because--"

"Because I've a good enough record to be above suspicion, and because
I'm young enough not to be missed," the agent said.

"And you, Pat," the physicist said to Flinn, "because of your unique
talents. But now we're all under the gun."

       *       *       *       *       *

There was a lapse in the background noise, and the three turned to see
the President's representative rise and signal for order. He was a
tall, graying man, beautifully dressed, and, as he spoke, there was a
note of sad resignation in his voice.

"So, gentlemen, since reasoning with Dobbs has proven to be useless, we
find ourselves in agreement. All that remains is to select the time and
the method. And, by the way, Mr. Hilliard--" he nodded at the Director
of the FBI--"has assured me there is no need to deviate from our
original plan, at least so far as the human element is concerned. Agent
Hayes will remain our--messenger. He seems to be ideally suited for the
job."

There was a visible stir down the length of the table as the top men
from the government tried not to look at Fred Hayes. None of them
succeeded. Under their brief, self-conscious but probing scrutiny,
Hayes' hard face betrayed not a flicker of emotion.

"And now the time and the method." The Presidential assistant cleared
his throat and scanned the faces of the men before him. "I should think
as soon as possible." A murmur of assent swept the room. "There remains
the problem of method. Dr. Wilmer cautions that it must be done very
efficiently. If Dobbs even suspects that his life is to be forfeit at
a predictable time--well, I hardly need tell you the danger. Director
Hilliard suggests that we leave it up to Agent Hayes, since he knows
his own capabilities better than anyone else. Mr. Hayes?"

The tall, athletic agent rose, reached under his coat to his right hip
and produced a short-barreled revolver. He held it up. "With this," he
said laconically. "In the head. Death will be instantaneous."

There were sudden protests from the military representatives.

Hayes holstered the revolver and looked at his chief. Hilliard nodded,
and Hayes walked to the end of the room. From a carton, he lifted a
small bullet trap and placed it against the wall. The safe area inside
the trap was about the size of an opened magazine. Then he moved to the
conference table, picked up one of the ashtrays, returned to the trap,
and propped the tray against it.

Appropriately, the tray was about the width of a man's head.

Agent Hayes stood up, buttoned his coat and began walking leisurely
away from the trap. At twenty paces, he whirled. It was almost too fast
for the eye to follow, but the individual actions were these:

With his left hand, Hayes unbuttoned his coat. With his right, he swept
open the coat, turned in a crouch, simultaneously drew the revolver,
and fired. The ashtray assumed a new identity--a scattered pile of
broken glass.

It all happened in measurably less than a second.

There was a collective expiration of breath from the men around the
table.

       *       *       *       *       *

Before breakfast the next morning, there wasn't a single one of the
small group of men intimately involved with the top-priority problem
who did not know that Hayes had failed.

This was shocking enough in itself, but what made it even more so was
the fact that Hayes was still alive to tell it--and that anyone else
was there to hear him.

"I came as close as hell to swearing," Hayes said dully to Wilmer and
Flinn.

Neither of them needed any special powers of observation to see that
the young agent was shaken. The three sat in the small Pentagon
office. Coffee had been served, and they were waiting now for a quorum
of the governmental officials to gather.

"I had it lined," Hayes continued. "I'd waited half the night for
everything to be just right. I was in a good position, close and to one
side. Dobbs was as relaxed as I've ever seen him. I was just telling
myself '_Now_' when Dobbs looked directly at me and grinned. 'If you're
planning on doing anything rash, my friend, don't. You can't possibly
kill me swiftly enough to keep from destroying yourself, every person
in this room, every man, woman, and child in this city, and every
living thing on the face of this Earth.' _What could I do?_"

"Thank God you didn't figure it was just a bluff!" Wilmer exclaimed.
"Pulling that trigger would have been the greatest blunder in history."

"Move and countermove," Flinn mused. "It was our gambit and we were
checked before we started."

"So I got on the open line and told the boys to fetch Flinn as quickly
as possible," Hayes went on. "But I still don't understand. I'd swear
that man read my mind."

"I don't think so," Flinn said. "I've had two mental contacts with
Dobbs, and neither time did I get the least suggestion that he was
telepathic."

"No need for him to be," Wilmer said. "It doesn't take a smart man to
put two and two together and arrive at four. And this man is more than
merely smart."

"I suppose you're right," Hayes said, "but it sure knocked the props
out from under me."

       *       *       *       *       *

They were all in attendance, most of them looking rumpled and gritty
from lack of sleep and the realization that they had been beaten.

"I just don't know," a senator said wearily. "First a man who can
influence matter, then one who reads minds, and now the latter tells us
the former is inviolable. It's too much for me."

"I refuse to accept defeat!" a fleet admiral thundered, bringing his
fist down upon the table explosively. He was an erect, bristling man
with an aggressive combat record in two wars. "We've lost the first
round--so what? There will be others."

"I quite agree," the Presidential assistant said. "This man _must_ be
destroyed. Already he's beginning to make impossible demands."

"But how do we go about it?" a congressman said. "Personally, I think
we're licked. As far as I can see, the best thing to do is let him have
his head and hope for the best."

"_Hope for the best?_" a man from a security agency echoed
incredulously. "It's power Dobbs wants--recognized power. He wants to
be feared and worshipped. Sooner or later he'll let everyone know. His
egotism will force it. Can you conceive of what that would mean? For
myself, I'd rather see the entire human race disappear in one flash of
fire without ever knowing what hit it than live under the thumb of the
fear of destruction!"

"Gentlemen!" The Presidential assistant rapped for order. "Let's
examine the situation rationally and seek out the flaws. There must be
some somewhere. Nothing in the mind of man is perfect."

"Well, this comes as close as anything," Wilmer interjected. "You ask
what's wrong with the direct approach--why not shoot him while he
sleeps? Well, I'll answer with some questions. Have any of you died as
the result of a bullet in the brain? Have you ever questioned anyone
who has been killed in that manner? Then how do we know there isn't
a microsecond of awareness before life is extinguished? And even--or
especially--on the subconscious level, isn't this enough time for a
preset signal? What's the time-lag between countdown zero and the
explosion of a thermonuclear bomb?"

"Apparently he has us blocked in every way," Flinn picked up Wilmer's
argument. "Asleep or awake. Conscious or unconscious. It's all the
same. Think of it as a special circuit in his mind. Destroy Dobbs, the
circuit shorts, and this preset signal to the oxygen atoms is sent,
their nuclei fuse, and that's the end of everything."

He scanned the faces of the men around the conference table. "Or think
of it as a hypnotic suggestion. Under hypnosis, an individual is given
a certain order that he is to carry out whenever a certain set of
circumstances or stimuli occurs. No matter when this happens, no matter
what he is doing or thinking when the moment arrives, the subject
reacts according to the order buried in his subconscious."

"But for every move there is a countermove," the admiral argued. "This
is a situation. A fantastic one, but a situation. There has to be an
answer."

"I think there is," Flinn said carefully, "but it could be very risky."

       *       *       *       *       *

It was up to the committee now. The decision rested squarely in the lap
of the United States Government. Flinn had stated his ideas, presented
his plan, and tried to give the odds--although in his heart he knew
that was impossible--so it was now out of his hands.

Or was it?

The parapsychologist lay on the bed in his hotel room, trying to
relax, trying to store up energy for the ordeal that might be imminent.
Hayes and Wilmer were in the room, too, awaiting word from the heavily
guarded conference chamber in the Pentagon.

The thin physicist paced up and down, his tanned face a study in
strain. Wilmer had been with this as long as anyone, except Dobbs, and
Flinn found himself wondering what deep inner resources the man had
tapped to retain his sanity.

The big federal agent slouched in a chair, looking at nothing. He had
lapsed again into the welcome protection of training and discipline.

Several times during the past thirty hours, since presenting his
plan, Flinn had had to restrain himself from probing the minds of
his two associates. At a time like this, no one had the right to
invade another's privacy. And curiosity had to give way for another
reason--just one look into either of their minds might be enough to
weaken or shatter his own resolve.

The classic dilemma. Do nothing and face a living hell. Act and court
destruction. The very simplicity of the alternatives made the problem
intolerable.

Telehypnosis--the untried hypothesis.

_Good Lord!_ Flinn told himself. _I'm not even proficient as a
telepath yet!_

Outside, he could hear the murmur of the city--the traffic, the people,
moving along their separate paths to their own destinations in the
humid afternoon heat.

Well, anyway, once the complete curtain of security had fallen, there
had been no more leaks. Proving that if a secret was big enough, it
could be kept.

Another classic problem. Do the people have the right to be informed?
Does forewarned really mean forearmed? And how about the other nations
of the world?

       *       *       *       *       *

An hour after the dinner dishes had been cleared away by the government
agent dubbing as a room-service waiter, the telephone rang with an
awful insistency.

Wilmer was the closest, but Hayes beat him to it by a full stride.

After identifying himself, Hayes listened in silence. Then he said,
"All right," and replaced the receiver.

He nodded at Wilmer and Flinn.

"It's go ahead." He paused and his face seemed to change--to relent
somehow. "And they wanted me to relay this message: The President says,
'May God be with you.'"

Flinn felt very alone and very close to something terrible.

In the gloom of the darkened bedroom that adjoined Dobbs', he could
see Wilmer silhouetted against the meager light that came through the
curtained window from the street lamp outside and Hayes was out in the
hall. But the knowledge of the proximity of the two men did nothing
to lessen Flinn's loneliness. The committee had even couched it as an
order, trying to relieve him of that small burden, but if he failed,
who would remain to accept the blame?

A few times in his forty-two years had Flinn wondered how it would feel
to have the fate of the world riding upon his shoulders. Now he knew
and wished he didn't.

The door opened silently and Hayes eased in.

"He's asleep," the agent breathed in a barely audible voice. "You can
start anytime now."

The plan was simple, deceptively so.

Since Dobbs' block was a kind of self-hypnotic thing, why not
countermand it with a deeper hypnotic suggestion introduced by
telepathy? If it could be done and was strong enough, the second would
counteract the first. At least for a short time.

There were terrifying flaws--the first one obvious, the second not so
easily seen.

Suppose Dobbs' block had inherent within it an anti-disturbance
feature that might react to any interference, including hypnotism
in any form? Then the result would be an immediate "short-circuit"
and--disaster.

Trembling with the responsibility that was upon him, Flinn forced
himself into a deep concentration, an almost cataleptic trance. All
details of the room faded from his consciousness. There was the
familiar gray, swirling mist, and, for what seemed an intolerably long
time, he fought to make contact with the sleeping man's mind. He almost
sobbed aloud from the effort.

Then at last he found it, entered, and gradually pushed down through
the subconscious.

       *       *       *       *       *

He was seeking now, probing for the deep-seated level of the block that
he had discovered the second time he had investigated Dobbs' mind.

It was very difficult with the sleeping man and, before he found
it, more than once he felt himself standing on the precipice of the
unknown, close to slipping away into a fright-filled nothingness.

Finally, he had it, clear and cold. The strange, unhuman, inscrutable
area that was in diabolical rapport with the basic stuff of one element
of the atmosphere. Flinn lingered there for a while, wondering again
why he could not read it completely, then forced himself on and on,
deeper and deeper, until at last he felt the limit had been reached.

His own warning thought intruded, telling him that this was the place.
And the time for the first test was at hand. He could not afford the
luxury of another pause. His resolve might crack....

The thought arced like a high-voltage spark, the preamble of the
counter-suggestion: _You are to do nothing. No matter what happens, no
matter what is done to you, you are to take no action whatsoever. You
are not to react. You are to do nothing. You are to disregard every
thought but this._

The battle had been joined. The interference had bridged the gap--yet
the block remained dormant!

The first hurdle had been cleared.

For the better part of three hours, Flinn continued to transmit the
counter-suggestion. Although he was not aware of it, sweat rolled from
every pore of his body and his nerves spasmed in unfelt agony.

Something happened.

Flinn lost contact as a shrill of warnings welled through Dobbs' mind.

A second later, the door opened and Hayes' voice hissed: "He's awake!"

Flinn returned to awareness slowly. First he was conscious only of how
tired he was, and then he knew that a voice was trying to reach him,
and he felt a handkerchief swabbing at his face.

Wilmer bent over him in the gloom.

Hayes said in Flinn's ear: "Dobbs is awake. He knows something's wrong.
He's moving around in there."

"Then go ahead," Flinn heard his voice say. "There won't be a better
time."

"Maybe we should wait," Wilmer cautioned.

"No! Do it now. Hurry!"

The agent stiffened, stepped back, and disappeared.

They heard the door to Dobbs' room open and close and the sound of
voices.

There was an exclamation, then Dobb's voice shouting: "What are you
doing? Are you crazy? I warn you, _I'll take every one of you with
me_!" Then a sudden explosion, muffled, but still shockingly loud, and
the thump of a heavy object falling.

Flinn could not bring himself to move a muscle.

       *       *       *       *       *

The silence seemed absolute. It was as if even the house itself were
listening, straining, preparing itself for the inevitable.

One second passed.

Two.

Five.

Ten.

_Nothing happened._

Abruptly, Wilmer shouted: "It's all over!"

Flinn heard footfalls upon the stairs and the sound of excited voices.

Hayes burst into the room and turned on the light, the .357 magnum
still in his hand. His face was pale; his mouth worked, but no sound
emerged.

Flinn found that his muscles would obey him now, and he stood up and
headed for the door. He felt numb, drained. He stepped out into the
hall. Every special agent and security man on the premises was crowded
there.

Flinn turned back to Hayes.

"I never thought to ask before," Flinn said. "Dobbs--did he have any
close living relatives? A wife? Children?"

Hayes shook his head.

"Thank God for that!" Flinn said.

He started down the hall toward the stairs. The men there grew silent
as he approached and moved soundlessly out of his way.

He went down the stairs, through the room off the kitchen, and outside
to the driveway. He looked up at the dark sky.

_It's over_, he told himself. _And now I'm a murderer. All of us are. A
guilt shared by the few to save the many. But the few are the product
of the many, just as each individual is, so where are we to place the
blame?_

Twenty years of research, and where had it led?

Somewhere he had failed as society had failed, and, even in success,
Flinn could feel no flush of victory.

The Earth was safe, but every human upon it had died a little without
even knowing it.

_Yes, it's over_, Flinn thought finally. _For now. Until the next time._

He could see no stars. In a while it would be dawn.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Death's Wisher, by Jim Wannamaker

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DEATH'S WISHER ***

***** This file should be named 51767.txt or 51767.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/1/7/6/51767/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
