The Project Gutenberg EBook of Scent Makes a Difference, by James Stamers

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: Scent Makes a Difference

Author: James Stamers

Release Date: April 17, 2016 [EBook #51773]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SCENT MAKES A DIFFERENCE ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                       SCENT MAKES A DIFFERENCE

                           By JAMES STAMERS

                      Illustrated by DICK FRANCIS

           [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from
                      Galaxy Magazine April 1961.
         Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
         the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]




             What I wanted was a good night's sleep. What
               I got was visitation rights with the most
             exasperating pack of sleepwalkers in history.


A fried egg came floating up through the stone steps of the Medical
Center and broke on my shoe. According to my watch, it was time for
the breakfast I didn't have that morning, so I waited a moment for the
usual two rashers of bacon.

When they materialized, I hopped aside to avoid them and went back into
the building, where the elevator took me straight up to the psychiatric
floor, without asking.

"Your blood pressure, salts, minerals, vitamins, basal metabolism,
brain pattern, nervous reflexes and skin temperature control are within
accepted tolerances," it droned, opening the doors to let me off. "You
have no clinical organic disorders; you weigh a hundred and fifty-two
pounds, Earth, measure six feet one inch, and have a clear pallid
complexion and an egg on your shoe."

I walked down the corridor to Dr. Doogle Spacio-Psycho Please Enter
and went determinedly in.

"Name, please," said the blonde receptionist, tapping her nail eroder.

"Jones. Harry Jones."

"Mr. Harry K. Jones, the physicist?"

"Yes."

"Oh, no," she said, fiddling with the appointment list, "Mr. Harry K.
Jones has just had his morning appointment and left."

"I know," I said. "An important piece of clinical data has just turned
up. I have returned with an egg on my shoe."

"I think you'd better see the doctor."

I sat down to wait and took the little bottle of pills from my pocket.
"From the Galaxy to you, through Dr. Doogle, Spacio-Psycho," it said on
the label. "The last word in tranquilizers. Conservative Zen methods
only, appointments any hour, first consultation free, no obligation,
call personal transmitter DDK 51212-6790, Earth. Active ingredients
oxylatohydrobenzoic-phe-ophenophino, sugar, coloring to 100%."

       *       *       *       *       *

The inner office door opened and Dr. Doogle smiled fatly at me from
behind his expensive desk.

"Do come in," he called, "and tell me all about it."

"It's happened again," I said, going into his office.

"Well, why not, if you feel that way? Nurse, bring me Mr. Hing-humph's
case history."

"Mr. Har-ry K. Jo-nes' film is in the transcriber, Doctor," said the
receptionist. "Mr. Jones, the physicist."

"Ah, yes, of course. Please sit down, Mr. Jones. Now what exactly is
the trouble? Hold nothing back, tell me all, reveal your intimate
thoughts."

"The main entrance just served me the breakfast that your diet
forbids," I said, sitting down.

"Plain case of wish fulfillment. Put it down to poltergeists, Mr.
Jones."

"And what exactly do you mean by that?"

"Well, now," Dr. Doogle said, drumming his fat fingers, "I don't think
we need to go into technicalities, Mr. Jones."

"Look," I said firmly. "I came to you to get a quiet night's sleep. No
more insomnia, you said, leave your problems in the laboratory, let not
the nucleii banish sleep, work hard, sleep hard, take tranquilizers
and enjoy the useful recuperation of the daily wear on body tissues,
deep dreamless sleep of the innocent."

He look at me suspiciously.

"It sounds like the sort of advice I might have given," he admitted.

"Well, at least I managed to keep my dreams in my head until I started
your treatment. I have an urgent problem to solve that vitally affects
national security. I can't have this sort of thing happening in the
middle of an experiment."

I pointed to the fried egg on my shoe and shook it off on the pile of
his green carpet.

"Yes. Well," he said, peering over the desk at it. "If you feel that
strongly, Mr. Jones, perhaps you'd better give up the diet and just
take the pills."

"I want to know how it happens," I said, and I settled firmly into the
consulting chair.

Dr. Doogle coughed professionally. "Of course, of course. You are an
intelligent man, Mr. Jones. One of our leading physical scientists.
Naturally you wish to know the precise mechanism of such phenomena.
Very commendable and entirely natural. Think no more about it."

"Dr. Doogle, do you know what you are doing?"

"Spacio-Psycho is still in its early stages, Mr. Jones. You are really
privileged to be a pioneer, you know. We have had some most interesting
results with that new tranquilizer. I hope you're not losing faith, Mr.
Jones?"

"I accept the orthodox philosophy of Spacio-Psycho, it is only the
basic philosophy of Ch'anna or Zen, and I had the routine scientific
education, naturally."

"Ah," said Dr. Doogle with rapture, "the substratum of the universe is
no-mind, and thus all material things are in constant unimpeded mutual
solution. Ji-ji-muge, the appleness of an apple is indistinguishable
from the cupness of a cup."

"And an egg on the shoe is the breakfast I didn't have," I said.

"Here," he said. "I think those pills are sending your sleeping
mind down beyond the purely personal level of your own emotions and
subconscious cerebrations. Take these, in a little water, half an hour
before going to bed."

I stood up and walked over to the door.

"What are they?" I asked.

"Same as before, only stronger. Should send you right down to the
root of things. Pass quiet nights in no-mind, Mr. Jones, sleep beyond
the trammels of self, support yourself on the universal calm sea of
no-mind."

"If these don't work, there'll be no-fee," I told him.

       *       *       *       *       *

I took three of the stronger pills that night, turned off the light and
lay back in bed, waiting for sleep to come and get me. The antiseptic
odor of the Medical Center recalled itself, but nothing else happened,
and I was still waiting to go to sleep when I woke up next morning.
No dreams of a breakfast I couldn't eat, no dreams at all. I had been
smelling the memory of formaldehyde and just slid off to sleep. I could
still smell it, for that matter, as if it were coming from the slightly
open bedroom window. I looked up.

"Hallo," said the tall skinny man in a doctor's coat on the window sill.

"Hallo yourself," I said. "Go away, I'm awake."

"Yes, you are. At least I assume you are. But I'm not."

I sat up and looked at him, and he obligingly turned his head to
profile against the brightness of the window. He had a sharp, beaky
face that was familiar.

"Haven't we met somewhere?" I asked.

"Certainly," he said, in a slightly affected voice.

"Well?"

"I don't know your name," he said, "but I have a very important
post-operative case at present, and you keep charging around the ward
when you're asleep. I just came over, as soon as I could get a few
hours' sleep myself, to ask you to stop doing it, if you don't mind."

"I've done no such thing."

"You were doing it all last night, my friend."

"I was not," I said. "I spent last night here in my own bed. I didn't
even dream."

"Ah, that probably accounts for it. Tell me, do you take drugs,
tranquilizers, by any chance? We've had a lot of trouble with that.
They seem to cause a bubble in the sequence of probabilities and things
shift about. I've been taking a new one myself, while this case is on.
I suspect that although I'm dreaming you, I think, you are not asleep
at all. At least I wasn't when you made all that noise in my ward last
night."

"No, I'm awake," I said. "Very much so."

"I see. Well, I shall wake up soon myself and go back to my own world,
of course. But while I'm here, I suppose you haven't any advanced works
on post-operative hyperspace relapse?

"Pity," he said, as I shook my head.

"I suppose you have no information on the fourth octave of
ultra-uranium elements?"

He shook his head. "Didn't even know they existed," he said. "I don't
believe they do in my probable time. What are you, a physicist? Ah," he
added, as I nodded, "I wanted to specialize in physics when I was in
college, but I went in for medicine instead."

"So did I," I said, "medicine, I mean, but I never passed pharmacology
with all those confusing extraterrestrial derivatives."

"Really?" he said interestedly. "It's my weakest subject, too. I'm a
pretty good surgeon, but an awful fool with medications. I suppose
that's how we got together. You won't come busting up the ward again,
will you?"

"I'd like to be obliging, but if I don't dream and I don't know where I
am when I'm asleep, I don't see what I can do to stop it. It's not as
if I'm really there, is it?"

       *       *       *       *       *

He crossed his arms and frowned at me. "Look," he said. "In my probable
time, you're as much physically there as I am now in your time here.
I'll prove it. I know I'm asleep in the emergency surgeon's room in my
hospital. You know you're awake in your bedroom."

He held out his hand and walked across the floor to me.

"My name's Jones," he said.

"So's mine," I answered, shaking his solid hand. "This must be a very
vivid dream to you."

We smiled at each other, and as he turned away, I caught sight of his
reflection in the wall mirror beside my hairbrush on the cabinet.

"Good heavens!" I said. "In a mirror, you look exactly like me. Is your
name Harry Jones?"

He stopped, walked over to the mirror and moved about until he could
see me in it.

"Harold K. Jones," he said. "You've got the face I shave every morning,
but I've only just recognized you. You're me."

"I prefer to think you are me," I said.

"So you did fail that final pharmacology exam, eh? And I didn't, in my
probability. Well, well. I must admit it seemed more probable I would
fail at the time, but I passed."

"It was that tramp Kate's fault. She said yes too easily."

He coughed and looked at his fingers. "She said no to me. And, as a
matter of fact, after I passed I married her. She's my wife."

"I'm sorry. I meant nothing personal."

"You never married?"

"I never really got over Kate," I said.

"I wonder what would have happened if I had qualified and then not
married her."

"You mean what _did_ happen--to the Harry K. Jones who passed in
pharmacology but did not marry Kate. He must be around in another
probability somewhere, the same as we are. Good heavens," I shouted,
"somewhere I may have solved the fourth octave equation."

"You're right, Harry. And I may have found out how to get hyperspace
relapse under control."

"Harold," I said, "This is momentous! It is more probable that
you-I and I-you will make a mess of things, but there must be other
probability sequences where we are successful."

"And we can get to them," he shouted, jumping up. "Are you using
oxylatohydrobenzoic-pheophenophino?"

"Something like that."

"Three pills last thing at night?"

"Yes."

"Ever have foreign bodies materialize into your time-space?"

"Several breakfasts," I said. "The last egg was yesterday, on my shoe."

"It was Virginia ham with me, so I stopped dieting and increased the
dosage."

"So did I," I said. "I suppose, apart from major points where a whole
probability branches off, we lead much the same lives. But eggs don't
dream. How did the ham get into your waking world?"

"Harry, really! I have a tendency to jump to conclusions, which you
must control. How do you know eggs don't dream? I would have thought,
though, that a pig was peculiarly liable to the nightmare that it will
end up as a rasher--any reasonably observant pig, that is. But I don't
think that is necessary. Obviously, we are dipping down to a stratum
where things coexist in fact, and not merely one in fact and the other
in mind, or one probability and not its twin alternative. Now, how do I
get hold of the me that solved this hyperspace relapse business?"

"And I the ultra-uranium octave relationship," I added.

"Look out," he said. "I'm waking up. Good-by, Harry. Look after
myself...."

He flickered, paused in recovery and then faded insubstantially away. I
looked around my empty bedroom. Then, because it was time to go to work
at the laboratory, I shaved, dressed and left my apartment, as usual.

       *       *       *       *       *

Some high brass and politicians had been visiting the laboratory,
showing off to their females how they were important enough to visit
the top-secret bomb proving labs, and the thick perfume was hanging in
the sealed rooms like a damp curtain.

"I wish they wouldn't bring women into the unventilated labs," I
grumbled to my assistant.

"Never mind, Chief. If you can make this bomb work, they'll let you
build your own lab in the Nevada desert, with no roads to it. Have you
found the solution?"

"I'll tell you when I have," I said. "But I do have a new approach to
the problem."

And as soon as I could, I left the labs and went back to my apartment
downtown, took three pills and lay still, waiting for sleep. I could
not get the smell of that perfume in the lab out of my nose. It was a
heavy gardenia-plus-whatnot odor. I woke up in the middle of the night
with the perfume still clinging to the air. The room was dark and I
crossed my fingers as I leaned over to turn on the bedside lamp. If
mental concentration on all the possible errors in my work was the key,
the successful me should be here in the room, snatched from his own
segment of probability.

I turned on the light. There was no one else in the room.

"Hell," I said.

Perhaps it just meant he, or that me, was not asleep, or was perversely
not using tranquilizers. Or didn't that matter? No, I controlled this
alone and had gone wrong.

"Did you say something, Harry?" asked Kate, stepping out of the
bathroom and pulling the top of her nightgown into, I guess, place.
"Ooo, fancy dreaming about you. This is odd."

I sat up and covered myself protectively in the bedsheets.

"Look, Kate," I said. "I don't want to see you. I'm not your husband,
really. He's a pleasant fellow, I met him today, and he's not me. I
never became a doctor. No doubt you remember what I was doing instead
of studying."

That was a mistake, for she came and sat on the edge of the bed and ran
her fingers into my hair.

"I thought it was odd I should dream about my husband," she said. "I'll
believe you, because I don't know how I got here and you do look like
the Harry I used to know, before he went all high scientific surgeon
and no time for fun."

She curved more fully than she had when she was eighteen, but there was
neat symmetry to her sine formulae, and she still had blonde hair. Her
perfume was the same as the one in the lab I had been smelling all day,
it was now reaching me at high amperage.

So that was the key, the evocative power of smell association. I
sniffed deeply at the perfume in appreciation.

"Like it?" Kate asked, wriggling.

"Only for its scientific values," I said. "It suggests a most valuable
line of research."

"I'm in favor," she said, and pressed me to the bed.

"Your husband is coming!" I shouted, and it worked. She disappeared.
Presumably she woke up in her own probability time-space. And no doubt
Kate's reflexes by now were trained to snap her awake and away at the
suggestion that her husband was around. It was highly improbable that
Kate would alter much.

I got up to make myself some coffee. There was no point in wasting
sleep without a plan. Clearly, I had to take the pills and fix the
appropriate smell in my mind, and when I woke up I would drag the
proper slice of another probability with me. And then I would interview
the me who had solved the ultra-uranium heavy element equation. And the
bomb to end all bombs would be perfected. The test was ready, waiting
for me to say, "Let's go, boys. We know what will happen this time."

But there was, it struck me, the difficulty of finding the right scent
to evoke the right probable me.

       *       *       *       *       *

I collected all the toothpaste, deodorant, shaving stick, aftershave
lotion I could find in the bathroom and started on the toothpaste. I
inhaled deeply and lay down, with the first tube on my chest. But after
the coffee, I slept very briefly, and when I looked up there was only a
toothbrush on the carpet. It was not mine in this world and I had no
idea whose it was, or rather which probable me it belonged to.

But at least this established the principle. The smell produced the
object--and, if I went deep enough in sleep, it would produce the whole
Jones.

I dressed quickly and went out for a walk in the night air, breathing
deeply and memorizing every scent I came across. Then I went back to
the apartment, sniffed hard at the row of personal unguents, and lay
down to sleep.

When I woke up, it was morning and the room was full of people.

There were about a dozen of me, some wearing very odd clothes, some
scowling, others grinning unbecomingly, and some looking just plain
stupid.

"Gentlemen," I said, standing up on my bed, "I am sorry to disturb your
dreams but a matter of vital consequence has made me call you all here.
I am Harry, or Harold K. Jones, and I became a physicist. I need your
help. Do any of you know anything about the octaves of elements beyond
uranium?"

There was a babble, through which I heard chiefly:

"The man's mad.... He says he's me.... Who are you, anyway?... No,
you're not. _I'm_ Jones...."

"Please, gentlemen," I said. "I don't expect we have much time
before some of you wake up in your own probability. You, sir, in the
armchair--yes, you in the tight pants--how about you?"

"Me?" he said. "I'm Captain Jones. Third Vector Spacefleet. Engineer
rank. Who the galactic hellix are you, eh?"

Even from the bed, I could detect the smell of sweat and grease from
his working uniform.

"I suppose you took up flight engineering at high school?" I suggested.

"Quite right," he snapped.

An early deviation, obviously. I remembered being enthralled with the
arrival when I was a kid of the early space rockets, but my enthusiasm
was daunted by old Birchall, who made us stick to airplanes. Obviously,
his was not.

"How about you?" I asked, pointing to the thinnest me in the room.

"Penal colony on Arcetus," he said. "Eternal labor."

"Oh, I'm sorry. I wonder which time--well, how many physicists are
there here, or physical chemists, or astronomers, or even general
scientists?"

I walked around the room, detecting toothpaste brands A, B, C and
Whitebrighter, and a range of toilet preparations with manly odors
contributing to our popularity with friends, relatives, girls and
bosses, but no other physicist. Not a trace of research in my line. And
one or two of them were already showing signs of waking up elsewhere
and disappearing from the room.

I was about to start tracing it back to the point when I abandoned a
medical career, and I could still smell the formaldehyde, when Dr.
Harold K. Jones appeared.

"Look," he said, "I want you to keep away from Kate. Perhaps I didn't
make that clear yesterday.... Good heavens, where did you get all of
these me from? Does anyone here know anything about post-operative
hyperspace relapse?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Disgustedly, I saw that more than half of them did. Perhaps I should
have been a doctor, after all. The probabilities were heavily
represented in medicine. I sat on the bed and stared at my toes while
the doctors babbled excitedly together. I gathered that Dr. Harold K.
Jones had solved his problem, anyway.

"Excuse me," said a thoughtful me in a very quiet voice. "I didn't want
to make myself obtrusive, but I did do a certain amount of research
on the theoretical possibilities of elements heavier than uranium. It
seemed to me they might go on being discovered almost indefinitely."

"They are," I said quickly, "octave after octave of them. Tell me about
it, please."

"Look," he said, "it was only an idea. I really specialized in
biochemistry, but we do use trace elements, and the formula I worked
out at the time was--let me see...."

"Please try to remember," I said.

"Ah, yes, it was this," he said, and the strain of remembering woke him
up and he disappeared back to his own probability.

"This was damned well planned, Harry!" said Dr. Harold K. Jones
enthusiastically. "I think we can save hundreds of people every year
now. I always knew I had it in me."

"Listen, Jones," said Captain Jones of the Third Vector Spacefleet,
pushing himself through the crowd. "I've been talking to one or two of
the others, see, and if you have the galactic gall to disturb my sleep
again, I'm going to blast you. Is that clear?"

"Perfectly," I said.

"It's tricky out in space, you know. No hard feelings, but the fraction
of a micro-error and _poof_! You see what I mean. I must get a sound
sleep at stand-down."

"Don't forget what I said about Kate," Dr. Harold K. Jones remembered
to warn me. "I know how to do it, too. And you can have an accident
with my instruments--easily."

He disappeared. I watched as the others woke up and went, one by one,
even the felon from Arcetus, until they were all gone and I was alone
with dark thoughts on heavy elements. It was so improbable that I was
the only me who had worked on these lines, and very probable that if
two of us with similar minds did work on the same problem, we could
between us find the answer. Look at Dr. Jones and his hyperspace
relapse.

Thinking of Dr. Jones made me think of Kate, and I fell asleep again
with the memory of her scent in my head, as if I were really smelling
it. When I woke up again, halfway through the morning, there she was in
my room. She was at least dressed this time, but she smiled familiarly
at me.

"For God's sake, Kate," I said, "go back to your husband!"

       *       *       *       *       *

She began to cry. "Oh, Haroldkin," she said. "I'm so glad to see you. I
must be dreaming, because I know you're dead, but I've kept everything
just the way it was. Look--I haven't even touched your messy desk."

"Are you sitting in a room?" I asked.

"I'm in your study, Haroldkin," she said, surprised. "Can't you see?"

"No, as a matter of fact, I can't."

"Oh! Then I can throw out all these old papers?"

"What old papers?"

"Oh, I don't know, Haroldkin," Kate said. "You made such a fuss about
failing that silly medical exam that you never let me touch your desk
when you graduated in physics."

"Physics!"

"Yes," said Kate, throwing paper after paper onto the carpet. She made
sweeping motions in the air and dumped a mass of notes into her lap.
They appeared on her fingertips, but they stayed in existence when she
dropped them on the carpet.

"How did I die?" I asked, bending down and thumbing rapidly over the
papers.

"A bomb went off," she said. "I really don't want to talk about it. But
you were so _eminent_, Haroldkin!"

I must have been very soft in the discrimination to have allowed that
revolting nickname, I thought, but it was clear from the papers I was
holding that I knew my physics. And there it was, printed in an issue
of the _Commission's Journal_ that never existed in my time-space, the
whole equation I was looking for. It was so obvious when I read it that
I could not understand how I failed to think of it for myself--for my
own myself, that is.

When I looked up, this probable Kate had gone. I wanted to thank her,
but the evening would do. Meanwhile, here was the ultra-uranium fourth
octave equation.

I called the laboratory, read it off to my assistant, and told him to
get on with the test.

"Right, Chief. I'll go down myself and give you a report when I get
back."

I said fine and took the rest of the day off. It was the peak of my
career so far, and from the widow Kate's comments, it seemed as if
I had a great probable career to come. Of course, I would have to
redouble our safety precautions at the labs and it would be best if I
never went near the proving grounds. That other physicist me probably
made some error that I would avoid, being forewarned.

By evening, I decided to try to locate that probable Kate again, to
thank her, and to find out exactly how that poor me blew himself up
with a bomb. With care, I recalled the perfume and also the musty smell
of the papers, for I did not want Dr. Harold K. Jones' Kate appearing.
Then I removed all other odoriferous substances from the bedroom, took
three pills and was about to lie down to sleep when my assistant
called to report on the test.

"That you, Chief? What a success! We're made. Your name's in lights,
Chief! It was the most colossal explosion I've ever seen. It burned the
area like toast. It even smelled like toast, with a touch of ozone and
sulphur. Very strong smell...."

"Stop!" I screamed. "Stop!"

But it was too late. I could smell it clearly as he had described it.
And now the pills are working. How in the name of heaven am I going to
stay awake? Because once I fall asleep....





End of Project Gutenberg's Scent Makes a Difference, by James Stamers

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SCENT MAKES A DIFFERENCE ***

***** This file should be named 51773.txt or 51773.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/1/7/7/51773/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
