The Project Gutenberg EBook of The King of the City, by Keith Laumer

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: The King of the City

Author: Keith Laumer

Release Date: April 17, 2016 [EBook #51781]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE KING OF THE CITY ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                         THE KING OF THE CITY

                            By KEITH LAUMER

                         Illustrated by FINLAY

           [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from
                     Galaxy Magazine August 1961.
         Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
         the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]




               He was a sort of taxi-driver, delivering
              a commuter to the city. The tank traps and
              armored cars were the hazards of the trade!


I stood in the shadows and looked across at the rundown lot with
the windblown trash packed against the wire mesh barrier fence and
the yellow glare panel that said HAUG ESCORT. There was a row of
city-scarred hacks parked on the cracked ramp. They hadn't suffered
the indignity of a wash-job for a long time. And the two-story frame
building behind them--that had once been somebody's country house--now
showed no paint except the foot-high yellow letters over the office
door.

Inside the office a short broad man with small eyes and yesterday's
beard gnawed a cigar and looked at me.

"Portal-to-portal escort cost you two thousand C's," he said.
"Guaranteed."

"Guaranteed how?" I asked.

He waved the cigar. "Guaranteed you get into the city and back out
again in one piece." He studied his cigar. "If somebody don't plug you
first," he added.

"How about a one-way trip?"

"My boy got to come back out, ain't he?"

I had spent my last brass ten-dollar piece on a cup of coffee eight
hours before, but I had to get into the city. This was the only idea I
had left.

"You've got me wrong," I said. "I'm not a customer. I want a job."

"Yeah?" He looked at me again, with a different expression, like a guy
whose new-found girl friend has just mentioned a price.

"You know Gra'nyauk?"

"Sure," I said. "I grew up here."

He asked me a few more questions, then thumbed a button centered in a
ring of grime on the wall behind him. A chair scraped beyond the door;
it opened and a tall bony fellow with thick wrists and an adams apple
set among heavy neck tendons came in.

The man behind the desk pointed at me with his chin.

"Throw him out, Lefty."

Lefty gave me a resentful look, came around the desk and reached for my
collar. I leaned to the right and threw a hard left jab to the chin. He
rocked back and sat down.

"I get the idea," I said. "I can make it out under my own power." I
turned to the door.

"Stick around, mister. Lefty's just kind of a like a test for
separating the men from the boys."

"You mean I'm hired?"

He sighed. "You come at a good time. I'm short of good boys."

I helped Lefty up, then dusted off a chair and listened to a half-hour
briefing on conditions in the city. They weren't good. Then I went
upstairs to the chart room to wait for a call.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was almost ten o'clock when Lefty came into the room where I was
looking over the maps of the city. He jerked his head.

"Hey, you."

A weasel-faced man who had been blowing smoke in my face slid off his
stool, dropped his cigarette and smeared it under his shoe.

"You," Lefty said. "The new guy."

I belted my coat and followed him down the dark stairway, and out
across the littered tarmac, glistening wet under the polyarcs, to where
Haug stood talking to another man I hadn't seen before.

Haug flicked a beady glance my way, then turned to the stranger. He
was a short man of about fifty with a mild expressionless face and
expensive clothes.

"Mr. Stenn, this is Smith. He's your escort. You do like he tells you
and he'll get you into the city and see your party and back out again
in one piece."

The customer looked at me. "Considering the fee I'm paying, I sincerely
hope so," he murmured.

"Smith, you and Mr. Stenn take number 16 here." Haug patted a
hinge-sprung hood, painted a bilious yellow and scabbed with license
medallions issued by half a dozen competing city governments.

Haug must have noticed something in Stenn's expression.

"It ain't a fancy-looking hack, but she's got full armor, heavy-duty
gyros, crash-shocks, two-way music and panic gear. I ain't got a better
hack in the place."

Stenn nodded, popped the hatch and got in. I climbed in the front and
adjusted the seat and controls to give me a little room. When I kicked
over the turbos they sounded good.

"Better tie in, Mr. Stenn," I said. "We'll take the Canada turnpike in.
You can brief me on the way."

I wheeled 16 around and out under the glare-sign that read "HAUG
ESCORT." In the eastbound linkway I boosted her up to 90. From the way
the old bus stepped off, she had at least a megahorse under the hood.
Maybe Haug wasn't lying, I thought. I pressed an elbow against the
power pistol strapped to my side.

I liked the feel of it there. Maybe between it and old 16 I could get
there and back after all.

       *       *       *       *       *

"My destination," Stenn said, "is the Manhattan section."

That suited me perfectly. In fact, it was the first luck I'd had since
I burned the uniform. I looked in the rear viewer at Stenn's face.
He still wore no expression. He seemed like a mild little man to be
wanting into the cage with the tigers.

"That's pretty rough territory, Mr. Stenn," I said. He didn't answer.

"Not many tourists go there," I went on. I wanted to pry a little
information from him.

"I'm a businessman," Stenn said.

I let it go at that. Maybe he knew what he was doing. For me, there was
no choice. I had one slim lead, and I had to play it out to the end. I
swung through the banked curves of the intermix and onto the turnpike
and opened up to full throttle.

It was fifteen minutes before I saw the warning red lights ahead. Haug
had told me about this. I slowed.

"Here's our first roadblock, Mr. Stenn," I said. "This is an operator
named Joe Naples. All he's after is his toll. I'll handle him; you sit
tight in the hack. Don't say anything, don't do anything, no matter
what happens. Understand?"

"I understand," Stenn said mildly.

I pulled up. My lights splashed on the spikes of a Mark IX tank trap. I
set the parking jacks and got out.

"Remember what I told you," I said. "No matter what." I walked up into
the beam of the lights.

A voice spoke from off to the side.

"Douse 'em, Rube."

I went back and cut the lights. Three men sauntered out onto the
highway.

"Keep the hands away from the sides, Rube."

One of the men was a head taller than the others. I couldn't see his
face in the faint red light from the beacon, but I knew who he was.

"Hello, Naples," I said.

He came up to me. "You know me, Rube?"

"Sure," I said. "The first thing Haug told me was pay my respects to
Mr. Naples."

Naples laughed. "You hear that, boys? They know me pretty good on the
outside, ha?"

       *       *       *       *       *

He looked at me, not laughing any more. "I don't see you before."

"My first trip."

He jerked a thumb at the hack. "Who's your trick?"

"A businessman. Name is Stenn."

"Yeah? What kind business?"

I shook my head. "We don't quiz the cash customers, Joe."

"Let's take a look." Naples moved off toward the hack, the boys at
his side. I followed. Naples looked in at Stenn. Stenn sat relaxed
and looked straight ahead. Naples turned away, nodded to one of his
helpers. The two moved off a few yards.

The other man, a short bullet-headed thug in a grease-spatted overcoat,
stood by the hack, staring in at Stenn. He took a heavy old-style
automatic from his coat pocket, pulled open the door. He aimed the gun
at Stenn's head and carefully squeezed the trigger.

The hammer clicked emptily.

"Ping," he said. He thrust the gun back in his pocket, kicked the door
shut and went over to join Naples.

"Okay, Rube," Naples called.

I went over to him.

"I guess maybe you on the level," he said. "Standard fee. Five hundred,
Old Federal notes."

I had to be careful now. I held a bland expression, reached
in--slowly--took out my wallet. I extracted two hundred-C notes and
held them out.

Naples looked at them, unmoving. The thug in the dirty overcoat moved
up close, and suddenly swung the edge of his palm at my wrist. I was
ready; I flicked my hand aside and chopped him hard at the base of the
neck. He dropped.

I was still holding out the money.

"That clown isn't worthy of a place in the Naples organization," I said.

Naples looked down at the man, stirred him with his foot.

"A clown," he said. He took the money and tucked it in his shirt pocket.

"Okay, Rube," he said. "My regards to Haug."

I got in the hack and moved up to the barrier. It started up, trundled
aside. Naples was bending over the man I had downed. He took the pistol
from the pocket of the overcoat, jacked the action and aimed. There was
a sharp crack. The overcoat flopped once. Naples smiled over at me.

"He ain't worthy a place in the Naples organization," he said.

I waved a hand vaguely and gunned off down the road.


II

The speaker in my ear hummed.

I grunted an acknowledgement and a blurred voice said, "Smith, listen.
When you cross the South Radial, pick up the Midwest Feed-off. Take it
easy and watch for Number Nine Station. Pull off there. Got it?"

I recognized the voice. It was Lefty, Haug's Number One boy. I didn't
answer.

"What was the call?" Stenn asked.

"I don't know," I said. "Nothing."

The lights of the South Radial Intermix were in sight ahead now.

I slowed to a hundred and thought about it. My personal motives told
me to keep going, my job as a paid Escort was to get my man where he
wanted to go. That was tough enough, without detours. I eased back up
to one-fifty, took the Intermix with gyros screaming, and curved out
onto the thruway.

The speaker hummed. "What are you trying to pull, wise guy?" He sounded
mad. "That was the South Radial you just passed up--"

"Yeah," I said. "That's right. Smitty takes 'em there and he brings 'em
back. Don't call us, we'll call you."

There was a long hum from the speaker. "Oh, a wiseacre," it said
finally. "Listen, rookie, you got a lot to learn. This guy is
bankrolled. I seen the wad when he paid Haug off. So all right, we cut
you in. Now, get this...."

He gave me detailed instructions. When he was finished, I said, "Don't
wait up for me."

I took the speaker out of my ear and dropped it into the disposal slot.
We drove along quietly for quite a while.

I was beginning to recognize my surroundings. This section of the
turnpike had been opened the year before I left home. Except for the
lack of traffic and the dark windows along the way it hadn't changed.

I was wondering just what Lefty's next move would be when a pair of
powerful beams came on from the left, then pulled onto the highway,
speeding up to pace me. I rocketed past before he had made full speed.
I heard a loud spang, and glass chips scattered on my shoulder. I
twisted and looked. A starred hole showed in the bubble, above the rear
seat.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Duck!" I yelled. Stenn leaned over, put his head down.

The beams were gaining on me. I twisted the rear viewer, hit the I/R
switch. A three-ton combat car, stripped, but still mounting twin
infinite repeaters. Against that, old 16 was a kiddie car. I held my
speed and tried to generate an idea. What I came up with wasn't good,
but it was all I had.

A half a mile ahead there should be a level-split, one of those awkward
ones that caused more than one pile-up in the first few months the
turnpike was open. Maybe my playmates didn't know about it.

They were about to overtake me now. I slowed just a little, and started
fading to the right. They followed me, crowding my rear wheel. I heard
the spang again, twice, but nothing hit me. I was on the paved shoulder
now, and could barely see the faded yellow cross-hatching that warned
of the abutment that divided the pavement ahead.

I held the hack in the yellow until the last instant, then veered right
and cleared the concrete barrier by a foot, hit the down-curve at a
hundred and eighty in a howl of gyros and brakes--and the thunderous
impact of the combat car.

Then I was off the pavement, fighting the wheel, slamming through
underbrush, then miraculously back on the hard surface and coasting to
a stop in the clear.

I took a deep breath and looked back. The burning remains of the car
were scattered for a quarter of a mile along the turnpike. That would
have been me if I had gauged it wrong.

I looked at the canopy of the hack. Three holes, not a foot apart,
right where a passenger's head would be if he were sitting upright.
Stenn was unconcernedly brushing glass dust from his jacket.

"Very neat, Mr. Smith," he said. "Now shall we resume our journey?"

"Maybe it's time you leveled with me, Stenn," I said.

He raised his eyebrows at me slightly.

"When Joe Naples' boy Friday pointed the gun at your head you didn't
bat an eyelash," I said.

"I believe those were your instructions," Stenn said mildly.

"Pretty good for a simple businessman. I don't see you showing any
signs of the shakes now, either, after what some might call a harrowing
experience."

"I have every confidence in your handling--"

"Nuts, Stenn. Those three holes are pretty well grouped, wouldn't you
say? The man that put them there was hitting where he was aiming. And
he was aiming for you."

"Why me?" Stenn looked almost amused.

"I thought it was a little shakedown crew, out to teach me a lesson," I
said. "Until I saw where the shots were going."

Stenn looked at me thoughtfully. He reached up and took a micro-speaker
from his ear.

"The twin to the one you rashly disposed of," he said. "Mr. Haug was
kind enough to supply it--for a fee. I must tell you that I had a gun
in my hand as we approached the South Radial Intermix. Had you accepted
the invitation to turn off, I would have halted the car, shot you and
gone on alone. Happily, you chose to resist the temptation, for reasons
of your own...." He looked at me inquiringly.

"Maybe I'm sap enough to take the job seriously," I said.

"That may possibly be true," Stenn said.

"What's your real errand here, Stenn? Frankly, I don't have time to get
involved."

"Really? One wonders if you have irons in the fire, Smith. But never
mind. I shan't pry. Are we going on?"

I gave him my stern penetrating look.

"Yeah," I said. "We're going on."

       *       *       *       *       *

In twenty minutes, we were on the Inner Concourse and the polyarcs were
close together, lighting the empty sweep of banked pavement. The lights
of the city sparkled across the sky ahead, and gave me a ghostly touch
of the old thrill of coming home.

I doused that feeling fast. After eight years there was nothing left
there for me to come home to. The city had a lethal welcome for
intruders; it wouldn't be smart to forget that.

I didn't see the T-Bird until his spot hit my eyes and he was beside
me, crowding.

I veered and hit the brakes, with a half-baked idea of dropping back
and cutting behind him, but he stayed with me. I had a fast impression
of squealing metal and rubber, and then I was skidding to a stop up
against the deflector rails with the T-Bird slanted across my prow. Its
lid popped almost before the screech died away, and I was looking down
the muzzles of two power pistols. I kept both hands on the wheel, where
they could see them, and sat tight.

I wondered whose friends we had met this time.

Two men climbed out, the pistols in sight, and came up to the hack.
The first one was a heavy-set Slavic type zipped into a tight G. I.
weather suit. He motioned. I opened up and got out, not making any
sudden movements. Stenn followed. A cold wind was whipping along
the concourse, blowing a fine misty rain hard against my cheek. The
polyarcs cast black shadows on gray faces.

The smaller man moved over to Stenn and crowded him back against the
hack. The Slav motioned again, and I moved over by the T-Bird. He
fished my wallet out and put it in his pocket without looking at it.
I heard the other man say something to Stenn, and then the sound of a
blow. I turned my head slowly, so as not to excite my watchdog. Stenn
was picking himself up. He started going through his pockets, showing
everything to the man with the gun, then dropping it on the ground. The
wind blew cards and papers along until they soaked up enough water to
stick. Stenn carried a lot of paper.

       *       *       *       *       *

The gunny said something and Stenn started pulling off his coat. He
turned it inside out, and held it out. The gunny shook his head, and
motioned to my Slav. He looked at me, and I tried to read his mind.
I moved across toward the hack. I must have guessed right because
he didn't shoot me. The Slav pocketed his gun and took the coat.
Methodically, he tore the lining out, found nothing, dropped the ripped
garment and kicked it aside. I shifted position, and the Slav turned
and backhanded me up against the hack.

"Lay off him, Heavy," the other hood said. "Maxy didn't say nothing
about this mug. He's just a Escort."

Heavy started to get his gun out again. I had an idea he was thinking
about using it. Maybe that's why I did what I did. As his hand dipped
into his pocket, I lunged, wrapped an arm around him and yanked out my
own artillery. I held onto a handful of the weather suit and dug the
pistol in hard. He stood frozen. Heavy wasn't as dumb as he looked.

His partner had backed a step, the pistol in his hand covering all of
us.

"Drop it, Slim," I said. "No hard feelings, and we'll be on our way."

Stenn stood absolutely motionless. He was still wearing his mild
expression.

"Not a chance, mug," the gunny said softly. No one moved.

"Even if you're ready to gun your way through your pal, I can't miss.
Better settle for a draw."

"Maxy don't like draws, mister."

"Stenn," I said. "Get in the T-Bird. Head back the way we came, and
don't slow down to read any billboards."

Stenn didn't move.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Get going," I said. "Slim won't shoot."

"I employed you," Stenn said, "to take care of the heroics."

"If you've got any better ideas it's time to speak up, Stenn. This is
your only out, the way I see it."

Stenn looked at the man with the gun.

"You referred to someone named 'Maxy.' Would that by any chance be Mr.
Max Arena?"

Slim looked at him and thought about it.

"Could be," he said.

Stenn came slowly over to the Slav. Standing well out of the line of
fire, he carefully put a hand in the loose pocket of the weather suit
and brought out the pistol. I saw Slim's eyes tighten. He was having to
make some tough decisions in a hurry.

Stenn moved offside, pistol in hand.

"Move away from him, Smith," he said.

I didn't know what he had in mind, but it didn't seem like the time to
argue. I moved back.

"Drop your gun," he said.

I risked a glance at his mild expression.

"Are you nuts?"

"I came here to see Mr. Arena," he said. "This seems an excellent
opportunity."

"Does it? I--"

"Drop it now, Smith. I won't warn you again."

I dropped it.

Slim swiveled on Stenn. He was still in an awkward spot.

"I want you to take me to Mr. Arena," Stenn said. "I have a proposition
to put before him." He lowered the gun and handed it to Heavy.

It seemed like a long time until Slim lowered his gun.

"Heavy, put him in the back seat." He motioned me ahead, watched me as
he climbed in the T-Bird.

"Nice friends you got, mug," he said. The T-Bird started up, backed,
and roared off toward the city. I stood under the polyarcs and watched
the tail glare out of sight.

Max Arena was the man I had come to the city to find.


III

Old number 16 was canted against the deflector rail, one side shredded
into curled strips of crumpled metal. I looked closer. Under the flimsy
fairings, gray armor showed. Maybe there was more to Haug's best hack
than met the eye. I climbed in and kicked over the starter. The turbos
sounded as good as ever. I eased the gyros in; she backed off the rail
with a screech of ripped metal.

I had lost my customer, but I still had wheels.

The smart thing to do now would be to head back out the turnpike to
Haug's lot, turn in my badge and keep moving, south. I could give up
while I was still alive. All I had to do was accept the situation.

I had a wide choice. I could sign on with the New Confeds, or the Free
Texans, or any one of the other splinter republics trying to set up
shop in the power vacuum. I might try to get in to one of the Enclaves
and convince its Baron he needed another trained bodyguard. Or I could
take a post with one of the king-pins in the city.

As a last resort I could go back and find a spot in the Naples
organization. I happened to know they had a vacancy.

I was just running through mental exercises to hear myself think.
I couldn't settle for the kind of world I had found when I touched
planet three months back, after eight years in deep space with Hayle's
squadron. When the Interim Administration shot him for treason, I
burned my uniform and disappeared. My years in the Service had given me
a tough hide and a knack for staying alive; my worldly assets consisted
of the clothes I stood in, my service pistol and a few souvenirs of my
travels. For two months I had been scraping along on the cash I had
in my pocket, buying drinks for drifters in cheap bars, looking for a
hint, any lead at all, that would give me a chance to do what had to be
done. Max Arena was the lead. Maybe a dud lead--but I had to find out.

The city lights loomed just a few miles away. I was wasting time
sitting here; I steered the hack out into the highway and headed for
them.

       *       *       *       *       *

Apparently Lefty's influence didn't extend far beyond the South Radial.
The two roadblocks I passed in the next five miles took my money,
accepted my story that I was on my way to pick up a fare, said to say
hello to Haug and passed me on my way.

Haug's sour yellow color scheme seemed to carry some weight with the
town Organizations, too. I was well into the city, cruising along
the third level Crossover, before I had any trouble. I was doing
about fifty, watching where I was going and looking for the Manhattan
Intermix, when a battered Gyrob four-seater trundled out across the
fairway and stopped. I swerved and jumped lanes; the Gyrob backed,
blocking me. I kicked my safety frame down and floor-boarded the hack,
steering straight for him. At the last instant he tried to pull out of
the way.

He was too late.

I clipped him across his aft quarter, and caught a glimpse of the
underside of the car as it stood on its nose, slammed through the
deflector and over the side. Old 16 bucked and I got a good crack
across the jaw from the ill-fitting frame, and then I was screeching
through the Intermix and out onto the Manhattan Third level.

Up ahead, the glare panels at the top of the Blue Tower reared up
half a mile into the wet night sky. It wasn't a hard address to find.
Getting inside would be another matter.

I pulled up a hundred yards from the dark cave they used to call
the limousine entrance and looked the situation over. The level was
deserted--like the whole city seemed, from the street. But there were
lights in the windows, level after level of them stretching up and away
as far as you could see. There were plenty of people in the city--about
ten million, even after the riots and the Food Scare and the collapse
of legal government. The automated city supply system had gone on
working, and the Kingpins, the big time criminals, had stepped in and
set things up to suit their tastes. Life went on--but not out in the
open. Not after dark.

I knew almost nothing about Arena. Judging from his employees, he
was Kingpin of a prosperous outfit. The T-Bird was an expensive
late model, and the two thugs handled themselves like high-priced
talent. I couldn't expect to walk into his HQ without jumping a few
hurdles. Maybe I should have invited myself along with Stenn and his
new friends. On the other hand, there were advantages to arriving
unannounced.

It was a temptation to drive in, with the hack's armor between me and
any little surprises that might be waiting, but I liked the idea of
staging a surprise of my own. I eased into drive and moved along to a
parking ramp, swung around and down and stopped in the shadow of the
retaining wall.

I set the brake and took a good look around. There was nothing in
sight. Arena might have a power cannon trained on me from his bedroom
window, for all I knew, but I had to get a toe into the water sometime.
I shut down the turbo, and in the silence popped the lid and stepped
out. The rain had stopped, and the moon showed as a bright spot on the
high mist. I felt hungry and a little bit unreal, as though this were
happening to somebody else.

       *       *       *       *       *

I moved over to the side of the parking slab, clambered over the
deflector rail and studied the shadows under the third level roadway.
I could barely make out the catwalks and service ways. I was wondering
whether to pull off my hard-soled shoes for the climb when I heard
footsteps, close. I gauged the distance to the hack, and saw I
couldn't make it. I got back over the rail and waited.

He came into sight, rangy, shock-haired and preternaturally thin in
tight traditional dress.

When he got close I saw that he was young, in his early twenties at
most. He would be carrying a knife.

"Hey, Mister," he whined. "Got a cigarette?"

"Sure, young fellow," I said, sounding a little nervous. I threw in a
shaky laugh to help build the picture. I took a cigarette from a pack,
put the pack back in my pocket, held the weed out. He strutted up to
me, reached out and flipped the cigarette from my fingers. I edged back
and used the laugh again.

"Hey, he liked that," the punk whined. "He thinks that's funny. He got
a sense of humor."

"Heh, heh," I said. "Just out getting a little air."

"Gimme another cigarette, funny man."

I took the pack out, watching. I got out a cigarette and held it
gingerly, arm bent. As he reached for it, I drew back. He snatched for
it. That put him in position.

I dropped the pack, clenched my two hands together, ducked down and
brought them up hard under his chin. He backflipped, rolled over and
started crawling.

I let him go.

I went over the rail without stopping to think it over and crossed the
girder to the catwalk that ran under the boulevard above. I groped my
way along to where the service way branched off for the Blue Tower,
then stopped and looked up. A strip of luminous sky showed between the
third level and the facade of the building. Anybody watching from the
right spot would see me cross, walking on the narrow footway. It was a
chance I'd have to take. I started to move out, and heard running feet.
I froze.

The feet slid to a stop on the level above, a few yards away.

"What's up, Crackers?" somebody growled.

"The mark sapped me down."

       *       *       *       *       *

That was interesting. I had been spotted and the punk had been sent to
welcome me. Now I knew where I stood. The opposition had made their
first mistake.

"He was starting to cross under when I spot him," Crackers went on,
breathing heavily. "He saps me and I see I can't handle him and I go
for help."

Someone answered in a guttural whisper. Crackers lowered his voice. It
wouldn't take long now for reinforcements to arrive and flush me out.
I edged farther and chanced a look. I saw two heads outlined above.
They didn't seem to be looking my way, so I started across, walking
silently toward a narrow loading platform with a wide door opening from
it.

Below me, a lone light reflected from the wet pavement of the second
level, fifty feet down; the blank wall of the Blue Tower dropped past
it sheer to the glistening gutters at ground level. Then I was on the
platform and trying the door.

It didn't open.

It was what I should have expected. Standing in the full light from the
glare panel above the entry, I felt as exposed as a fan-dancer's navel.
There was no time to consider alternatives. I grabbed my power pistol,
flipped it to beam fire and stood aside with an arm across my face. I
gave the latch a blast, then kicked the door hard. It was solid as a
rock. Behind and above me, I heard Crackers yell.

I beamed the lock again, tiny droplets of molten metal spattering like
needles against my face and hand. The door held.

"Drop it and lift 'em, mug," a deep voice yelled. I twisted to look up
at the silhouettes against the deflector rail. I recognized the Slavic
face of the man called Heavy. So he could talk after all.

"You're under my iron, mug," he called. "Freeze or I'll burn you."

I believed him, but I had set something in motion that couldn't stop
now. There was nothing to go back to; the only direction for me was on
the way I was headed--deeper into trouble. I was tired of being the
mouse in a cat's game. I had taken the initiative and I was keeping it.

I turned, set the power pistol at full aperture, and poured it to the
armored door. Searing heat reflected from the barrier, smoke boiled,
metal melted and ran. Through the stink of burning steel, I smelled
scorched hair--and felt heat rake the back of my neck and hands. Heavy
was beaming me at wide aperture, but the range was just too far for a
fast kill. The door sagged and fell in. I jumped through the glowing
opening, hit the floor and rolled to damp out my smouldering coat.

       *       *       *       *       *

I got to my feet. There was no time now to stop and feel the pain of
my burns. They would expect me to go up--so I would go down. The Blue
Tower covered four city blocks and was four hundred stories high. There
was plenty of room in it for a man to lose himself.

I ran along the corridor, found a continuous service belt and hopped
on, lay flat, rode it through the slot. I came out into the light of
the service corridor below, my gun ready, then down and around again.
I saw no one.

It took ten minutes to cover the eighteen floors down to the
sub-basement. I rolled off the belt and looked around.

The whole space was packed with automatics; the Blue Tower was a
self-sufficient city in itself. I recognized generators, heat pumps,
air plants. None of them were operating. The city services were all
still functioning, apparently. What it would be like in another ten or
twenty years of anarchy was anybody's guess. But when the city systems
failed the Blue Tower could go on on its own.

Glare panels lit the aisles dimly. I prowled along looking for
an elevator bank. The first one I found indicated the car at the
hundred-eightieth floor. I went on, found another indicating the
twentieth. While I watched, the indicator moved, started down. I was
getting ready to duck when it stopped at the fifth. I waited; it didn't
move.

I went around to the side of the bank, found the master switch. I went
back, punched for the car. When the door whooshed open, I threw the
switch.

I had to work fast now. I stepped into the dark car, reached up and
slid open the access panel in the top, then jumped, caught the edge
and pulled myself up. The glare panels inside the shaft showed
me the pony power pack on top of the car, used by repairmen and
inspectors when the main power was off. I lit a per-match to read the
fine print on the panel. I was in luck. It was a through car to the
four-hundredth. I pushed a couple of buttons, and the car started up. I
lay flat behind the machinery.

As the car passed the third floor feet came into view; two men stood
beyond the transparent door, guns in their hands, watching the car come
up. They didn't see me. One of them thumbed the button frantically. The
car kept going.

There were men at almost every floor now. I went on up, passed the
hundredth floor, the one-fiftieth, and kept going. I began to feel
almost safe--for the moment.

       *       *       *       *       *

I was gambling now on what little I knew of the Blue Tower from the old
days when all the biggest names congregated there. The top floor was a
lavish apartment that had been occupied by a retired fleet admiral, a
Vice-President and a uranium millionaire, in turn. If I knew anything
about Kingpins, that's where Max Arena would hang his hat.

The elevator was slow. Lying there I had time to start thinking about
my burned hide. My scalp was hit worst, and then my hands; and my
shoulders were sticking to the charred coat. I had been travelling on
adrenalin since Heavy had beamed me, and now the reaction was starting
to hit.

It would have to wait; I had work to do.

Just below the three hundred and ninety-eighth floor I punched the
button and the car stopped. I stood up, feeling dizzy. I grabbed for
the rungs on the wall, hung on. The wall of the shaft seemed to
sway ... back....

Sure, I told myself. The top of the building sways fifteen feet in a
high wind. Why shouldn't I feel it? I dismissed the thought that it was
dead calm outside now, and started up the ladder.

It was a hard climb. I hung on tight, and concentrated on moving one
hand at a time. The collar of my coat rasped my raw neck. I passed up
the 398th and 9th--and rammed my head smack against a dead end. No
service entry to the penthouse. I backed down to the 399th.

I found the lever and eased the door open, then waited, gun in hand.
Nothing happened. I couldn't wait any longer. I pushed the door wide,
stepped off into the hall. Still nobody in sight, but I could hear
voices. To my left a discreet stair carpeted in violet velvet eased up
in a gentle curve. I didn't hesitate; I went up.

The door at the top was an austere slab of bleached teak. I tried the
polished brass lever; the door swung open silently, and I stepped
across the threshold and was looking across a plain of honey-colored
down at a man sitting relaxed in a soft chair of pale leather.

He waved a hand cheerfully. "Come on in," he said.


IV

Max Arena was a broad-shouldered six-footer, with clean-shaven blue
jaws, coarse gray-flecked black hair brushed back from a high forehead,
a deeper tan than was natural for the city in November, and very white
teeth. He was showing them now in a smile. He waved a hand toward a
chair, not even glancing at the gun in my hand. I admired the twinkle
of light on the polished barrel of a Norge stunner at his elbow and
decided to ignore it too.

"I been following your progress with considerable interest," Arena said
genially. "The boys had orders not to shoot. I guess Luvitch sort of
lost his head."

"It's nothing," I said, "that a little skin graft won't clear up in a
year or so."

"Don't feel bad. You're the first guy ever made it in here under his
own steam without an invitation."

"And with a gun in his hand," I said.

"We won't need guns," he said. "Not right away."

I went over to one of the big soft chairs and sat down, put the gun in
my lap.

"Why didn't you shoot as I came in?"

Arena jiggled his foot. "I like your style," he said. "You handled
Heavy real good. He's supposed to be my toughest boy."

"What about the combat car? More friends of yours?"

"Nah," he said, chuckling easily. "Some Jersey boys heard I had a
caller. They figured to knock him off on general principles. A nifty."
He stopped laughing. "The Gyrob was mine; a remoted job. Nice piece of
equipment. You cost me real dough tonight."

"Gee," I said. "That's tough."

"And besides," he said, "I know who you are."

I waited. He leaned over and picked something off the table. It was my
wallet.

"I used to be in the Navy myself. Academy man, believe it or not.
Almost, anyway. Kicked out three weeks before graduation. A frame.
Well, practically a frame; there was plenty of guys doing what I was
doing."

"That where you learned to talk like a hood?"

For a second Arena almost didn't smile.

"I am perfectly capable of expressing myself like a little gentleman,
when I feel so inclined," he said, "but I say to hell with it."

"You must have been before my time," I said.

"A year or two. And I was using a different name then. But that wasn't
my only hitch with the Service. When the Trouble started, I enlisted. I
wanted some action. When the Navy found out they had a qualified Power
Section man on their hands, I went up fast. Within fourteen months I
was a J. G. How about that?"

"Very commendable."

"So that's how I knew about the trick I. D. under the emulsion on
the snapshot. You should have ditched it, Maclamore. Or should I say
Captain Maclamore?"

       *       *       *       *       *

My mouth opened, but I couldn't think of a snappy answer to that one.
I was in trouble. I had meant to play it by ear once I reached Arena
to get the information I needed. That was out now. He knew me. He had
topped my aces before I played them.

Suddenly Arena was serious. "You came to the right man, Maclamore.
You heard I had one of your buddies here, right? I let the word leak;
I thought it might bring more of you in. I was lucky to get Admiral
Hayle's deputy."

"What do you want with me?"

Arena leaned forward. "There were eight of you. Hayle and his aide,
Wolfgang, were shot when they wouldn't spill to the Provisional
Government--or whatever that mob calls itself. Margan got himself
killed in some kind of tangle near Denver. The other four boys pulled a
fast one and ducked out with the scout you guys came back in. They were
riding dry tanks--the scout had maybe thirty ton/hours fuel aboard--so
they haven't left the planet. That leaves you stranded. With six sets
of Federal law looking for you. Right?"

"I can't argue with what's in the newspapers," I said.

"Well, I don't know. I got a couple newspapers. But here's where I
smell a deal, Maclamore. You want to know where that scout boat is.
Played right, you figure you got a good chance of a raid on an arsenal
or a power plant to pick up a few slugs of the heavy stuff; then you
high-tail out, join up with the rest of the squadron and, with the
ordnance you pack, you can sit off and dictate the next move." Arena
leaned back and took a deep breath. His eyes didn't leave me.

"Okay. I got one of you here. I found out something from him. He gave
me enough I know you boys got something up your sleeve. But he don't
have the whole picture. I need more info. You can give it to me. If I
like what I hear, I'm in a position to help--like, for example, with
the fuel problem. And you cut me in for half. Fair enough?"

"Who is it you've got?"

He shook his head. "Uh-uh."

"What did he tell you?"

"Not enough. What was Hayle holding out? You birds found something out
there. What was it?"

"We found a few artifacts on Mars," I said. "Not Martian in origin;
visitors. We surveyed--"

"Don't string me, Maclamore. I'm willing to give you a fair deal, but
if you make it tough for me--"

"How do you know I haven't got a detonator buried under my left ear," I
said. "You can't pry information out of me, Arena."

"I think you want to live, Maclamore. I think you got something you
want to live for. I want a piece of it."

"I can make a deal with you, Arena," I said. "Return me and my shipmate
to our scout boat. Fuel us up. You might throw in two qualified men to
help handle the ship--minus their black-jacks, preferably--then clear
out. We'll handle the rest. And I'll remember, with gratitude."

Arena was silent for a long moment.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Yeah, I could do that, Maclamore," he said finally. "But I won't. Max
Arena is not a guy to pick up the crumbs--or wait around for handouts.
I want in. All the way in."

"This time you'll have to settle for what you can get, Arena." I put
the gun away and stood up.

I had a feeling I would have to put it over now or not at all.

"The rest of the squadron is still out there. If we don't show, they'll
carry on alone. They're supplied for a century's operation. They don't
need us."

That was true up to a point. The squadron had everything--except fuel.

"You figure you got it made if you can get your hands on that
scout-boat," Arena said. "You figure to pick up fuel pretty easy by
knocking off say the Lackawanna Pile."

"It shouldn't be too tough; a fleet boat of the Navy packs a wallop."

Arena tapped his teeth with a slim paper-cutter.

"You're worried your outfit will wind up Max Arena's private Navy,
right? I'll tell you something. You think I'm sitting on top of the
world, huh? I own this town, and everybody in it. All the luxury and
fancy dinners and women I can use. And you know what? I'm bored."

"And you think running the Navy might be diverting?"

"Call it whatever you want to. There's something big going on out
there, and I don't plan to be left out."

"Arena, when I clear atmosphere, we'll talk. Take it or leave it."

The smile was gone now. Arena looked at me, rubbing a finger along his
blue cheek.

"Suppose I was to tell you I know where your other three boys are,
Maclamore?"

"Do you?" I said.

"And the boat," Arena said. "The works."

"If you've got them here, I want to see them, Arena. If not, don't
waste my time."

"I haven't exactly got 'em here, Maclamore. But I know a guy that knows
where they are."

"Yeah." I said.

Arena looked mad. "Okay, I'll give it to you, Maclamore. I got a
partner in this deal. Between us we got plenty. But we need what you
got, too."

"I've made my offer, Arena. It stands."

"Have I got your word on that, Maclamore?" He stood up and came over
to stand before me. "The old Academy word. You wouldn't break that,
would you Maclamore?"

"I'll do what I said."

Arena walked to his desk, a massive boulder of Jadeite, cleaved and
polished to a mirror surface. He thumbed a key.

"Send him in here," he said.

I waited. Arena sat down and looked across at me.

Thirty seconds passed and then the door opened and Stenn walked in.

       *       *       *       *       *

Stenn glanced at me. "Well," he said. "Mr. Smith."

"The Smith routine is just a gag," Arena said. "His name is--Maclamore."

For an instant, I thought I saw a flash of expression on Stenn's face.
He crossed the room and sat down.

"Well," he said. "A very rational move, your coming here. I trust you
struck a profitable bargain?" He looked hard at me, and this time there
was expression. Hate, I would call it, offhand.

"Not much of a deal at that, Stenn," Arena said. "The captain is a
tough nut to crack. He wants my help with no strings attached. I think
I'm going to buy it."

"How much information has he given you?"

Arena laughed. "Nothing," he said. "Max Arena going for a deal like
that. Funny, huh? But that's the way the fall-out fogs 'em."

"And what have you arranged?"

"I turn him loose, him and Williams. I figure you'll go along, Stenn,
and let him have the three guys you got. Williams will tell him where
the Scout boat is, so there's no percentage in your holding out."

"What else?"

"What else is there?" Arena spread his hands. "They pick up the boat,
fuel up--someplace--and they're off. And the captain here gives me the
old Academy word he cuts me in, once he's clear."

There was a long silence. Arena smiled comfortably; Stenn sat calmly,
looking at each of us in turn. I crossed my fingers and tried to look
bored.

"Very well," Stenn said. "I seem to be presented with a _fait
accompli_...."

I let a long breath out. I was going to make it....

"... But I would suggest that before committing yourself, you take the
precaution of searching Mr. Maclamore's person. One never knows."

I could feel the look on my face. So could Arena.

"So," he said. "Another nifty." He didn't seem to move, but the stunner
was in his hand. He wasn't smiling now, and the stunner caught me
easily.


V

The lights came on, and I blinked, looking around the room.

My mementos didn't look like much, resting in the center of Arena's
polished half-acre of desk top. The information was stored in the
five tiny rods, less than an inch long, and the projector was a flat
polyhedron the size of a pill-box. But the information they contained
was worth more than all the treasure sunk in all the seas.

"This is merely a small sample," Stenn said. "The star surveys are said
to be unbelievably complete. They represent a mapping task which would
require a thousand years."

"The angles," Arena said. "Just figuring the angles will take plenty
time."

"And this is what you almost let him walk out with," Stenn said.

Arena gave me a slashing look.

"Don't let your indignation run away with you, Arena," Stenn said.
"I don't think you remembered to mention the fuel situation to Mr.
Maclamore, did you?"

Arena turned to Stenn, looming over the smaller man. "Maybe you better
button your lip," he said quietly. "I don't like the way you use it."

"Afraid I'll lower you in the gentleman's esteem?" Stenn said. He
looked Arena in the eye.

"Nuts to the gentleman's esteem," Arena said.

"You thought you'd squeeze me out, Arena," Stenn said. "You didn't need
me any more. You intended to let Maclamore and Williams go and have
them followed. There was no danger of an escape, since you knew they'd
find no fuel."

He turned to me. "During your years in space, Mr. Maclamore, technology
moved on. And politics as well. Power fuels could be used to construct
bombs. Ergo, all stations were converted for short half-life
secondaries, and the primary materials stored at Fort Knox. You would
have found yourself fuelless and therefore helpless. Mr. Arena would
have arrived soon thereafter to seize the scout-boat."

"What would he want with the boat without fuel?" I asked.

"Mr. Arena was foresighted enough to stock up some years ago," Stenn
said. "I understand he has enough metal hoarded to power your entire
squadron for an indefinite time."

"Why tell this guy that?" Arena asked. "Kick him to hell out of here
and let's get busy. You gab too much."

"I see that I'm tacitly reinstated as a partner," Stenn said. "Most
gratifying."

"Max Arena is no welcher," Arena said. "You tipped me to the tapes, so
you're in."

"Besides which you perhaps sense that I have other valuable
contributions to make."

"I figure you to pull your weight."

"What are your plans for Mr. Maclamore?"

"I told you. Kick him out. He'll never wise up and cooperate with us."

"First, you'd better ask him a few more questions."

"Why? So he'll blow his head off and mess up my rug, like...." Arena
stopped. "You won't get anything out of him."

"A man of his type has a strong aversion to suicide. He won't die
to protect trivial information. And if he does--we'll know there's
something important being held out."

"I don't like messy stuff," Arena said.

"I'll be most careful," Stenn said. "Get me some men in here to secure
him to a chair, and we'll have a nice long chat with him."

"No messy stuff," Arena repeated. He crossed to his desk, thumbed a
lever and spoke to someone outside.

Stenn was standing in front of me.

"Let him think he's pumping you," he hissed.

"Find out where his fuel is stored. I'm on your side." Then Arena was
coming back, and Stenn was looking at me indifferently.

       *       *       *       *       *

Arena had overcome his aversion to messy stuff sufficiently to hit me
in the mouth now and then during the past few hours. It made talking
painful, but I kept at it.

"How do I know you have Williams?" I said.

Arena crossed to his desk, took out a defaced snapshot.

"Here's his I. D." he said. "Take a look." He tossed it over. Stenn
held it up.

"Let me talk to him."

"For what?"

"See how he feels about it," I mumbled. I was having trouble staying
awake. I hadn't seen a bed for three days. It was hard to remember what
information I was supposed to get from Arena.

"He'll join in if you do," Arena said. "Give up. Don't fight. Let it
happen."

"You say you've got fuel. You're a liar. You've got no fuel."

"I got plenty fuel, wise guy," Arena yelled. He was tired too.

"Lousy crook," I said. "Can't even cheat a little without getting
caught at it."

"Who's caught now, swabbie?" Arena was getting mad. That suited me.

"You're a lousy liar, Arena. You can't hide hot metal. Even Stenn ought
to know that."

"What else was in the cache, Maclamore?" Stenn asked--for the hundredth
time. He slapped me--also for the hundredth time. It jarred me and
stung. It was the last straw. If Stenn was acting, I'd help him along.
I lunged against the wires, swung a foot and caught him under the ribs.
He oofed and fell off his chair.

"Don't push me any farther, you small-time chiselers," I yelled.
"You've got nothing but a cast brass gall to offer. There's no hole
deep enough to hide out power metal, even if a dumb slob like you
thought of it."

"Dumb slob?" Arena barked. "You think a dumb slob could have built
the organization I did, put this town in his hip pocket? I started
stock-piling metal five years ago--a year before the ban. No hole deep
enough, huh? It don't need to be so deep when it's got two feet of lead
shielding over it."

"So you smuggled a few tons of lead into the Public Library and filed
it under Little Bo Peep."

"The two feet was there ahead of me, wisenheimer. Remember the
Polaris sub that used to be drydocked at Norfolk for the tourists to
rubberneck?"

"Decommissioned and sold for scrap," I said. "Years ago."

"But not scrapped. Rusted in a scrapyard for five years. Then I bought
her--beefed up her shielding--loaded her and sank her in ten fathoms of
water in Cartwright Bay."

"That," Stenn said, "is the information we need."

Arena whirled. Stenn was still sitting on the floor. He had a palm gun
in his hand, and it was pointed at the monogram on Arena's silk shirt.

"A cross," Arena said. "A lousy cross...."

       *       *       *       *       *

"Move back, Arena." Stenn got to his feet, eyes on Arena.

"Where'd you have the stinger stashed?"

"In my hand. Stop there."

Stenn moved over to me. Eyes on Arena, he reached for the twisted ends
of wire, started loosening them.

"I don't want to be nosey," I said. "But just where the hell do you fit
into this, Stenn?"

"Naval Intelligence," Stenn said.

Arena cursed. "I knew that name should have rung a bell. Vice Admiral
Stenn. The papers said you got yours when the Navy was purged."

"A few of us eluded the net."

Arena heaved a sigh.

"Well, fellows," he said--and jumped.

Stenn's shot went wild, and Arena left-hooked him down behind the
chair. As he followed, Stenn came up fast, landed a hard left, followed
up, drove Arena back. I yanked at my wires. Almost--

Then Arena, a foot taller, hammered a brutal left-right, and Stenn
sagged. Carefully Arena aimed a right cross to the jaw. Stenn dropped.

Arena wiped an arm across his face.

"The little man tried, Mister. Let's give him that."

He walked past my chair, stooped for Stenn's gun. I heaved, slammed
against him, and the light chair collapsed as we went over. Arena
landed a kick, then I was on my feet, shaking a slat loose from the
dangling wire. Arena stepped in, threw a whistling right. I ducked it,
landed a hard punch to the midriff, another on the jaw. Arena backed,
bent over but still strong. I couldn't let him rest. I was after him,
took two in the face, ducked a haymaker that left him wide open just
long enough for me to put everything I had in an uppercut that sent him
back across his fancy desk. He sprawled, then slid onto the floor.

I went to him, kicked him lightly in the ribs.

"Where's Williams," I said. I kept kicking and asking. After five
tries, Arena shook his head and tried to sit up. I put a foot in his
face and he relaxed. I asked him again.

"You didn't learn this kind of tactics at the Academy," Arena whined.

"It's the times," I said. "They have a coarsening effect."

"Williams was a fancy-pants," Arena said. "No guts. He pulled the
stopper."

"Talk plainer," I said, and kicked him again, hard--but I knew what he
meant.

"Blew his lousy head off," Arena yelled. "I gassed him and tried scop
on him. He blew. He was out cold, and he blew."

"Yeah," I said. "Hypnotics will trigger it."

"Fancy goddam wiring job," Arena muttered, wiping blood from his face.

       *       *       *       *       *

I got the wire and trussed Arena up. I had to clip him twice before I
finished. I went through his pockets, looked at things, recovered my
souvenirs. I went over to Stenn. He was breathing.

Arena was watching. "He's okay, for crissake," he said. "What kind of
punch you think I got?"

I hoisted Stenn onto my shoulder.

"So long, Arena," I said. "I don't know why I don't blow your brains
out. Maybe it's that Navy Cross citation in your wallet."

"Listen," Arena said. "Take me with you."

"A swell idea," I said. "I'll pick up a couple of tarantulas, too."

"You're trying for the hack, right?"

"Sure. What else?"

"The roof," he said. "I got six, eight rotos on the roof. One
high-speed job. You'll never make the hack."

"Why tell me?"

"I got eight hundred gun boys in this building alone. They know you're
here. The hack is watched, the whole route. You can't get through."

"What do you care?"

"If the boys bust in here after a while and find me like this....
They'll bury me with the wires still on, Maclamore."

"How do I get to the roof?"

He told me. I went to the right corner, pushed the right spot, and a
panel slid aside. I looked back at Arena.

"I'll make a good sailor, Maclamore," he said.

"Don't crawl, Arena," I said. I went up the short stair, came out onto
a block-square pad.

Arena was right about the rotos. Eight of them. I picked the four-place
Cad, and got Stenn tied in. He was coming to, muttering. He was still
fighting Arena, he thought.

"... I'll hold ... you ... get out...."

"Take it easy, Stenn," I said. "Nothing can touch this bus. Where's the
boat?" I shook him. "Where's the boat, Stenn?"

He came around long enough to tell me. It wasn't far--less than an
hour's run.

"Stand by, Admiral," I said. "I'll be right back."

"Where ... you...."

"We need every good man we can get," I said. "And I think I know a guy
that wants to join the Navy."


EPILOGUE

Admiral Stenn turned away from the communicator screen.

"I think we'd be justified in announcing victory now, Commodore." As
usual, he sounded like a professor of diction, but he was wearing a big
grin.

"Whatever you say, chief," I said, with an even sappier smile.

I made the official announcement that a provisional Congress had
accepted the resignations of all claims by former office holders, and
that new elections would be underway in a week.

I switched over to Power Section. The NCO in charge threw me a snappy
highball. Damned if he wasn't grinning too.

"I guess we showed 'em who's got the muscle, Commodore," he said.

"Your firepower demonstration was potent, Max," I said. "You must have
stayed up nights studying the tapes."

"We've hardly scratched the surface yet," he said.

"I'll be crossing back to _Alaska_ now, Mac," Stenn said.

I watched him move across the half-mile void to the flagship. Five
minutes later the patrol detail broke away to take up surveillance
orbits. They would be getting all the shore leave for the next few
years, but I was glad my squadron had been detailed to go with the
flagship on the Deep Space patrol. I wanted to be there when we
followed those star surveys back to where their makers came from. Stenn
wasn't the man to waste time, either. He'd be getting under way any
minute. It was time to give my orders. I flipped the communicator key
to the squadron link-up.

"Escort Commander to Escort," I said. "Now hear this...."





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The King of the City, by Keith Laumer

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE KING OF THE CITY ***

***** This file should be named 51781.txt or 51781.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/1/7/8/51781/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
