The Project Gutenberg EBook of Third Planet, by Murray Leinster

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.



Title: Third Planet

Author: Murray Leinster

Release Date: July 14, 2016 [EBook #52574]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THIRD PLANET ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                             THIRD PLANET

                          By MURRAY LEINSTER

           [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from
                    Worlds of Tomorrow April 1963.
         Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
         the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]


                    The aliens had lost their lives
                    to nuclear war--but their loss
                   might be the salvation of Earth!


I

It was, as usual, a decision on which the question of peace or atomic
war depended. The Council of the Western Defense Alliance, as usual,
had made the decision. And, as usual, the WDA Coordinator had to tell
the Com Ambassador that the Coms had won again. The WDA would not risk
atomic war over a thirty-mile shift of a national border in southeast
Asia.

"Perhaps," said the Com Ambassador politely, "it will be easier for
you personally if I admit that our Intelligence Service has reported
the decision of your Council." He paused, and added, "in detail."

The Coordinator asked wearily, "How much detail?"

"First," said the Ambassador, "you are to insist that no decision
has been reached. You are to play for time. If I do not agree, you
are to offer to compromise. If I do not agree, you are to accept the
settlement we suggested. But you are to ask urgently for time in which
to remove the citizens we might feel ought to be shot. This is not an
absolute condition, but you are to use every possible means to persuade
me to grant it."

The Coordinator ground his teeth. But the Council wouldn't go to war
for a few thousand citizens of an Asiatic country--who would probably
be killed in the war anyhow. There would be millions killed in Western
countries if the war did come.

"I have much respect for you," said the Ambassador politely, "so I
agree to three days of delay during which you may evacuate disloyal
citizens by helicopter. On the fourth day our troops will move up to
the new border. It would be unfortunate if there were clashes on the
way."

"We can't get them out in three days!" protested the Coordinator. "It's
impossible! We haven't enough copters!"

"With warning to flee," said the Ambassador, "many can reach the new
border on foot."

The Coordinator ground his teeth again. That would be a public
disgrace--and not the first one--for the WDA for not protecting its
friends. But the public in the Western nations did not want war. It
would not allow its governments to fight over trivial matters. Its
alliance could not make threats. On the other hand, the public in the
Com nations had no opinions its governments had not decreed. The Com
nations could threaten. They could even carry out threats, though made
for trivialities. So the WDA found itself yielding upon one point after
another. Eventually it would fight, and fight bravely, but too late.

The Coordinator said heavily, "You will excuse me, Mr. Ambassador. I
have to see about getting as many copters as possible to southeast
Asia."

       *       *       *       *       *

Some hundreds of light-years away, the Survey ship _Lotus_ floated in
space, a discreet number of millions of miles from the local sun. It
was on a strictly scientific mission, so it would not be subject to
Com suspicion of having undesirable political intentions. At least
they hadn't demanded to have an observer on board. Com intelligence
reports were notoriously sound, however, and possibly spies had assured
their employers that the _Lotus's_ mission was bona fide. Her errand
was the mapping and first-examination of a series of sol-type solar
systems. This was the ninth such system on the list. The third planet
out from the sun, here, lay off to starboard. It was near enough to
have a visible disk to the naked eye, and moderate magnification
showed ice-caps and permanent surface markings that could be seas
and continents. As was to be expected, it was very much like a more
familiar third planet out--Earth.

The skipper gave Nolan the job of remote inspection while the gross
examination of the system went on. Nolan had a knack for such work,
and much of it naturally fell to him.

"Okay!" he said resignedly, "Another day, another world!"

"My private nightmare," said the skipper, with humor, "is bug-eyed
monsters. Try not to find 'em here, Nolan. Eh?"

He'd said that eight times before on this voyage. Nolan said, "My
private nightmare is getting home and finding out that while we've been
finding new worlds for men to live on, they've started a war and made
Earth a place to die on. Try to arrange that it doesn't happen before
we get home. Eh?"

He'd said that eight times before on this voyage, too.

"I wish us both luck. Nolan," said the skipper. "But that ball out
yonder looks plausible as a nest for bug-eyed monsters!"

He shook his head and went out. He was still being humorous. Nolan
set up his instruments and went to work. As he worked, he tried to
thrust away the thoughts that came to everybody on Earth every day.
They were as haunting, some light-centuries from Earth, as back at
home. There was the base the Coms were building on the moon. The WDA
had an observatory there, but the Coms were believed to be mounting
many more rockets than telescopes. And there was that unsatisfying
agreement made between the Coms and WDA just before the _Lotus_ took
off. Each promised solemnly to notify the other of all space take-offs
before they happened. The idea was to prevent a mistake by which a
Pearl-Harbor-style attack might be inferred when it wasn't really
happening. The fact that it could be prepared against was evidence of
the kind of tension back on Earth.

But the _Lotus_ was far from home. She lay some seventy-odd millions of
miles out from the sol-type star Fanuel Alpha, whose third planet Nolan
was to look over.

He sent off a distance-pulse and took angular measurements of the
planet's disk. The ratio of polar to equatorial diameters was
informative. The polar flattening said that the day lasted about thirty
hours. Almost like Earth's. The equatorial diameter of 8200 miles was
much like Earth's. The inclination of the axis of rotation indicated
seasons--not exaggerated, but much like the seasons on the third planet
of Sol. The size of the ice-caps indicated the overall planetary
temperature. There were clouds. In fact, there was a cloudmass in the
southern hemisphere that looked just like an Earthly tropic storm
undergoing the usual changes as it went away from the equator. This was
very much like Earth! And the dark masses which were seas....

       *       *       *       *       *

Nolan frowned. Those mud-colored patches were water. Undoubtedly. A
narrow-band light filter proved it. But the areas which were neither
sea nor cloud mass? There were three levels of brightness to be seen on
the disk outside the polar areas. One was sea-bottom. One was cloud.
The other....

Nolan fretted a little. There was something wrong. The solid ground
surface of the planet was too light in color. It was such items that a
person with a knack for it would notice sooner than a man without the
knack. Vegetation should be more nearly midway between sea-bottom and
cloud mass in color.

Nolan fitted in the chlorophyll filter. On the planet of a sol-type
sun, vegetation had to use chlorophyll or else. Through this filter the
clouds would show, of course. They were white and reflected all colors
of light. But no color that chlorophyll didn't reflect could pass
through the filter.

The cloud masses showed clearly. Nothing else appeared. The filters
would have shown vegetation. It didn't. It said there wasn't any.

Nolan stepped up the magnification. He saw other things. He didn't like
them. He got some maximum-magnification pictures and interpreted them
with increasing grimness.

He went to make his report just as the system constants began to reach
the skipper. The local sun's mass was 1.3 sols. The solar rotation
period was thirty-four days. There were sunspots of perfectly familiar
kinds. The Lauriac Laws about the size and distribution of planets
in a sol-type system were borne out. One was small, and its sunward
side was probably at a low red heat. This was like Mercury. Planet
Two, like its analogue Venus in the home system, would be resolutely
unoccupiable by man. Planet Four--analogous to Mars--was smaller than
Three and had a very thin atmosphere. There were gas-giants in orbits
six and seven. Then a novelty Lauriac's laws predicted things about
fifth planets, too, but they'd never been verified because fifth
planets were unstable. They blew up. Only fragments--asteroids--had so
far been noted where fifth planets of sol-type suns ought to be. But
there was a fifth planet here, rolling magnificently through emptiness.
It matched the Lauriac predictions. It had an atmosphere, which should
contain oxygen. It was the first sol-system fifth planet ever observed.

There was a babble in the skipper's office as the discoverers of the
fifth planet told him about it.

Nolan said curtly, "I've something more urgent to report. Planet Three
ought to be like Earth. It was. It isn't, any longer. It's dead!"

Nobody paid attention. There was a fifth planet! It was unparalleled!
All the theories about the absence of fifth planets could now be
checked!

"I'm telling you," said Nolan sharply, "that the third planet's dead!
It was alive, and something happened to it! It has seas and clouds and
ice-caps, and they're water! But its land surface is pure desert! Where
life can exist, it does. Always! Life did exist here. Now it doesn't."
He turned to the skipper, "Maybe bug-eyed monsters killed it, skipper.
It looks to me like murder!"

Then they stared at him. He spread out his pictures. He pointed out
this item and that. They were conclusive. Nobody else might have
realized the facts behind them quite so soon, but when put together
they fitted.

"Familiar, eh?" asked Nolan sardonically. "You recognize the pictures
like them before. They weren't made with cameras, like these, but
artists drew them from descriptions of what would happen. Here it's
happened! I think," he added, looking at the skipper, "that this is
more important than fifth planets. I think we'd better go over and get
what information we can and take it home. Death like this implies life
a lot like men. If non-human creatures can do something as human as
this, we'd better get the word back home so something can be done to
get ready before we find them--or they find us."

The skipper went carefully over the pictures. On one he put his finger
on a feature Nolan hadn't mentioned. He seemed to wince.

"I think you win, Nolan," he said painfully. "We'll send a drone down.
I doubt we can land, but this ought to be checked. Immediately. Maybe I
should add--inconspicuously."

       *       *       *       *       *

"Confidentially," said the Com Ambassador to the Coordinator of the
WDA, "confidentially I agree that it is a trivial matter. But we are a
new nation. Our people lack perspective. They rejoice in the strength
and vigor of the nation of which they are citizens. They will not allow
that nation to display what they consider weakness in any matter. One
has to allow for a certain exuberance in the people of a nation newly
freed from the tyranny of capitalists and warmongers such as still
enslave the people of your countries. We cannot yield in this matter."

The Coordinator said:

"To be confidential in my turn, we both know that what you just said
simply isn't true. Your government decides what its public shall think.
It makes sure they don't think anything it doesn't want them to."

The Com Ambassador shrugged his shoulders. He was very polite. He did
not even pretend to resent being called a liar.

"Now, my country intends to move forward in this matter in ten days,"
he observed. "And it would be deplorable if our soldiers were fired on."


II

It turned out that it wouldn't have mattered if the _Lotus_ had sent
screaming notifications of its presence throughout all nearby space.
There were detectors out, of course, but they reported absolutely
nothing as the _Lotus_ moved on toward Planet Three. There was static
from storms upon the planet. It grew louder as the survey ship
approached. But there was no sign of anything alive.

The _Lotus_ cruised some two hundred miles above seas and cloud masses
and desert, photographing as she followed a search pattern that covered
all the sunlit hemisphere. There were mountains in the tropics which
by all the rules of meteorology should have had rain forests at their
feet. They didn't. There was a river system which ran like the Nile for
a thousand miles or more, through deserts like those of Egypt. There
should have been at least a ribbon of vegetation along its banks. There
wasn't. Where it reached the sea was an enormous delta.

A drone went down and reported temperatures and humidity and the
composition of the atmosphere, and the radiation background count. One
would have thought the records those of Earth. The background count
was a trifle high--3.9 instead of 3.6--but there was eighteen per cent
of oxygen in the atmosphere. The only oddity, there, was nearly a full
per cent of helium. When the drone came up it brought samples of soil
and sea water. There was no life in either. The soil was mostly mineral
dust, but an electron microscope disclosed abraded fractions of pollen
grains and the like. The sea water sample had evidently been picked up
by the drone's dredge from some shallow. There were tiny, silicious
shells in it. Plankton. They had been alive, but were so no longer.

"I think," said Nolan, "that I make a landing. Right?"

The skipper said crossly, "Yes. You're the best man for it. You notice
things. But I doubt you'll learn very much." He tapped the written
report that the radiation background count was 3.9. "It happened a
long time ago. A long, long time ago!" Then he said with a totally
unsuccessful attempt at humor, "Try and find out that it was bug-eyed
monsters, eh? It looks too much like Earth! I'd rather blame monsters
than men!"

Nolan growled and went to prepare for the landing. Two other men would
go with him, of course. The _Lotus_ wouldn't descend. It cost fuel to
make landings. Unless there was some remarkable specimen that a drone
couldn't handle the ship would stay aloft.

So a drone took three of them down to ground, a second drone following
with equipment. They had weapons, of course. Men never land anywhere
without weapons. They had the material for a foam-house camp. They had
a roller-jeep, running on huge inflated bags. It would run efficiently
on anything from sand to swamp mud, and float itself across bogs or
rivers. They had cameras and communicators. Nolan had picked Crawford
for geology and Kelley for communications. They could get other
specialists from the ship, if desirable.

The ground where they landed was desert: nothing more. There were
enormous dunes like gigantic frozen swells of sand. Sometimes there
were miles between crests. They landed close to the mud banks northern
ice-cap to avoid the deep gorges in which rivers ran farther south. On
the first day they set up their camp.

Mountains reared to the north of them, covered almost to their bases
with ice. These they need not explore. Instruments would do most of
the landing-party work, in any case. But they inflated small balloons
and sent them skyward, to learn about currents of the upper air, and
Crawford took painstaking photographs of dune formations, and they set
up a weather radar. They checked the water recovery from the camp's
air-conditioner. It would supply their needs. When night drew near,
with all instruments recording, they watched the sunset.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was amazing how splendid and how magnificent a sunset could be. Not
many men see sunsets these days. The three of them, aground at the
ice-cap's edge, saw enormous mile-long dunes reaching away as far as it
was possible to see. They cast black shadows. Then glories of crimson
and gold rose from the western horizon of this dead and empty world.
There was ice and snow upon the mountains, and unbelievable tints and
blends of colors appeared there. After a long, long time the light
faded away. Then there was nothing to see but the stars, and nothing to
listen to at all. This world was dead. They went in their camp-house
and shut out the dark and the silence.

On the second day, Nolan went in search of permafrost. Their
instruments faithfully recorded everything they needed except such
items as this. Nolan found permanent ice in a valley of the northern
mountains. It was perpetually frozen ground which might not have thawed
in a thousand thousand years. He dug down through surface ice to the
permanently frozen soil beneath it. That soil was not desert sand.
And preserved in it Nolan found the blackened roots of plants, and
the blackened blades of something like grass, and even some small,
indefinite objects which had been seeds or fruit.

They hadn't died with the planet. They were far older than that
catastrophe. But they were proof that once this world lived and throve.

During what was left of the day-light, Nolan and Kelley went south to
a river gorge and photographed it for the record. The river had cut a
gorge a full two hundred feet deep in the wind-deposited dust which was
everywhere. There were now-dry gullies which undercut the dune-sides
and at times dumped mud into the slowly flowing liquid of the river.
There were no colorings save dust and mud. The river itself was mud. It
flowed very, very slowly and without elation.

They came back depressed. An airless planet holds no life, but it
defies life to establish itself. A methane-ammonia planet fights the
intrusion of men with monstrous frigid storms. But this world was
designed for life. That it was dead was tragedy. Its rivers flowed
sullen, syrupy mud which moved reluctantly toward the lifeless seas.

Kelley wouldn't look at the sunset this second night. He went into the
camp and turned on music. Crawford watched for a little while only.
There were clouds. There were breezes. One knew that here and there
rain fell in gentle showers which should have nourished grasses and
flowers and filled the air with fragrance. But instead it fell upon
impalpable dust and turned it to mud which flowed slowly into gullies
and into rivers which were also mud and moved onward, until perhaps
after years the soil would become part of a mud-bank in the ocean.

Nolan came into the foam-walled house and said shortly, "We'll finish
up tomorrow and leave."

Kelley said abruptly. "Nobody's made any guess about why everything
died, here. But we all know!"

Crawford said reflectively, "It must've taken a lot of intelligence to
murder this planet. When d'you suppose it happened?"

"Ten thousand--twenty thousand years ago," said Nolan. "The whole place
must have been radioactive, air and all. But if they used cobalt the
background count could be down to 3.9 in ten or twenty thousand years."

"We haven't," said Kelley, "seen any craters. Even the pictures from
out in space didn't show bomb-craters."

"When everything died and turned to dust," said Nolan, "there'd be
dust storms. There still must be. They'd cover anything! There was a
terrific civilization in part of what's now the Sahara, back on Earth.
By pure accident they've found a patch of highway and a post-house.
Everything else is covered up. Cities, highways, dams, canals.... And
that's heavy sand instead of fine dust! The _Lotus_ found some shadows
on a photo. They want us to look and see what cast them. We'll look at
it tomorrow and then leave."

Crawford said deliberately:

"We three have had a preview of what Earth will be like before too
long! I wonder if it would do any good on Earth to show them what we've
found?"

"It's being argued on the ship," said Nolan. "Some say we'd better
suppress the whole business."

Crawford considered.

"The Coms aren't a very believing people," he said slowly. "But our
people are. If we report this, our people will believe it. But the Coms
can tell their people it is lies. Our people will want peace more than
ever if they see what a war will mean. But the big-shot Coms will just
take that as a reason to demand some more concessions, and more, and
more. Like demanding to build a base on the moon...."

"I'm going to bed," said Nolan. He added ironically, "I hope you have
pleasant dreams!"

       *       *       *       *       *

He did go to bed, but he slept very badly. The others slept no better.
All three of them were up before sunrise. They saw it. And to Nolan
the coming of the light seemed somehow like an eager arrival of the
new day, anxious to see if some tiny thread of green somewhere lifted
proudly from brown earth to greet it. But none ever did. Or would.

"We should be through by noon," said Nolan.

They set out in the jeep. They abandoned the camp. They would abandon
the jeep, too, presently, when they went up the ship that waited in
orbit.

They headed west, and Kelley took over the microwave set that sent a
wide-fanning beacon skyward. The _Lotus_ was in orbit now. Every ninety
minutes she was overhead. She'd completed the mapping of the planet.
Every square foot of its surface had been photographed from aloft.

They drove. The ungainly inflated bags which took the place of wheels
rolled unweariedly, at first over dew-wetted dust and then over the
minor gullies which, so near the ice-cap, were not yet gorges. They
went on for twenty miles, and the abomination of desolation was all
about them.

"We shouldn't tell about this back home," said Kelley abruptly.
"If the Com people saw it, they'd know that no--" his tone was
ironic--"national aspiration justified the risk of this. But they
wouldn't see it. And our people might look at it and decide that
anything was better than this. But it isn't."

Nolan said nothing. He didn't believe that the discovery of this dead
planet could be kept a secret for very long.

The mountains drew back to northward and the desert took their place.
The _Lotus_ went by overhead, unseen. But it gave a message to Kelley.

"We're on course," he reported. "The ship just said so. Ten miles more."

In ten miles they came upon a city, or what had been one. It was
partly buried in the omnipresent dust. That is, they saw part of a
city's remnants showing in the mile wide trough between dunes hundreds
of feet high. There were other remnants between two other dunes,
and still more in yet other troughs beyond. Structures of stone had
existed, and portions of them remained. They had cast shadows the
_Lotus_ had discovered from aloft. The stone remains were abraded by
the dust-carrying winds of a hundred centuries. Their roofs had been
crushed when monster dunes formed over them. They had been reexposed
to the sunshine when winds moved the dunes away. There was no metal
left. No glass. No artifacts. They had been buried tens or hundreds of
times, and uncovered as many. There was nothing left but skeletons of
stone which cast angular shadows, though their fragments were rounded
by centuries of patient wind erosion.

It had been a very great city, but Nolan made the only observation
that could tell anything about its occupants.

"The builders of this city," he said tonelessly, "used doors about the
same size we do."

And that was all they could find out. Presently:

"New York will be like this eventually," said Crawford. "And Chicago.
And everywhere else."

Kelley spoke suddenly into the microwave transmitter. He said sharply
to the ship, invisibly overhead:

"Yes! Send down the drone! We've had it!"

       *       *       *       *       *

The Council-member from Brazil made an impassioned speech in the
supposedly secret meeting of the Western Defense Alliance. He pointed
out with bitter factuality that no past yielding to Com demands
had gained anything. Further yielding would be suicidal. He made a
fierce demand that the WDA present a united front against this fresh
diplomatic pressure. That it refuse, flatly and firmly and with
finality, to make a single concession on a single point. It was a good
speech. It was an excellent speech. It and others like it should have
been made a long time before. The Coordinator of the Western Defensive
Alliance nodded at its end.

"I agree," he said, "with every word the representative from Brazil has
spoken. I think we all agree. The practical thing to do, of course, is
to send a combined expeditionary force to maintain the independence
of Sierra Leone. This force should be formed of contingents from every
Western Defense Alliance nation, and it should have orders to prevent
the entry of Com troops into Sierra Leone territory. I do not think
that anything less will prevent the extinction of another member nation
of the Western Defense Alliance. Will any Council member propose such
action for a vote?"

There was a pause. Then babblings. It would mean war! It would mean
atomic war! Tens or hundreds of millions of human beings would die over
a matter affecting less than two hundred thousand! It was ridiculous!
Public opinion--

The Council meeting ended with no vote upon the matter. Without even a
proposal on which a vote could be taken.

Two days later, Com troops from one of the African Com nations moved
in and occupied Sierra Leone. A great many of its citizens were shot,
some for opposing the new state of affairs, but some seemingly just on
general principles.


III

The _Lotus_ went on toward Planet Five, leaving a world which should
have been alive and wasn't, to go to a world which should not exist,
but did. On the way there was argument which became embittered. In
theory, the discoveries made by a Survey ship became automatically
available to all the world. But the discovery of Three in the state it
was in would have political results on Earth.

It was--and is--a fact that nobody really believes in death until he
sees a dead man. And nobody can believe in the destruction of a planet
unless he's seen the corpse or color photographs of it. But that was
precisely what the _Lotus_ had to carry back to Earth. The WDA nations
would see those pictures and read the facts. They would believe in
atomic war and the complete sterilization of a world. The Com nations
would not see the pictures. They would continue to believe that the
West--the WDA--was decadent and enslaved to tyrannical warmongers,
and obviously could not resist the splendid armed forces of the Com
association. And they wouldn't really believe there could be more than
isolated, crazy resistance to their valiant troops. So they'd back
their leaders with enthusiasm, and the Western peoples at most would be
merely desperate.

The _Lotus_ arrived at Planet Four--which by the Lauriac laws should
have been similar to Mars. It was almost its twin. It had ice-caps
of hoarfrost and its atmosphere was thin and barely contaminated by
oxygen. A base could be maintained here, of course, provided one had a
source of supply. A base here, incidentally, would have much the value
of the Com base on Luna.

The _Lotus_ did not find that base. It found no cities or signs of
settlement. But it did find a bombcrater, miles across and it seemed
miles deep. There was an accumulation of reddish dust at its bottom,
trapped from the thin winds that blew over this half-frozen world.

The _Lotus_ went on to Planet Five.

The sun, so far out, was very small and its warmth was barely
perceptible. But there was vegetation. The surface temperature was
above freezing. The Lauriac Laws had predicted that the central
metallic core would be small, and the greater part of its mass should
be stony. The radioactives in Earth's thin rocky crust produce
a constant flow of heat from the interior to the surface. It is
considered that it is enough heat to melt a fraction of an inch of ice
in a year. On this planet, with a crust many hundreds instead of mere
scores of miles thickness, the internal heat was greater. The world was
not frozen, and life existed here. It was a pallid, unnatural sort of
life which had developed to live in starlight with a feeble assist from
a very bright nearby star which happened to be its sun.

There was a base here, too. Kelley located it when he found a resonant
return of certain frequencies from the ground. It was not a reflection,
but resonance. And so they found the base.

It had been built by engineers the humans on the _Lotus_ could only
admire. There were gigantic doors which could admit the _Lotus_
herself. They were rusted shut and had to be opened with explosives.
There were galleries and tunnels and laboratories. There were missile
launchers and missile-storage chambers. There was a giant dome housing
a telescope men had not even dreamed of equalling. It was not an
optical telescope.

Ultimately they found a mortuary, where the members of the garrison
were placed when they died. The _Lotus_ was not equipped for the
archeological and technological studies the base called for. Its
function was to scout out things for especially qualified expeditions
to study. And, of course, there was the political situation back on
Earth....

       *       *       *       *       *

On the fourth day after landing, the skipper sent for Nolan. The
skipper sweated a little.

"Nolan," he said querulously, "we've found something."

"A bug-eyed monster?" asked Nolan dourly.

"No." The skipper mopped his forehead. "Back yonder, on Three, you took
a few looks from twenty million miles and figured out what had happened
there. We'd have worked it out eventually, but you saw it at once.
You're lucky that way. Now we've found something. It's an--instrument.
We're short on time. Come with me and make some guesses."

He led the way, explaining jerkily as he went. The thing was in a room
by itself, with its own air system and apparently its own food store.
It was inside four successive systems of locked doors--all of them
inches-thick stainless steel. It was intended that the last door could
be opened from inside. It was evidently the very heart of the armed
base on Planet Five. Anything sealed up like that would have to be
either incredibly valuable or incredibly dangerous.

Nolan followed through the shattered doors, and presently the skipper
made a helpless gesture. There was the discovery. It looked more like
an old-fashioned telescope than anything else. It had a brass barrel,
and it was very solidly mounted, and there were micro-micro adjustments
to point it with almost infinite exactitude. It had been sealed in a
completely air-tight environment, and what moisture was present had
combined with other metals. It wasn't rusted. There was an eyepiece,
placed in an improbable position, and there was a trigger. It wasn't
like a gun-trigger, but it couldn't have any other purpose. There was
no porthole for it to fire through. The compartment in which it had
been sealed was deep underground.

Nolan said uneasily:

"It's a weapon, of course."

"Of course!" said the skipper. He mopped his forehead. "I--I think we
should take it home. It might make a difference to WDA. But we don't
know what it does! It could be a mistake...."

Nolan walked around it. He saw that it could be aimed in almost any
direction. But not quite. There was a direction that stops prevented it
from pointing to. Nolan said:

"What's in that direction?"

The skipper jumped. When Nolan asked the question he began to suspect
many answers. He said in a stricken voice, "That's where the missiles
were launched--and where the others are stored."

Nolan stared at the thing. It looked hateful. It had the savage feel of
a frozen snarl.

"The power-pile?"

The skipper nodded. He mopped his face again.

"Right alongside. We figured they wanted to shield the rest of the base
from radioactives."

Nolan said carefully:

"It could be that they wanted to shield the radioactives from something
in the base. Maybe something that would act on radioactives is
involved." He said painfully, "Men can't change the rate of fission
except by building up a critical mass. But maybe--possibly bug-eyed
monsters could."

The skipper perspired. He'd have worked out the same thing in the long
run, but Nolan saw it right away. He went away and got the ship's
engineers. They brought an X-ray for finding flaws in metal. They took
pictures of the inwards of the brass-barreled instrument in its place.
They traced two separate, incomprehensible circuits. But they were
separate.

       *       *       *       *       *

At long last the skipper nodded permission for Nolan to try the
eyepiece, to see what it showed with heavy metal and much soil and
vegetation atop it. They taped the trigger so it could not be moved.
The controls affecting the eyepiece they left free. The skipper almost
dripped sweat as Nolan turned on the eyepiece circuit, peering in.

For a long time he saw nothing whatever. Then a tiny disk moved slowly
into the eyepiece's field. It was barely larger than a point. Nolan
moved one of the eyepiece controls. The disk enlarged. It enlarged
again. A tiny red dot appeared in the center of the field of vision. As
the disk enlarged, the red dot grew larger and became a tiny red circle.

Nolan fumbled. He shifted the position of the instrument with a
micro-control. He moved the faintly glowing disk until it was enclosed
in the red circle. He enlarged.... Presently the disk was very large,
and the red circle ceased to enlarge. It enclosed only a part of the
disk.

Nolan felt cold chills down his spine. He swallowed and asked for
the angular relationship of Planet Four to Three. The skipper sent
someone to find it out. But Nolan had found Planet Four before the
answer came. The first disk was in some fashion a representation of
Planet Three--the Earthlike world which was dead. The second was a
representation of Four. There was a bright spot near the equator of
Four--the equator being located by the flattening of the poles. It
would be just about where a gigantic atom-bomb crater still existed.

Nolan drew back and took a deep breath.

"Apparently," he said unsteadily, "this eyepiece detects radioactives,
converting something that I can't imagine into visible light after
it's passed through a few feet of metal and a good many more of dirt.
There's a red ring which makes me think of a gun-sight. And there's a
trigger. Skipper, would you send half an ounce or so of ship-fuel out
to space in a drone? I think we're going to have to pull this trigger."

The skipper wrung his hands. He went away. And Nolan stood staring at
nothing in particular, appalled and sickened by the thoughts that came
to him.

Presently the skipper came back and mumbled that a drone was on the
way up. Nolan searched for it with the eyepiece. He found it. The
sensitivity of the eyepiece was practically beyond belief. What it
worked on--what it transmuted and amplified to light--was wholly beyond
his imagination.

The drone went four thousand miles out. Nolan absently asked for
somebody to be posted out of doors, watching the sky. He got the vivid
spark that was the half ounce of ship-fuel in the center of the red
luminous ring. He turned his eyes away and pulled the trigger.

There was no sound. There was no vibration. There was no indication in
the underground room that anything at all had happened. There was only
a violent flare in the eyepiece, from which Nolan had just drawn back.

Someone came shouting from out of doors that there had been an
intolerable flash of brilliance in the sky.

A few moments later the word came that the drone control board
indicated that the drone had ceased to exist.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Com Ambassador sighed a little when he saw the expression on the
Coordinator's face. Interviews with the titular head of the alliance of
all Western nations became increasingly a strain on his politeness. But
the Coordinator said grimly:

"I think I can guess what you're here to tell me!"

The Com Ambassador said politely:

"It is painful to--ah--beat around the bush. May I speak plainly?"

"Do," said the Coordinator.

"Our base on the Moon," said the Ambassador with a fine air of
frankness, "some time ago reported military preparations on Earth,
among the WDA nations. Those preparations could have no purpose other
than an unwarned attack upon us. We felt it necessary, then, to take
countermeasures of preparation only. We modified the plans for our moon
base to have it contain not only the telescopes and such observational
equipment, but to have an adequate armament of missiles. It is now so
armed."

The Coordinator whitened a little, but he did not look surprised.

"Well?"

"I have to inform you," said the Com Ambassador, "that any military
action directed against any Com nation, or its troops, or the Union of
Com Republics, will be met by atomic bombardment from the moon as well
as--ah--our standard military establishments. This, of course, does not
mean war. To the contrary, we hope that it will end the possibility of
war. We trust that all causes of tension between our nations will one
by one be removed, and that an era of perpetual peace and prosperity
will follow."

The Coordinator's lips twisted in an entirely mirthless smile.

"Military action against Com troops," he observed, "means resistance to
invasion or occupation, doesn't it?"

"It would be wiser," said the Ambassador carefully, "to protest than to
resist. At least, so it seems to me."

The Coordinator of the Western Defense Alliance said:

"Tell me something confidentially, Mr. Ambassador. How long before you
expect--no. You wouldn't answer that. Ah! How long do you think it will
be before I am shot?"

The Com Ambassador said politely:

"I would hesitate to guess."

       *       *       *       *       *

The _Lotus_ started back to Earth with the enigmatic weapon fastened
firmly in its cargo hold. Great pains had been taken to keep it from
being knocked or shocked or battered in its transfer to the ship.
Firmly anchored, Nolan had insisted that the stops, which prevented it
from being aimed below the horizon or toward the radioactives in the
base, be adjusted so it could not be aimed at the _Lotus's_ own engines
or fuel-stores. There were no missiles to worry about, of course.

Even this precaution, however, roused doubt and uneasiness, especially
among the scientific staff. It was highly probable that when the
_Lotus_ reported in from space, the Coms would ask to examine such
specimens as she brought back. The request would be expressed as
scientific interest, but a refusal would be treated as a concealment
of dire designs. There were those on the ship who felt that the weapon
should be dismantled and made to seem meaningless, to avoid any chance
of a humiliating squabble with the Coms.

The skipper roared at them. It was the only time on the voyage when
he displayed anger. But he glared at those who proposed the act of
discretion. He drove them out of the cabin in which the suggestion was
made. He turned to Nolan, who definitely was not a party to it. His
manner changed. He said querulously:

"Nolan, why do you want that thing mounted so it could be used if
necessary?"

"That's the way it was mounted on Planet Five. To box it or case it
might injure it. To take it apart might mean that it could never be got
together in working order again."

"Is that the real reason?" demanded the skipper. "It's a good reason,
but is it the real one?"

"No," admitted Nolan. "It isn't."

The skipper fumed to himself.

"We might get home," he said fretfully, "and find things just as we
left them. Then there'd be no harm in the mounting. We'd at least try
to diddle the Coms and get it ashore without their knowing it was
important. We might get home and find that war'd broken out and Earth
was dead like the Third Planet back yonder, only not all yet turned to
desert. Then the mounting wouldn't matter. Nothing would! Or we could
find that the Coms had smashed the West and were all cockahoop about
what they'd managed to do in a sneak attack. So it had better stay
mounted. I covered everything, didn't I?"

Nolan wasn't feeling any better than anybody else on the _Lotus_. The
jitters that affected everybody but conditioned Coms had been bad when
the _Lotus_ went about its business. But when the ship headed for home,
nerves got visibly worse. They didn't know what they'd find there.
With the third planet of Fanuel Alpha in mind, it was all too easy to
believe in disaster.

"There's one thing," said Nolan painfully, "that bothers me. I've
been trying to think like a Com top brass. The WDA is a well meaning
organization, and it's gained time, no doubt. But aside from the Com
missiles, ninety-five per cent of the atomic warheads on Earth are
in the hands of just one WDA nation. It happens to be ours. It's
been bearing most of the load of defense costs for the West. It's the
richest country in the world. There's practically no poverty in it."

"What has poverty to do with a possible war?" demanded the skipper.

"Everything," Nolan said uncomfortably. "The Coms take over a country.
They march in. There are rich people and poor people. The Coms start to
humiliate and destroy the rich. The poor people hated them. So the Coms
are popular long enough to get things going right. But if they tried
that in our country--"

"It wouldn't work," said the skipper. "Not for a minute."

"It wouldn't," agreed Nolan. "Most of our people think of themselves
as well to do, and the rest can hope to become so. So the Coms would
have to try to govern two hundred million indignant and subversive
underground resisters. They couldn't hold down such a country. They
wouldn't try!"

The skipper blinked.

"If you mean they'd leave our country alone--"

"I don't," said Nolan. "They'd destroy it. They'd have to. So they
might as well destroy it out of hand and destroy most of the fighting
potential and a lot of resolution in the West. A well handled
atomic-missile bombardment and some luck, and they could take over the
rest of the world without trouble. I think that's the practical thing
for them to do. I think they'll do it if they can."

The skipper grimaced. Then he said, almost ashamedly:

"Maybe we're talking nonsense, Nolan. Maybe we've just got bad cases of
nerves. Maybe things have gotten better since we left. We could arrive
back home and find nobody even dreaming of war any more!"

"That," said Nolan, "would scare me to death. That would be the time to
make a sneak attack!"

Which was pessimism. But nothing else seemed justified. It was not even
easy to be hopeful about the value of the fifth-planet weapon to the
Western Defensive Alliance. The WDA couldn't use it in a preventive
war. Their people wouldn't allow it. The initiative would always remain
with the Coms.

The _Lotus_ moved Earthward. She carried a more deadly instrument for
war than men had ever dreamed of. But the ship's company daily jittered
a little more violently.

The war might have been fought and be over by now. If it had, the Coms
would have won it.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Coordinator for the WDA handed the Com Ambassador his passport.

"I'm sorry you've been recalled," he said heavily, "Because I think I
see the meaning of the move."

"I am only called home for conference and instructions," said the
Ambassador politely. "I shall miss our friendly chats. We have had a
very fine personal relationship, though we have disagreed so often."

The Coordinator absently shifted objects on his desk. He said suddenly:

"Mr. Ambassador, have I ever lied to you?"

The Ambassador raised his eyebrows. Then he smiled.

"Never!" he said pleasantly. "I have marveled!"

The Coordinator took a quick, sharp breath.

"I shall not lie now," he said abruptly. "I hope you will believe me,
Mr. Ambassador, when I tell you one of our best-kept military secrets."

The Ambassador blinked and then shrugged politely.

"You always astonish me," he said mildly.

"Your High Command," said the Coordinator grimly, "has decided not to
try to take over the nation around us. It is considered impractical. So
this nation is to be destroyed, to shatter the backbone of the WDA and
make resistance anywhere else unthinkable."

The Ambassador said reproachfully:

"Ah, but you begin to believe your own propaganda!"

"No," said the Coordinator. "I have simply told you the facts you
undoubtedly already know. Now I tell you our best-kept military
secret. We know that we cannot deal with you. We know that you might
be successful in an overwhelming, unwarned attack. We know that if you
decide upon war, it will be directed primarily at this nation. So
we have set up some very special atomic bombs where it is extremely
unlikely that you will find them. They are 'dirty' bombs. They are
designed to make the maximum possible amount of radioactive dust--of
fallout. Timing mechanisms are set to detonate them. Every day a man
goes and sets back the timing mechanism in each place where a bomb
is established. On the day that a man fails to do so the bombs will
certainly explode."

The Coordinator said almost briskly:

"We calculate that the bombs will make the atmosphere of the whole
Earth lethally radioactive. They will raise the background count on
Earth to the point where nothing can live: no plant, no animal, no fish
in any sea. This will only happen if this nation is destroyed. It will
fight if it is attacked, of course, but your chances of substantial
success are good. But if you are successful the Earth will die. I may
add that the people of the Com nations will die also, to the last
individual."

The Ambassador started to his feet.

"But you could not do that!" he protested white-lipped. "You cannot!"

The Coordinator shrugged and shook his head.

"I have not lied to you before, Mr. Ambassador. I do not lie to you
now." Then he said formally: "I hope you have a pleasant journey home."


IV

The _Lotus_ came out of the usual sequence of arrival-hops no more than
six light-seconds from Earth. A million miles, more or less; perhaps
four times the distance of the Moon. Nolan examined the planet's sunlit
face and said steadily:

"Nothing's happened yet."

There was almost agonized relief. Only the skipper did not seem to
relax. He went stolidly to the control-room and got out the scrambler
card that matched just one other scrambler card in the world. He put
it in the communicator. To speak to Earth by scrambler would be an
offense. It would be protested by the Coms. They would insist that a
survey ship should have nothing secret to report and that anything
secret must be inimical to the Com Association of Nations.

The skipper formally reported in, in the clear, and then insisted
on completing his report by scrambler. He did complete it, over the
agitated protest of the ground. Then there was silence. He mopped his
forehead.

"Nolan, better get down to the eyepiece. The Coms could send something
up to blast us. I'll get the detectors out. You be ready! You're sure
you can handle things?"

"This is a little bit late to raise the question," said Nolan. "I think
I can do it, though."

He went down into the hold. He turned on the eyepiece. He saw the
distinct, luminous disk which was Earth in the not-at-all-believable
field of the impossible instrument. He saw points--not dots--of
extremely vivid light. Obviously the size of a radioactive object did
not determine the brightness of its report to the weapon from Planet
Five of Fanuel Alpha. Something else controlled the brilliance.

He saw the groupings of many dimensionless points of light. There were
the patterns which meant the silos holding the monster atomic missiles
of the West. He could distinguish them from the much more concentrated
firing-points of the Com nations. The oceans had few or no bright
points at all. There were only so many atomic-powered ocean-going
vessels. Nolan could tell well enough which were the Western
accumulations of radioactives for defense purposes, and which were the
Com stores of warheads.

His throat went dry as he realized the power in his hands. Neither he
or anyone else could make one blade of grass grow, but he could turn
the third planet of this sun into a desert and a dreariness like the
third planet of another sun far, far away.

The skipper came into the hold. He locked the entrance door behind him.

"I got to the Coordinator," he said in a shaking voice. "I started
enough trouble by reporting by scrambler. He talked to me. I showed him
pictures. He's telling the Coms most of what I reported, saying that if
they like they can try to blast us. If they try, and don't succeed, we
can try to figure out what to do next."

       *       *       *       *       *

The Com premiership was in some ways the equivalent of the office of
Coordinator of the Western Defense Alliance. But the men who held the
two posts were quite unlike and the amount of authority they could
exercise was vastly different. The Com premier read, again, the newly
arrived message from the Coordinator. The high officials he'd sent for
came streaming into the room. Most of them had flimsies of the message
in their hands. The Premier beamed at them.

"You have the news," he said humorously. "The WDA Coordinator first
threatened to make all Earth's air radioactive if we attacked
the--ah--leading member of the WDA and destroyed it. He has evidently
decided that this threat is not strong enough. So he assures us that
a Western survey ship has come back from an exploring voyage with a
cargo of artifacts from a non-human civilization. Among the artifacts
there is what he says is the absolute weapon. He says that the skipper
who has brought it back claims that it can end the tension between
the WDA and us--by ending us!" The Premier chuckled. "He invites us
to verify the skipper's claim by attempting to blast the survey ship,
whose coordinates of position he gives us. I think he has made a rather
substantial error of judgment."

His eyes twinkled as he looked from one to another of the high
officials he had summoned.

"We accepted the invitation," said the Premier. "Naturally! General?"

He looked at a tall general officer with twin silver rockets in his
lapels. The general said proudly:

"Yes, Excellency! Our space-radar located an object at the survey
ship's stated position. We sent six rockets with atomic warheads at
it. We used satellite-placing rockets for maximum acceleration. They
are well on their way now. Of course they can be disarmed or destroyed
as well as maneuvered to intercept this survey ship if it attempts to
flee. They will reach the target area in just under three hours."

The Premier nodded, very humorously.

"Since we accepted their invitation, naturally the Western staff
concludes that we are disturbed. That we will wait to see what our
rockets learn. It would be interesting, but our scientists tell me that
the alleged weapon is impossible. Utterly impossible! So it is merely a
trick.... And we will not wait for our rockets to arrive. We might be
late for our dinners, and we would not like that!"

The high officials made sounds of amusement.

"So we put our own ending to the comedy," said the Premier blandly.
"The circuits are joined?" He asked the question of a craggy-faced
service-of-supply colonel. The colonel managed to nod, and was
stricken numb by the importance of the gesture.

"Then," said the Premier humorously, "we will destroy our enemy."

He waddled across the room. He put a pudgy forefinger on a button. He
pushed it.

Even here, deep underground, there were roaring sounds as rockets took
off for the west. All over the Com nations, carefully distributed
rocket-firing sites received signals from the one pushbutton. They sent
bellowing monsters up into the sky.

       *       *       *       *       *

Three Com rockets reached their targets, and Nolan never quite forgave
himself for it. They were murderous. They wiped out cities. But that
was all. The rest of the rockets went off prematurely. A spread of half
a hundred, crossing the North Pole, detonated just out of atmosphere.
Others went off over the Atlantic. Not a few made temporary suns above
the Pacific. Nolan brought moving specks within the thin red circle of
his instrument, and pulled the trigger. The points flamed momentarily
and left patches of luminosity behind them. And that was that.

But they continued to rise. On Earth they made noises like dragons.
There was panic from their starting points. Those first out had not
reached their targets! So the Com launching-sites flung more and more
missiles skyward. One of them reached a city of the West. A second. A
third.

The only possible answer was to blast them as they rose. Then to blast
them before they rose. Nolan's task became the terribly necessary one
of preventing radioactives from moving away from Com territory and
into WDA nations--specifically one WDA nation. He did not think of the
consequences of his actions except in terms of preventing excessively
bright mathematical points of light from getting to the areas where
there were so many fewer points of similar light which did not move at
all. He tried to stop only those that moved.

But three got by him, and he could do nothing but detonate all the
radioactives in Com territory. He had to! When that was done, there
were six warheads coming up from Earth. He detonated them. There were
massed warheads moving toward Earth from the Moon. It seemed that they
practically tore space apart that they went off together. Then the moon
base began to fire rockets, hysterically, at the _Lotus_, and it was
necessary to detonate the radioactives in the moon base.

It had been estimated that an atomic war might be over in three hours.
But prophecies are usually underestimates. Between the first and last
explosions on Earth, in space and on the moon--there was a truly
gigantic crater where the Com base had been--some thirty-seven minutes
elapsed. Then the war was over.

There were some survivors in Com territory, of course. But they
couldn't retaliate for the destruction of their nations. Their own
bombs had done the destruction. They couldn't even gloat that the
rest of Earth shared their catastrophe. It didn't. Most of the bombs
exploded high, and over ocean. No less than three-fifths of all fallout
landed in the sea and sank immediately. For the rest, the background
count on Earth nowhere went above 4.9, and people could be protected
against that.

The survey ship _Lotus_ came gingerly down to ground. There was no
longer any reason for tension. Its crew reported in and scattered to
the various places they called home. They were very glad to be back. In
the course of time they were all suitably bemedalled and admired and
told that their names would live forever. Of course, it was not true.

Nolan didn't pay much attention to this. He left the Survey. He went
to live in a small town. He married a small-town girl. And he never,
never, never took any one of the excursions so many WDA people took
to see the result of atomic explosions in Com territory, when their
attempt to murder one Western nation backfired. Nolan had caused that
backfiring. He very passionately did not want to see its results.

He'd seen all he wanted of that sort of thing on the third planet of a
sol-type sun, some light-centuries from Earth.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Third Planet, by Murray Leinster

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THIRD PLANET ***

***** This file should be named 52574.txt or 52574.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/2/5/7/52574/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
