Project Gutenberg's Dave Dashaway and his Hydroplane, by Roy Rockwood

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Dave Dashaway and his Hydroplane

Author: Roy Rockwood

Posting Date: August 29, 2012 [EBook #6714]
Release Date: October, 2004
First Posted: January 19, 2003

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DAVE DASHAWAY AND HIS HYDROPLANE ***




Produced by Sean Pobuda









DAVE DASHAWAY AND HIS HYDROPLANE

Or Daring Adventures Over The Great Lakes

By Roy Rockwood




CHAPTER I

THE YOUNG AVIATOR


"Telegram, sir."

"Who for?"

"Dave Dashaway."

"I'll take it."

The messenger boy who had just entered the hangar of the great prize
monoplane of the aero meet at Columbus, stared wonderingly about him
while the man in charge of the place receipted for the telegram.

The lad had never been in so queer a place before.  He was a lively,
active city boy, but the closest he had ever seen an airship was a
distance away and five hundred feet up in the air.  Now, with big
wonder eyes he stared at the strange appearing machine.  His fingers
moved restlessly, like a street-urchin surveying an automobile and
longing to blow its horn.

The man in charge of the place attracted his attention, too.  He had
only one arm and limped when he walked.  His face was scarred and he
looked like a war veteran.  The only battles this old warrior had
been in, however, were fights with the elements.  He was a famous
"wind wagon" man who had sustained a terrible fall in an endurance
race.  It had crippled him for life.  Now he followed the various
professional meets for a living, and also ran an aviation school for
amateurs.  His name was John Grimshaw.

The messenger boy took a last look about the place and left.  The
old man put on a cap, went to the door and rather gruesomely faced
the elements.

"A cold drizzling rain and gusty weather generally," he said to
himself in a grumbling tone.  "I'll face it any time for Dashaway,
though.  The telegram may be important."

The big aero field looked lonely and gloomy as the man crossed it.
Lights showed here and there in the various buildings scattered
about the enclosure.  The ground was wet and soft.  The rain came in
chilling dashes.  Old Grimshaw breasted the storm, and after half a
mile's walk came to a hangar a good deal like the one he had left.
There was a light inside.

"Hello, there!" he sang out in his big foghorn voice, thrusting the
door open with his foot and getting under the shelter, and shaking
the rain from his head and shoulders.

Two boys were the occupants of the place.  They had a lamp on the
table, upon which was outspread pictures and plans of airships.  The
older of the two got up from his chair with a pleasant smiling face.

"Why, it's Mr. Grimshaw!" he exclaimed.

"That's who it is," joined in the other boy cheerily.  "Say, you're
welcome, too.  We were looking over some sketches of new machines,
and you can tell us lots about them, you know."

"Got to get back to my own quarters," declared Grimshaw.  "Some
other time about those pictures.  Boy brought a telegram to Mr.
King's hangar.  It's for you, Dashaway."

"For me?" inquired the lad who had first addressed the visitor.

"Yes.  Here it is.  Mr. King's away, but if you need me for anything
let me know."

"I'm always needing you," replied Dave Dashaway.  "I don't know what
we'd do without you."

The young aviator--for such he was in fact and reality--took the
proffered envelope.  He tore open its end and read the enclosure
rapidly.

"Why," he said, "this is strange."

"Any answer?  Need me?" asked Grimshaw, moving towards the door.

"No, thank you," replied Dave in a vague, bothered way that made his
companion and chum, Hiram Dobbs, study his face with some
perplexity.

"I'd better get back home, then," said the old man.  "Fine weather
for hydroplanes this, eh?"

Both Dave and Hiram proceeded to the door with the grim old fellow
who had so kindly taught them all they knew about aeronautics.  When
their visitor had departed, Dave went back to the table.  He sat
down and perused the telegram once more.  Then he sat looking
fixedly at it, as if he was studying some hard problem.  Hiram stood
it as long as he could.  Then he burst out impetuously:

"What is it, Dave?"

"I'm trying to find out," was the abstracted reply.

"Who is it from?"

"The Interstate Aeroplane Co."

That name meant a good deal to Hiram Dobbs, and a great deal more to
Dave Dashaway.  It marked the starting point in the aviation career
of the latter, and that in its turn had meant a first step up the
ladder for his faithful comrade, Hiram.

In the first volume of this series, entitled:

"Dave Dashaway, the Young Aviator; Or, In the Clouds for Fame and
Fortune," the career of Dave Dashaway has been told.  The father of
the young airman had been a noted balloonist, and when he died a
mean old skinflint named Silas Warner had been appointed Dave's
guardian.  Warner had acted the tyrant and hard taskmaster for the
youth.  A natural love for aeronautics had been born in Dave.  He
had made an airship model which his guardian had maliciously
destroyed.  Warner had also appropriated a package dropped
accidentally by a famous aviator, named Robert King, from a
monoplane.

Dave had found this package, containing money, a watch and a medal
greatly prized by Mr. King.  Dave resolved that this property should
be restored to the airman.  He got hold of the lost articles, which
his guardian had secreted, and ran away from home.

After various adventures, during which he was robbed of the airman's
property, Dave managed to reach the aero meet at Fairfield.  He
found Robert King and described to him the boy thief.  The airman
took a fancy to Dave from the nerve and ability he showed in
experimenting with a parachute garment, and hired him.

About the same time Hiram Dobbs came along, ambitious to change his
farm life for an aviation career, and secured work helping about the
grounds.  Mr. King sent Dave to Grimshaw for training.  The
Interstate Aeroplane Co. wanted to exhibit its Baby Racer, a novel
biplane.  Dave made a successful demonstration, and won the
admiration and good will of the company.

In a few weeks time Dave scored a big success and won several
trophies.  His final exploit was taking the place of an aviator who
had fainted away in his monoplane, and winning the race for Mr.
King's machine.  Dave was now the proud possessor of a pilot's
license, and had fairly entered the professional field.

The thief who had stolen Mr. King's property from Dave, a graceless
youth named Gregg, was found, and the property recovered.  He had
also got hold of some papers that belonged to Dave's father.  Gregg
through these had obtained a trace of a Mr. Dale, a great friend of
the dead balloonist.  He had made Mr. Dale believe he was the real
Dave Dashaway, until he was unmasked.

Another bad boy Dave had run across was named Jerry Dawson.  From
the start in his career as an airman this youth had been an enemy.
Dave had succeeded him in the employ of Mr. King, Jerry having been
discharged in disgrace.  Jerry tried to "get even," as he called it,
by trying to wreck Mr. King's monoplane, the Aegis.  He also
betrayed Dave's whereabouts to his guardian.  Because Dave was right
and Jerry wrong, there plots rebounded on the schemer and did Dave
no harm.

Jerry and his father were exposed.  They still followed the various
meets, however, just as Mr. King and Dave and Hiram did, but they
were shunned by all reputable airmen.

After leaving the aero meet at Dayton the proud possessor of a
trophy as winner of a one hundred mile dash, Dave now found himself
and his friends on the aero, grounds at Columbus.  This was a summer
resort located on Lake Michigan.  A two weeks' programme had been
arranged, in which Dave was to give exhibitions for his employers of
their new model hydroplane.

Hiram was practicing for a flight in the Baby Racer.  The two
friends that rainy summer evening were interested in plans for the
coming meet and aviation business generally.  The arrival of the
telegram once more introduces the reader to Dave Dashaway, now
popularly known as the young aviator.

The telegram which Grimshaw had brought to Dave was dated at the
headquarters of the Interstate Aeroplane Co., some three hundred
miles distant.  It was addressed to Dave in care of Mr. King, and it
was signed by the manager of the company.  It read as follows:

"Our sales agent, Timmins, reported from your quarters at Columbus
three days ago.  Was due at Kewaukee this morning on big contract
with County Fair Amusement Co.  Wired Northern Hotel there, where we
had forwarded all the contracts and papers, and he is not there.
Find him at any expense, and get him to Kewaukee before to-morrow
morning, or the Star Aero Co. will get the order.  Fear some trick.
This means ten thousand dollars to us."

Dave read and reread this message, weighing every word in his mind
as he did so.  Hiram sat watching him in a fever of suspense and
anxiety.  Finally he exclaimed:

"See here, Dave Dashaway, is that Greek you can't make out, or have
you gone to sleep?"

"I was only trying to figure out this telegram," replied Dave
thoughtfully.  "Here, read it for yourself, and see what you make of
it."

The young aviator passed the yellow sheet over to his curious
friend.  The latter scanned it rapidly.  Then, with startling
suddenness, his face twitching with excitement, he jumped to his
feet.

"What do I make of it?" shouted Hiram.  "Just what the telegram
says--a trick!  It's come all over me in a flash.  Why, Dick, I know
all about it."




CHAPTER II

The "BABY RACER"


"You know all about it?" repeated Dave Dashaway, looking up in great
surprise.

"That's what I do," declared Hiram positively.

"What do you mean?"

"I'll explain."

"I wish you would."

"I'm a blockhead, that's just what I am!" cried Hiram.  "I don't
know what possessed me that I didn't tell you all about it before."

"See here, Hiram," broke in Dave, "What are you talking about?"

"Why, about Mr. Timmins.  You know he here night before last and
left us then?"

"Yes, Hiram, to go to Kewaukee."

"Well, he just didn't go to Kewaukee at all."

"That's no news, for this telegram shows that couldn't have done
so."

"You see, when Mr. Timmins got telling us about the big sale he was
going to make at Kewaukee," continued Hiram, "and how the Star Aero
people were bidders for the same contract, you warned him against
the Dawsons, and the people they are working for!"

"I know I did.  That was because the Dawsons are stunting for the
Star people."

"Exactly.  Then when I caught Jerry Dawson and Brooks, that precious
chum of his, sneaking around the Aegis hangar, I made up my mind
that they were up to no good.  I know what they were snooping around
for, now."

"What was it?"

"To pick up what information they could about Mr. Timmins' plans,
so, when Mr. Timmins went away, I was awful glad.  I felt pleased,
for Mr. King told as you know that he was a free and easy fellow,
friendly to everybody, and sometimes drank more than he ought to."

"Yes, I know that, Hiram."

"Well, last night I went to town to get some supplies for Mr.
Grimshaw.  There's a tavern at the cross roads, and some men were in
there.  I saw them through an open window.  There were six of them.
Brooks was there, and Jerry and his father, and three more of the
crowd.  They were playing cards and making a great deal of noise.
Just as I looked in some one pulled down the shade.  I caught a
sight of the other man, though.  Right off, even at the distance I
was, it struck me he looked like Mr. Timmins.  Then I remembered
that Mr. Timmins had certainly gone to Kewaukee the night before, so
I put it off my mind.  Now, I see the whole trick."

"What is that?"

"The crowd kept Mr. Timmins here, delaying and entertaining him.
Maybe later some of them led him still further away from Columbus.
Their man is probably on the spot at Kewaukee now, ready to get that
big contract for show biplanes."

Dave had been anxiously walking up and down the floor while Hiram
was talking.  Now he took his cap off a peg and picked up an
umbrella.

"You wait here till I come back, Hiram," he said.

"Where are you going, Dave?"

"Down to the Aegis hangar.  This telegram disturbs me very much.  I
have no idea where Mr. Timmins can be, and something must certainly
be done about this contract."

"That's so, Dave," agreed Hiram.  "It isn't exactly our business,
but it would be a big feather in your cap to help out the people who
are hiring you."

"That's what I want to do, if I can," replied Dave, as he left the
place.

The youth went straight to the Aegis hangar, where he found Grimshaw
tinkering over a broken airplane wing.  Mr. King had a desk in one
corner of what he called his office room.

Dave was free to use this at all times.  He opened it now, and for
ten minutes was busy with some railroad time tables he found there.
Then he consulted an aero guide map.

Grimshaw watched him from under his shaggy eyebrows, but said
nothing until Dave got up from the desk, buttoned his coat and
prepared to face the storm again.

"What's the trouble, Dashaway?" he asked.

"Why, Mr. Grimshaw?" inquired Dave, wishing to evade direct
questioning.

"You seem bothered about something, I see."

"Well, as a matter of fact, I am," confessed Dave.

"What is it?"

"I'm trying to find a way to get to Kewaukee," explained Dave.
"Something has come up that makes me think I ought to be there in
the interests of my employers early to-morrow morning. I am figuring
out how I can make it."

"See here, Dashaway," spoke the old airman in a grim, impressive
way,  "don't you do anything reckless."

"I won't," answered Dave.  "You know you once said I was all
business.  Well, I'll always try to do my duty without any
unnecessary risks."

Dave laughed carelessly and got away from the hangar.  A daring idea
had come into his mind.  Perhaps Grimshaw suspected it, and Dave was
afraid he might.  The lad knew that the eccentric old fellow liked
him, and would try to dissuade him from any exploit of unusual
peril.

"I'll do it, I'll have to do it or let the company lose out,"
breathed Dave, as once outside he broke into a run across the
aviation field.

Dave found Hiram winding the alarm clock as he re-entered the half
shed, half canvas house where the Baby Racer was stored.  Although
they got their meals at Mr. King's headquarters, the boys had two
light cots and slept near to the machine which Dave had been
exhibiting.

Dave glanced at the clock, and Hiram noticing the look, said:

"Eleven thirty, Dave.  I've set the alarm clock for five thirty.
You know that new hydroplane will probably come in on an early
freight.  What's the programme?"

"Well, Hiram," responded Dave, throwing off his coat and hat, "I'm
going to dress up for a ride."

"Eh?" ejaculated Hiram, staring hard at the set resolute face of his
comrade.

"Yes, I've got to get to Kewaukee."

"Oh, you mean going by train?"

"No.  Last one left an hour ago.  Next one nine o clock to-morrow
morning."

"Automobile, then?"

"On the country mud roads we've been having for the last week?"

"That's so.  Then--"

"It's the airship route or nothing, Hiram," said Dave.  "I'm going
in the biplane."

"The Baby Racer?"

"Yes."

"On such a night as this!  Why, Dave," began Hiram, almost in alarm.

"Don't say a word," interrupted Dave with a preemptory wave of his
hand.  "I've made up my mind, and that ends it."

"It usually does," said Hiram.  "If you're bound to do it, though,
Dave--"

"I certainly am."

"Ask Mr. Grimshaw's advice, first."

"Not for worlds."

"Why not?"

"I think he would try to stop me.  See here, Hiram, I've thought it
all over.  I know it's a hard, rough night, but I also know what the
Baby Racer can do."

"It's a pretty bad night to do any fooling in the air," remarked
Hiram.

"There won't be much fooling about it, Hiram. I know the chances
and, I shan't look for any fun.  It is a bad night, I know, but the
wind is right, and I can head straight into it in reaching
Kewaukee."

"How far away is Kewaukee, Dave?"

"Ninety-five miles."

Dave, while he talked, had been putting on his regular aviator's
suit.  As he finished up with a helmet, he noticed Hiram changing
his coat for a sweater.

"What are you up to, Hiram," he inquired quickly.

"Getting ready, of course."

"Getting ready for what?"

"The trip to Kewaukee."

"Oh, you think you're going?"

"If you are," retorted Hiram, "I know I am.  Now, see here, Dave,"
continued Hiram, waving a silencing finger as Dave was about to
speak, "I know I'm not an aviator like you, and never will be.  All
the same, I am some good in an airship, if it's only to act as
ballast.  The other day when I was up with you in the Racer, you.
said I shifted the elevator just in time to save a smash up.  In a
storm like the one to-night, you my need me worse than ever.
Anyhow, Dave Dashaway, I won't let you go alone."

The young airman looked at his loyal, earnest friend with pleasure
and pride.  Hiram was only a crude country boy.  He had, however,
shown diamond in the rough, and Dave appreciated the fact.

Hiram had made several ground runs in an aeroplane.  He had gone up
in the Baby Racer twice with Dave, and had proven himself a model
passenger.  As he had just hinted, too, he had been familiar enough
with the mechanism of the biplane to operate some of its auxiliary
machinery so as to avert an accident.

"You are the best company in the world, Hiram," said Dave, "but I
wouldn't feel right in letting you take the risk of a hazardous
run."

"Dave, I won't let you go alone," persisted Hiram.

Dave said nothing in reply.  He went outside, and Hiram followed
him.  They unlocked the door of the shed adjoining where the Baby
Racer was housed, and lit two lanterns.

"Get a couple of the nearest field men, Hiram," directed Dave, "and
I will have everything in order by the time you get back."

There was not much for Dave to do.  Only the noon of that day they
had got the little biplane ready for a cross country spurt.  Then
the rain came on, and they decided to defer the dash till the
weather was more propitious.  Dave was looking over the machinery,
when a gruff hail startled him.

"Hello!" challenged old Grimshaw, appearing at the open doorway of
the hangar.  "What you up to, Dashaway?"

Dave flushed guiltily.  He was dreadfully embarrassed to be "caught
in the act" as it were, by his great friend, the old airman.

"Why--you see, Mr. Grimshaw--" stammered Dave.

"Yes, of course I see," retorted the old man firmly.  "You're going
to start out a night like this."

"I've got to, Mr. Grimshaw," declared Dave desperately.

"Business, eh?"

"Of the most important kind."

"What is it?"

It was in order for Dave to explain details, and did so briefly.

"H'm," commented Grimshaw, when his pupil concluded his explanation.
"And so you thought you'd steal away without letting me know it?"

"Oh, now, Mr. Grimshaw!" Dave hastened to say--"that was not the
spirit of the thing at all."

"Go ahead, Dashaway."

"Well, then, I think so very much of you I didn't want it to worry
you."

"Roll her out," was all that Grimshaw would say, placing his one
hand on the tail of the biplane.  "Hold on for a minute.  Gasoline
supply?"

"Twenty-five gallons."

"That will do.  Lubricating oil-all right.  Now then, lad, hit that
head wind every time, and you'll make it, sure."





CHAPTER III

A WILD NIGHT RIDE


"Go!"

It was less than half an hour after the appearance of Grimshaw on
the scene that the Baby Racer was all ready for its stormy night's
flight.

The old aviator had fussed and poked about the dainty little
biplane, as if it was some valued friend he was sending out into the
world to try its fortune.  Every once in a while he had growled out
some brief advice to Dave in his characteristic way.

Then he directed and helped, while two field men started the machine
on its forward run.

"Look out for telegraph poles, and watch your fuel tank," was
Grimshaw's final injunction.

Dave knew the Baby Racer just as an engineer understands his
locomotive.  Daylight or dirk, once aloft the young aviator did not
doubt his own powers.  The moment the Racer left the ground,
however, with a switch of her flapping tail, Dave knew that he was
to have no easy fair-weather cruise.

"Slow it is," the watchful, excited Hiram heard him say, working the
wheel as cautiously as an automobilist rounding a sharp curve.

Dave saw that everything depended on getting a start and reaching a
higher level.  He kept the angle of ascent small, for the maximum
power of the engine could not be reached in a moment.  The starting
speed naturally let down with the machine ascending an inclined
plane.

"It's slow enough, that's sure," remarked Hiram.  "It's the wind,
isn't it, Dave?"

"We don't want to slide back in the air or be blown over backwards,"
replied Dave, eye, ear, and nerve on the keenest alert.

The wind resistance caused a growing speed reduction.  The
sensitiveness of the elevating rudder warned Dave that he must
maintain a perfect balance until they could strike a steady path of
flight.  Hiram's rapt gaze followed every skillful maneuver of the
master hand at that wheel.

"Good for you!" he chirped, as Dave worked the ailerons to
counteract the leaning of the machine.  A swing of the rudder had
caused the biplane to bank, but quick as a flash Dave righted it by
getting the warping control on the opposite tack, avoiding a bad
spill.

The machine was tail heavy as Dave directed a forward plunge,
coasting slightly.  He had, however, pretty good control of the
center of gravity.

It was now only a question of fighting the stiff breeze that
prevailed, and keeping an even balance.

Hiram's eyes sparkled as the Racer volplaned, caught the head wind
at just the right angle, and struck a course due northwest like a
sail boat under perfect control.

The engine was near the operator's seat, and on the post just under
the wheel were the spark and throttle levers on the fuselage beam.
The steering wheel was a solid piece of wood about eight inches in
diameter with two holes cut into it to fit the hands.

The passenger's seat now occupied by Hiram was in the center line of
the machine, so that, filled or vacant, the lateral balance was not
affected.

Hiram knew all about the monoplane dummy or the aerocycle with
treadle power for practice work which he had operated under old
Grimshaw's direction.  As to the practical running of a biplane
aloft, however, that was something for him to learn.  He was keenly
alive to every maneuver that Dave executed, and he stored in his
mind every new point he noticed as the Racer seemed fairly started
on its way.

"Keep me posted, Dave," spoke the willing Hiram.  "If anything
happens I want to know what you expect me to do."

"I don't intend to have anything happen if I can help it, Hiram,"
replied Dave.  "This is a famous start."

"It's not half as bad as I thought it would be," said Hiram.

The rain had changed into a fine mist, but the breeze continued
choppy and strong at times.  Dave had gone over the course with Mr.
King in The Aegis twice in the daytime, and had an accurate idea of
the route.  However, he had landmarks to follow.  What guided Dave
were the lights of the various towns on the route to Kewaukee and
railway signals.  These were dimly outlined by a glow only at times,
but Dave as he progressed felt that he was keeping fairly close to
his outlined programme.

Hiram chuckled and warbled, as he knew from Dave's manner and the
way the Baby Racer acted that his friend had it under full control.
Our hero attempted no fancy flying nor spurts of swiftness.  Up to
the end of the first hour the flight had proven far less difficult
than he had anticipated.

"There's Medbury," said Dave at length, inclining his head towards
a cluster of electric lights below and somewhat beyond them.  "That
means one-third of our journey covered."

"It's great what you and the Baby Racer can do, Dave," cried the
admiring and enthusiastic country boy.  "We're going to make it,
aren't we?"

"If the wind doesn't change and we meet with no mishaps," answered
Dave.

A stretch of steady sailing was an excuse for Hiram to share a brief
lunch of ham sandwiches with Dave.  The thoughtful Grimshaw had
provided these at the last moment of the departure of the biplane.

By the watch Mr. King had given him on the occasion of winning a
race for the Aegis, Dave found that it was a little after two
o'clock when the Racer passed a town named Creston.

"It's only twenty miles farther, Hiram," announced the young aviator
with satisfaction.

"And plenty of juice in the tank left to go on," added Hiram.  "This
is a trip to talk about, eh, Dave?"

Dave nodded and smiled.  He suddenly gave renewed attention to wheel
and levers.

"Anything wrong?" inquired Hiram, noticing the movement.

"The wind is shifting slightly," was the reply.

Dave felt of the breeze cautiously after that, keeping his cheek
well to windward.  It required constant watchfulness and
maneuvering for the next fifteen miles to keep the control
permanent.  Dave was glad when a dim glow of radiance told that they
had nearly reached the end of their journey.

Dave "ducked," as the phrase goes, as a swoop from a new quarter
sent the machine banking.

He managed the dilemma by circling.  There was only five more miles
to cover.  Dave went up searching for a steadier air current, found
it, maintained a steady flight for over a quarter of an hour, and
slowed down slightly as they came directly over Kewaukee.

"Going to land?" inquired Hiram, attentively attracted by all these
skillful maneuvers.

"Yes," replied Dave.  "The question is, though, to find just the
right place."

Dave tried to figure out the contour of the landscape beneath them.
He passed over high buildings, skirted what seemed like a factory
district, and began to volplane.

"Going to drop?" queried Hiram.

"I think so," responded Dave.  "According to those electric lights
there is a park or some other large vacant space we can strike on
this angle."

"The mischief!" exclaimed Hiram abruptly as the Racer struck a lower
air current a strong blast of wind made it shake and reel. Then
there was a creak, a sway and a snap.

"Something broke!" shouted Hiram in excitement.

"Yes," answered Dave rapidly.  "It's one of the right outermost
struts between the supporting planes."

"The one that snapped the other day," suggested Hiram.

"Likely.  Grimshaw fixed it with glue and bracing, and fitting iron
rings about it.  The vibration of the motor and the straining have
pulled the nail heads through the holes in the rings."

"Can you hold out?"

Dave did not reply.  He felt new vibrations, and knew that the
strain of warping the wings at the tips had caused more than one of
the struts to collapse.

The young aviator realized that it would be a hard drop unless he
did something quickly and effectively.  There was no time to think.
Counterbalance was everything.

Dave tried to restore the disturbed balance of the machine by
bringing the left wing under the control.  Then he forced the
twisting on the right side.

The young aviator held his breath, while his excited companion
stared ahead and down, transfixed.  They were going at a rapid rate,
and every moment the Baby Racer threatened to turn turtle and spill
them out.

Dave succeeded in temporarily checking the tendency to tip.  All
aerial support was gone.  He kept the rudder at counterbalance,
threw off the power, and wondered what they were headed into.

The next moment the Baby Racer crashed to the ground.





CHAPTER IV

A BUSINESS BOY


"We've landed!" shouted Hiram in a jolty tone, plunging forward in
his seat in the biplane.

"Yes, but where?" Dave asked quickly.

"That's so.  Whew!  What have we drifted into?"

The Baby Racer had struck a mass soft and yielding.  It drove
through some substance rather than ran on its wheels.  There was a
dive and a joggle.  Then the machine came to a halt--submerged.

Whatever had received it now came up about the puzzled young
aviators as might a snowdrift or it heap of hay.  Dave dashed a
filmy, flake-like substance resembling sawdust from eyes, ears and
mouth.  Hiram tried to disentangle himself from strips and curls of
some light, fluffy substance.  Then he cried out:

"Dave, it's shavings!"

"You don't say so."

"Yes, it is--a great heap of shavings, a big mountain of them."

"Lucky for us.  If we had hit the bare ground I fear we would have
had a smash up."

Gradually and cautiously the two young aviators made their way out
of the seats of the machine.  They got past the wings.  A circle of
electric street lamps surrounded them on four sides.  Their
radiance, dim and distant, seemed to indicate that they were in the
center of a factory yard covering several acres.

A little way off they could discern the outlines of high piles of
lumber and beyond these several buildings.  The biplane lay partly
on its side, sunk deep in a heap of long, broad shavings.  The mass
must have been fully a hundred feet in extent and fifteen to twenty
feet high.  They reached its side and slid down the slant to the
ground.

"Well!" ejaculated Dave.

"Yes, and what?" inquired Hiram, brushing the loose bits of shavings
from his soaked tarpaulin coat.

"Business--strictly and quick," replied Dave promptly.

"And leave the Racer where she is?"

"Can you find a better place, Hiram?"

"Well, no, but--"

A man flashing a dark lantern and armed with a heavy cane came upon
them around the corner of the buildings.  The boys paused.  The man,
evidently the watchman of the place, challenged them, moving his
lantern from face to face.

"Who are you?" he demanded sternly.

"Aviators," replied Dave.

"What's that?"

"We just arrived in an airship."

"No nonsense.  How did you get in here?"

"Mister," spoke out Hiram, "we just landed in the biplane, the Baby
Racer.  If you don't believe me, come to the shavings pile yonder
and we'll show you the machine, and thank you for having it there,
for if you hadn't I guess we'd have needed an ambulance."

The watchman looked incredulous.  He followed Dave and Hiram,
however, as they led the way back to the heap of shavings.  One wing
of the biplane stuck up in the air and he made it out.

"This is queer," he observed.  "You say it's an airship?"

"Yes, sir," nodded Hiram.

"We had to make a hurried night journey from Columbus," explained
Dave.  "There were no trains, and we came with the biplane."

"Well, well, well," commented the watchman.  He had heard of
Columbus and the aero meet there, and began to understand matters.

"You see," spoke Hiram, "we can't land everywhere, or we'd have to
settle some damage suits."

"I will be glad to pay you for letting us leave the machine here
till after daylight, and watch it to see no harm comes to it,"
proposed Dave.

"Why, we'll do that," assented the watchman.  "You look like two
decent young fellows, and I'm sure the company won't object to
letting your airship stay up there for a few hours."

"We will be back to see about it in a few hours," promised Dave.

The watchman led the boys to the big gate of' the factory yard and
let them out.  The rain had ceased and the wind was not blowing so
hard as before.

"What now, Dave?" inquired Hiram, as they found themselves in the
deserted street.

"The Northern Hotel."

"Oh, going to try and fix things before daylight?"

"We can't afford to lose a minute," declared Dave.  "There's a
policeman.  I want to ask him a question."

They hurried to a corner where a policeman had halted under the
street lamp.  Dave inquired the location of the Northern Hotel.
Then the boys proceeded again on their way, and reached the place in
about half an hour.

The night clerk and others were on duty.  Dave approached the desk
and addressed the clerk.

"Is a Mr. Timmins stopping here?" he asked.

"Why, no," replied the clerk, looking Dave and Hiram over curiously,
their somewhat queer garb attracting his attention.

"Do you know him, may I inquire?"

"Oh, yes, Mr. Timmins has been here several times.  We are holding
some mail for him, and expected him several days ago."

"Do you know the company he represents?"

"Airships, isn't it?" propounded the clerk.

"That's right.  The Interstate Aeroplane Company."

"Yes, I remember now," added the clerk.

"I am also connected with that company," explained Dave.

The clerk stared vaguely, as if he did not quite understand the
situation.

"Yes," eagerly broke in the irrepressible Hiram, as if he was
introducing some big magnate, "he's Dave Dashaway, and he's beat the
field with the Interstate Baby Racer."

"Oh, Dashaway, eh?" said the clerk, with a pleasant smile.  "I've
heard of you and read about you."

"I am glad of that," responded Dave, "because it may help you
identify me with the Inter-state people.  As an employee of theirs
and a friend of Mr. Timmins, I will have to be confidential with
you."

"That's all right--we are used to confidences in this business,"
said the hotel clerk.

Dave reflected deeply for a moment.  He had a definite plan in view.
He realized that he must confide to a degree in the hotel clerk.

"The gist of the matter," said Dave, "is that Mr. Timmins has missed
connections.  He should have been here two days ago.  Here is a
telegram I received from the Interstate people."

The clerk read the telegram.  He nodded his head and smiled, which
the observant Dave took to mean that he was friendly towards Mr.
Timmins, but knew of some of his business-lapses in the past.

"What do you want me to do?" asked the clerk.

"You notice that the Interstate people refer in that telegram to
some papers sent to the hotel here for Mr. Timmins."

"I noticed that," assented the clerk.  "I shouldn't wonder if this
is the package."

As he spoke the clerk reached over to the letter case near his desk
and took up a large manila envelope.  It was addressed to Mr.
Timmins, and bore in one corner the printed name and address of the
Interstate Aeroplane Co.

"That is the letter, I feel sure," said Dave.

"I have no doubt of it," agreed the clerk.

"Do you suppose it would help you out any to have me give it to
you?"

"Why, will you?" questioned Dave eagerly.  "I was going to ask you
to do so."

"I think I understand the situation now," said the clerk, "and I can
see how your getting the letter may help your people out of a
tangle.  It's taking some responsibility on my part, for the letter
is of course the property of Mr. Timmins.  I'm going to take the
risk, though, and I think Mr. Timmins will say it's all right when
he comes along."

"I know he will," declared Dave.  "You see, I hope to carry through
a contract he has neglected."

Dave took the bulky letter and opened its envelope.  He glanced
hastily but intelligently over its contents.  They were just what he
imagined they would be, contracts for eight biplanes ready to sign,
and details and plans as to the machines.

"Have you a Kewaukee directory here?" he asked.

The clerk pushed a bulky volume across the marble slab of the
counter, with the words:

"Anybody special you are looking up?"

"Why, yes," replied Dave, "the County Fair Amusement Co."

"Oh, you mean Col. Lyon's proposition," observed the clerk at once.
"He runs county fair attractions all over the country."

"It must be the same," said Dave.

"I know Col. Lyon very well," proceeded the clerk.  "He comes in
here very often."

"Where is his office?" inquired Dave.

"I don't think he has any regular office," responded the clerk.
"Two or three times a week he calls for mail at the Central
Amusement Exchange.  He travels a good deal--has side attractions
with most of the big shows."

"But he lives in Kewaukee?"

"Not exactly.  He has a very fine place called Fernwood, out on the
North Boulevard."

Dave thought things over for a minute or two.  Then he asked:

"How can I reach Fernwood?"

"You don't mean before daylight?"

"Why, yes," responded Dave, "the sooner the better."

"I think any of the taxi men out at the curb know the location,"
said the clerk.

"Thank you," replied Dave, "and for all your great kindness about
that letter."

He and Hiram went out to the street.  There were three or four
taxicabs lined up at the curb, their drivers napping in the seats.
Dave approached one of them.

"Do you know where Fernwood is?" he inquired of the chauffeur.

"You mean Col. Lyon's place?"

"Yes."

"Was there only last night.  I took the Colonel home."

"Then he's there," spoke Dave to Hiram.  "All right, take us to
Fernwood."

"You won't find anybody stirring at this hour of the morning,"
suggested the chauffeur.

"Then we'll Wait till the Colonel gets up," said Dave.

In less than half an hour the auto came to a halt before one of a
score or more of fine houses lining the most exclusive section of
the country boulevard.

Dave got out of the machine and Hiram followed him.  They passed
through the gates of a large garden.  In its center was a mansion
with wide porches.  No light showed anywhere about the place.

"You're not going to wake anybody up at this outlandish hour?"
asked Hiram.

"Well, perhaps not," answered Dave.

"Why didn't you wait and see this Col. Lyon in the city at his
office?"

"Because there is no certainty that he will be at his office today.
Then, too, that Star fellow may be on hand there to grab the
contract.  I want to head him off."

By this time they had reached the steps of the front porch.

"See here, Hiram," observed Dave, lowering his voice, "we'll sit
down here for a spell.  It's about five o'clock, and by six someone
will be stirring about."

"Say," said Hiram, staring across the shadowed porch, "the front
door there is open."

"Why, so it is," replied Dave, peering towards it.

"That's strange, isn't it?"

"Oh, no--neglected, or left open for ventilation."

Both boys relapsed into silence.  Hiram rested his face on his hands
and his knees, inclined to doze.

Dave was framing up in his mind how he would approach Col. Lyon.  He
was deeply immersed in thought, when a sound behind him caused him
to start and look behind him.

Somebody with a great bundle done up in a sheet had just passed
through the open doorway out upon the porch.

The bundle was so big that its bearer had both hands clasped about
it, and its top came above his eyes.

Before Dave could speak a warning, the man carrying the package
crossed the porch and stumbled against Hiram, whom he did not see.

"Thunder! what's this?" shouted Hiram, knocked from his position and
rolling down the steps.

The man with the bundle echoed the try with one of alarm, as he
missed his footing and plunged forward.

"The mischief!" exclaimed Dave, starting at the bundle over which
the man tumbled, bursting it open.

There was an immense clatter.  Even in the imperfect light of the
early morning, the young aviator made out a great heap of clothing,
silverware and jewelry, rattling down the steps of the porch.





CHAPTER V

A TEN THOUSAND DOLLAR ORDER


"What's happened?" cried Hiram, rolling over and over on the gravel
walk to which he had tumbled.

"Stop that man!" shouted Dave.

In a flash the young aviator took in the meaning of the situation.
The fugitive, for such he now was, made a quick move the instant he
gained his feet.  Not waiting to see who had obstructed his
progress, and probably deciding that it was the police, he bounded
in among some bushes.

Dave, running after him, made out his form dimly, swiftly scaling a
rear brick wall.

"Why, what is all this?" demanded Hiram, staring at the litter on
the steps.

"That man was a thief," explained Dave.

"It looks that way, doesn't it?  Hello!"

Both boys stepped back and stared upwards.  Over the porch was a
second railed-in veranda.  A night-robed figure had crossed it from
some bed chamber fronting upon it.

"Hey, you down there!  What's all this racket?" challenged this
newcomer on the scene.

"Are you Colonel Lyon?" inquired Dave.

"That's me."

"Then you had better come down and see what's going on."

"Why so?"

"Your house has been burglarized."

"Gracious I you don't say so.  Where is the thief?"

"He has escaped."

"Hm.  Down in a minute," mumbled the man, retiring from view.

It was several minutes before the owner of the mansion put in a
second appearance.  He came cautiously out on the porch, clutching a
great heavy cane.  He looked the boys over suspiciously.

"I don't understand this," he began.

"Neither did we, Mister," returned Hiram, "till the thief came
bolting out through that front door.  He fell all over me and
dropped his bundle.  There's what was in it."

Hiram pointed to the scattered plunder.  For the first time the
colonel caught sight of the scattered stuff.  He gasped, and stared,
and fidgeted.  Then he hastened back across the porch and into the
vestibule.

Clang!  clang!  Clang! rang out a great alarm gong, and almost
immediately two men servants of the place came rushing out
half-dressed upon the porch.

In a very much excited way the colonel incoherently told of the
burglary.  He ordered the men to gather up the scattered plunder.
Then he turned his attention to Dave and Hiram.

"Now, tell me about the whole thing," he spoke.

"There isn't much to tell, Colonel Lyon," replied Dave.  "We were
sitting here waiting--"

"Waiting?" repeated the showman sharply.

"Yes, sir."

"What for?"

"To see you."

"Eh?" projected the Colonel, with a stare.

"That's right, Mister," declared Hiram.  "You see, it's pretty
early, and we didn't want to wake you up."

"Yes, but what brought you here so early?"

"Business," answered Dave.

"Business--with me?"

"Yes, sir.  We came in an automobile from the city, so as to be sure
to find you early enough.  We had just settled down here to wait and
rest, when that burglar came out."

"Why, then, you've saved my losing all that valuable stuff!"
exclaimed the showman.  "I should say so," added the speaker with
force, as he moved over and glanced at the heaps his servants were
massing together, upon the lower step.  "Watches, rings, silverware,
my fur winter coat, and hello--my whole collection of rare coins!
Hump! the man must have had the run of the house for hours. Here,
you two, come inside.  You've done me a big service."

Hiram chuckled, nudging Dave in a knowing way.

"What luck!" he whispered.  "Dave, you're all right now."

The owner of the place led his young guests through the vestibule
into a hallway, and pointed to a large reception room.

"You wait till I get dressed," he directed.  "Sit down, and make
yourself comfortable."

As he spoke the showman turned on a perfect blaze of electric light.
Dave and Hiram took off their helmets, and made themselves look as
little like stormy night aviators as was possible under the
circumstances.

It was nearly ten minutes before their host reappeared.  He was
fully dressed now, and presented the appearance of a keen, active
business man.

"Think there's any use trying to catch that burglar?" was his first
question.

"I don't think so at all," replied Dave.

"All right, then.  Carry that truck into the library," the showman
ordered his two men, who had gathered it up in a rug taken from the
vestibule.  "You'll take turns guarding the house, nights after
this.  Now then, young men, who are you?"

The showman put the question as he plumped down in an armchair
besides his two guests.

"We're airship boys," explained Hiram hastily, but proudly.

"Oh!" commented Colonel Lyon slowly, looking the pair over from head
to foot.

"That is, Dave is an airman," corrected Hiram.  "He's Dave
Dashaway."

"Why, I've heard of you.  At the Dayton meet, weren't you?
Honorable mention, or was it a prize?"

"Both," shot out Hiram promptly.

"That's very good," said the colonel.  "I'm pretty well up in the
aero field myself.  I run that line at county fairs."

"Yes, sir, I know that," said Dave, "and that is why I came to see
you."

"That's so--you said it was business, but I must say you are early
birds," smiled the showman.

"We had to be," again spoke Hiram.

"How was that?"

"Why," said Dave, "I thought it was very necessary that I should see
you first thing this morning.  I acted on a wire from my employers,
the Interstate Aeroplane Co."

"Your employers?" repeated the colonel, a fresh token of interest in
his eyes.

"Yes, sir, I have been exhibiting their Baby Racer at the meets."

"Ah, I understand now."

"I am going to take up hydroplane work at Columbus, now.  Last night
late I received a telegram from the Interstate people.  It led to
getting to Kewaukee and seeing you.  There were no trains."

"Roads too bad for an automobile," put in Hiram.

"And we came in the Baby Racer," concluded Dave.

"What's that?" exclaimed the showman.

"You came all the way from Columbus in a biplane?"

"Yes, sir," nodded Dave.

"A night like last night--"

"We had to, you see," observed Hiram.

"H'm," observed the colonel, with decided admiration in his manner,
"that was a big thing to do.  Where is your machine?"

"We landed on a heap of shavings in a city factory yard," explained
Dave.  "We left the machine in charge of the watchman."

"And automobiled it out here?  Why, say, I had some dealings with
your company."

"I know you did," said Dave.

"I wrote to them for specifications and figures on light biplanes.
They sent outlines that pleased me very much, and I told them so.
Their man made an appointment to be at my city office to close up
matters day before yesterday.  He never showed up."

"I know that," said Dave.

"What was the trouble?"

"I will explain that to you."

"You see, the Star man was here yesterday.  He made a pretty fair
showing, but I was rather struck on your goods."

"Everybody is that knows them," spoke Hiram.

"Well, I was to let the man know this morning at my city office my
decision.  You are on deck.  All right, what have you got to say?"

"Why, just this," replied Dave: "I'm not much of a business man, of
course, but I hurried on to see you because I believe a trick has
been played on our people."

"Who by?"

"The Star crowd."

"Oh!"

"In some way they have sidetracked our agent.  I have with me,"
continued Dave, "the detailed plans and figures on your order, which
had been forwarded from the factory to the Northern Hotel, at
Kewaukee."

"All right, show them up," directed the colonel briskly.

Dave did so.  Hiram sat regarding his friend, with undisguised
admiration, as for one half, hour Dave went over papers, explaining
the merits of the Interstate biplane with all the clearness and
ability of a born salesman.

 "You'll do," pronounced the showman with an expansive smile, as
Dave concluded.  "That's the contract, is it?"

"Yes, sir," and Dave handed the showman the paper in question.

"All right, I'll just go to the library and sign it."

"Dave," whispered Hiram in a triumphant chuckle, as Colonel Lyon
left the room. "Great!"

Dave returned a pleased smile.  He suppressed partly the great
satisfaction he felt.

"You see," remarked the showman, returning in a few minutes and
handing the signed contract to Dave, "I favored your machines from
the start.  It must be a good machine, to make ninety miles on a
night like last night.  Now then, young gentlemen, I've ordered an
early breakfast, and I want you to join me at the meal."

There was no gainsaying the hearty, imperious old fellow.  The boys
felt first class as they finished a repast that sent them on their
way complacent and delighted.

"The company will acknowledge the contract, Colonel Lyon," said
Dave, as they left the porch, "and attend to other details."

"I don't suppose, Dashaway," answered the showman, "that you're open
for such a week stunt as exhibiting at some of my county fairs?"

"I am under contract with the Interstate people," replied Dave.  "If
I get out of a job, Colonel Lyon, I shall be glad to have you
consider me."

"I fancy I will," declared the showman with enthusiasm.  "I'll make
you a liberal offer, too.  You've saved the carting away of all that
stuff the burglar gathered.  It make it up to you some way."

Dave waved the contract in reply.

"I couldn't have a better feather in my cap than this," he cried
gaily.  "Many, many, thanks, Colonel Lyon."

"And you'll find the Interstate biplane just the best in the world,"
added Hiram.

"We've kept that chauffeur waiting a long time," observed Dave, as
they came out upon the boulevard.

"Oh, he's used to that," suggested Hiram.

"I'll give him something extra for his patience," said Dave.

"Yes, the Interstate people can well afford it," commented Hiram.
"Think of it: a ten thousand dollar order!  Hurrah!"





CHAPTER VI

ABOARD THE HYDROPLANE


"Dashaway, you're a wonder."

"Thank you, sir."

"And I'm proud of you," added Mr. Robert King, the winner of the
monoplane endurance prize, and the man who had practically adopted
Dave into the aviation field.

"I've got something to say as to the matter of pride," spoke up old
Grimshaw.  "A lad who can make the run Dashaway did with the Baby
Racer, is a boy to holler about."

"If there's anything to be proud about," added Dave, "it's the right
good friends I've made."

"My friends, too," put in the impetuous Hiram.  "I'm getting along
famously.  Why, I only tipped out of the dummy airship once
yesterday."

All hands were in fine high spirits.  It was several days after the
wild night race Dave and Hiram had made to Kewaukee.  Now the entire
party were on their way to the borders of the lake, where the new
hydroplane made by the Interstate Aviation Company was ready for a
trial trip.   Grimshaw knew little of hydroplanes, and the
Interstate people had sent an expert demonstrator to the spot to
teach their young exhibitor the ropes.  Dave had been constantly
under this man's tuition.

It was far more easy, he had learned, to acquire a thorough
knowledge, of how to run a hydroplane than to operate a monoplane.
It was simpler, and besides that his experience with an airship
helped wonderfully.

Dave was winning golden opinions from his employers.  The way in
which he had dosed the Kewaukee contract had pleased them immensely.
There was another end to the Kewaukee episode that had brought heaps
of satisfaction to all of them, especially to Hiram Dobbs.

The Baby Racer had been quickly repaired at Kewaukee, and had made a
speedy return trip to Columbus.  Somehow the story of how the
Interstate people had outwitted the plots of the Star crowd had
gotten noised around the meet.  Then a class journal devoted to
aeronautics printed the story.

"Well," Hiram had come to Mr. King's hangar that morning to say,
"the Dawson crowd are simply squelched.  I met Jerry Dawson and his
father.  You ought to see the looks they gave me when I just grinned
at them, and said 'Contract!'  It was like a fellow saying 'Baa!' to
sheep.  Why, those fellows just sneaked away.  We've beaten them at
every angle, Dave, and I reckon they'll give up their meanness now,
and quickly fade away."

"It would be a good thing for honest aeronautics if they would,"
growled old Grimshaw.

"We'll hasten them with a little help, if they try any more tricks,"
announced Mr. King.

The hydroplane had been run into a boat house after the practice of
the day previous, and was all ready for use.  It was equipped to
carry two or more passengers, and was driven by a fifty horse power
motor.  It had two propellers, and these were controlled by chain
transmission.

Old Grimshaw had not much use for hydroplanes, he had told Dave.
His hobby was air machines.  However, because his favorite pupil was
going to run the machine, he allowed Dave to explain about the
hydroplane, and was quite interested.

The machine had a bulkhead fore and aft, with an upward slope in
front and a downward slope to the rear.

"It's safe, comfortable, and quick to rise to control," declared
Dave.  "See, Mr. Grimshaw, there's a new wrinkle."

Dave touched a little device attached to the flywheel.  The latter
was made with teeth to fit into another gear, operated from a shaft.

"What do you call that, now?" asked the old airman.

"A self starter.  You see, the shaft runs forward alongside the
pilot's seat.  Here's the handle of it, right at the end of the
shaft."

"Looks all right," admitted Grimshaw grudgingly.  "Give me the air,
though, every time.  If you want to be a sailor, why don't you
enlist the navy?"

"How about an air and water combination, Grimshaw?" called Mr. King.

"Well, that is a little better," replied Grimshaw.

"I'm dying to see that new aero-hydroplane Dave's people are getting
out," remarked the ardent Hiram.

"They wrote me it would be completed this week," said Dave.

"And you are going to run it, Dave?"

"I think so, I hope so.  They claim great things for it."

"Well, give your hydroplane a spin, Dashaway," suggested Mr. King.
"I want to see how she works, and must get back to the hangars on
business."

The Reliance, the new hydroplane of the Interstate people, was
twenty feet long and had a fuel gauge and a bilge pump.

Dave got into his seat, and Hiram sat directly beside him.  A touch
put the machinery in motion.

"There's a puffy eighteen mile wind, Dashaway,"  cried out Mr. King.

"Yes, I wouldn't venture too far from shore," advised Grimshaw, a
trifle anxiously.

The water was quite rough where the flight started.  The machine
acted all right, however.  A crowd had gathered on the beach, and
there was some encouraging cheering as the power boat gained good
headway.

"Whew I what have you invited me to, Dave--bath?" puffed Hiram.

Dave had neglected to put in place the rubber cover, so that during
the preliminary run along the water the waves drenched both of the
boys.

Dave stopped the motor and started drifting, at a sudden current or
breeze sent the tail before the wind.  The rear of the hydroplane
was forced under water.

"Look out!" ordered Dave sharply.

"I see--we're in for an upset," spoke Hiram quickly.

The hydroplane was forced over backwards, the tail striking a sand
bar.

Dave and Hiram were both ready for the tip.  They escaped with only
wetting their feet, for they climbed upon the bottom of the upper
surface as the hydro capsized.

The hydroplanes prevented the machine from sinking.  Almost at once
a boat put out from shore.  Once back at the boat house, the damage
shown was a slight fracture to the main girder and some of the ribs
at the trailing edge, and two broken tail spars.  Dave sent Hiram at
once to the practice grounds to arrange about the repairs.

"It's no weather for a trial, Dashaway," said Mr. King, "I think I
would postpone the trial trip until tomorrow, if I were you."

Dave did not commit himself.  He stayed about the boat house after
the airman and Grimshaw had gone away, watching every move of the
repair man.

"She's staunch and sound as she was at the beginning," the latter
declared, when he had completed his work.

"Yes, I think that is true," replied Dave.

"What's the programme?" inquired Hiram, "for I see you don't intend
to give up."

"Not until I master the Reliance, just as I did the Baby Racer,"
declared Dave.  "That upset was necessary, I guess, to teach me that
I must drive on just as little surface as possible in speeding, and
make the wings do one half the work."

"Then you are going to try again?" questioned Hiram.

"Yes, Hiram.  The waves aren't so choppy now, and the wind has gone
down a good deal."

"It's pretty late for much of a run," replied Hiram.

"Oh, we can make the end of the lake and back inside of an hour."

"Well, I'm always ready--with you," laughed Hiram gaily.

From the start this time Dave knew that he had a better grasp of the
mechanism than on his first trial.  The Reliance behaved splendidly.
Once clear of shore obstructions and sandbars, they must have run a
stretch at nearly forty miles an hour.

Sand Point, at the rounding end of the great lake, was reached
without a mishap.  Dave did not wait to try any maneuvering for a
crowd that had gathered to watch the Reliance.

"Straight home," he observed, as they made the turn.

"It's time, I'm thinking," said Hiram.

A squall had come up, and the dimness of coming eventide had already
spread over the water, but there was no rain.  In fact, it had
turned too cold for that.  A fine baffling mist was falling,
however, and this was condensing into a heavy fog.

"Not much to see, eh?" propounded Dave, as they got clear of the
shore.  "I shouldn't like to run into some stray craft."

It was something of a strain on Dave, the present situation.  No air
signal had yet been placed on the Reliance, nor was its lighting
apparatus installed.

The darkness increased, and the fog became almost an impenetrable
shroud.

"What was that?" shouted out Hiram sharply, as there was a heavy
jarring shock.

"Grazed a rock, I think," replied Dave.  "I don't like this a bit.
If I knew my bearings, I'd run straight ashore."

"Do it, anyway, Dave," advised Hiram.  "We don't want to wreck the
Reliance on her first trip."

Dave gave the wheel a turn.  Just then a distinct yell rang out
across the muggy waters, and then, in rapid succession, seven quick,
snappy explosions.





CHAPTER VII

A RESCUE IN THE FOG


"What do your suppose that was?" inquired Hiram excitedly.

"It was kind of startling," said Dave.

"Listen."

With the power shut off, the hydroplane drifted, Dave checking its
slack running.  They were now in a dense fog; with night fast coming
on.  For the moment everything was still.  Then there rang through
the misty space one word:

"Help!"

"It was in that direction," said Hiram quickly, pointing.

"I think so, too," nodded Dave, "and not far away."

"What could have happened?  Those shots?"

"Probably fired to call assistance."

"If you could speed up the hydroplane a little--"

"I would have to get the starter in use, and we might run into
something.  Hello!  Hello!  Hello!"  Dave shouted loudly.  There was
a speedy reply.

"Here!  Hello! this wa-aa-ay!"

"That's a man's voice, and he's right near to us," declared Hiram,
leaning forward and peering through the mist.  "Hey, there!"

"I see you.  Good!"

There was a tilt of the machine.  The person in the water had seized
one of the wing stays.

"Careful, there," ordered Dave.  "Don't cling to that wing or bear
it down."

"I can't hold out."

Dave cautiously edged from his seat towards a form now plainly
visible.  It was that of a man about thirty years of age.

It was no easy task to take the man aboard.  One of his hands was
useless.  He seemed in pain and half choked with water he had
swallowed.

Hiram gave up his seat to the rescued man, who sank back as if
overcome with faintness and exhaustion.  Hiram himself found a
resting place on the platform supporting the two seats.

"Is there anybody else in trouble?" Dave asked of their passenger.

"No, no," replied the man.  "The launch is gone up.  Get me to land
quick as you can.  I'm afraid my arm is broken.  It pains me
terribly.  I must get to a surgeon soon as possible."

Dave got the hydroplane under way again.

He was fortunate in striking a course that brought them back to the
boat house in about an hour's time.

The rescued man was somewhat revived by this time, and when the
hydroplane was safely housed, Dave took his arm and piloted the way
from the beach.

"It is less than half a mile to the hangars," the young aviator
explained.  "When we get there we can find an automobile to take you
into town."

"It was when my launch struck a rock that I hurt my arm," the man
explained.

"Were you on board alone?" asked the curious Hiram.

"Yes.  I was driving ahead full speed, to get ashore out of the fog.
I heard your machine, and was afraid I'd get run into.  My launch
ran into a reef with terrific force.  I was thrown against it
bulkhead, arm sprained or broken, nearly stunned, and then into the
water."

"But the launch, Mister?" questioned the interested Hiram anxiously.

"Smashed.  I don't know if I could locate it again in the fog.  I
couldn't use my hurt arm, and I fired my revolver, yelled, and gave
up when your machine came along."

"Where did you come from, Mister?" pressed the persistent Hiram.

"Why--well, I came from up north.  Own a launch.  Had some business
this way, and got well on my way till the craft struck."

Dave noticed as the man spoke that it was in a hesitating, evasive
way.  He seemed anxious to change the conversation, for he said:

"You are taking me to the Columbus aero field?"

"Yes, we belong there," answered Dave.

"Some people there named Dawson?"

"Yes, father and son."

"That's it.  Here, now?"

"Oh, yes, they follow the different meets."

"Why, then, say," observed the man, "if you will just get me up
against them, I shall be pleased.  You see, they're friends of mine.
They'll take care of me."

Dave gave the man a look.  Hiram pulled a face at him behind his
back.  That settled it with Hiram.  In his mind he was sure that
anybody who knew the Dawsons in a friendly way could not possibly
amount to much.

The man did not mention his name.  He seemed to care nothing
whatever for the fate of the launch.  He barely thanked Dave, as,
reaching the aero grounds, our hero led him near to the headquarters
of the man for whom the Dawsons were working.

"You'll find your friends over there," he said.

"All right," nodded the man he had rescued.  "Lucky I met you.
Thanks."

"Say, Dave Dashaway, now what do you think of that!" burst out
Hiram, as the man got out of earshot.

"Think of what, Hiram?" inquired the young aviator.

"Friend of the Dawsons!"

"Well, they've got to know somebody, haven't they?"

"That's so, but I don't like the fellow you rescued."

"Why not, Hiram?"

"Did you notice the way he hesitated when we asked him where he had
come from?"

"Yes."

"And about that launch?  He didn't seem to care what had become of
it."

"Maybe it didn't belong to him."

"Well, anyway, hadn't he ought to have some concern about other
folks' property?"

Dave did not reply.  He had his own ideas and opinion of the rescued
man.  He was due for a public exhibition of the Reliance the next
day, and dismissed the incident from his mind as he got back to the
Baby Racer hangar.

Mr. King was to make a non-stop race also, and there was plenty of
detail to attend to at the Aegis headquarters as well.

That was a busy, exciting day, the one following.  The Aegis and her
competitors got started by ten o'clock.  There was a varied
programme from eleven to one.  At three o'clock Dave made his run
with the hydroplane.

Two other machines engaged in the contest, but not only were they of
inferior make, but their operators were clumsy and not up to
standard.

Dave won considerable praise.  The Reliance made a beautiful run,
and he felicitated himself that he had got onto the knack of running
it right.

"I don't believe much in hydroplanes," old Grimshaw observed to him
as he accompanied Dave back to the aero grounds, "but I believe in
you, and I will say you made a clever showing."

"Wait till the Interstate folks send on their latest improved
aero-hydroplane, Mr. Grimshaw," said Dave.  "You'll see some fine
work then."

"There's your friend, young Dobbs," remarked Grimshaw.

Dave saw Hiram on a run, headed towards them.  He came up
breathless.

"Some one at the hangar to see you, Dave," he reported.

"Who is it, Hiram?"

"He says he's a United States revenue officer."

"Hello!" spoke Grimshaw, "I hope your hydroplane hasn't got you into
any trouble running up against the government."

"Oh, I think not," replied Dave with a smile.

"It's a long story and a big story, Dave," replied Hiram.  "You know
the man you rescued he lake yesterday?"

"Yes, Hiram."

"Well, it turns out that he is a notorious smuggler and the
government is looking for him."





CHAPTER VIII

A PUZZLING DISAPPEARANCE


Dave hurried his steps.  Old Grimshaw turned off at the Aegis
headquarters.  Hiram led his companion by a short cut to the Baby
Racer hangar.

On a campstool inside the tent where the boys slept, Dave found a
keen-eyed, hatchet-faced man.  He sat stiff as a poker, and seemed
to pierce Dave through and through with his glance as he looked him
over critically.

"Dashaway, yes?" he interrogated, and as Dave bowed assent he added:
"Thought I'd wait and see you, although our young friend here has
been pretty dear."

"About what?" asked Dave.

"Ridgely."

"Who is he?"

"The man you rescued from the lake last evening.  As I have told
your friend, the man is a bad one, and we have chased him up and
down the lakes clear from Detroit."

"He is a criminal, then?"

"A smuggler.  He has outwitted the revenue officers for some time.
His last specialty was running Chinese emigrants over the border.
When he learned the chase was on, he stole a launch and scudded for
other waters.  He had the name and color of the launch changed.  Why
he came to Columbus we don't know."

"To see some people named Dawson, he said."

"Yes, they appear to be fiends."

"Can't Jerry Dawson tell you anything about him?" asked Dave.

"No."

"For a very good reason."

"And what is at?"

"Dawsons left last night."

"Left--left the meet?" exclaimed Dave in surprise.

"Yes, bag and baggage."

"That puzzles me," said Dave.

"It baffles us," observed the revenue officer, "for they have left
no clew to their future whereabouts."

"Won't Jerry's employer tell you?"

"He says he can't.  Professes to be quite at sea as to the meaning
of their sudden departure.  Angry, too, for it seems they had a
contract in the service."

"I wouldn't believe him," broke in Hiram.  "Anybody respectable
about the meet can tell you that he is not to be trusted."

"Well, the Dawsons are gone and Ridgely went away with them," said
the revenue officer definitely.  "I fancied you might give me some
hint that might help me, Dashaway, as to their antecedents,
friends."

"I'm a new one in the aviation line," said Dave.  "I found them in
the business when I joined it, only a few weeks ago."

"Well, I understand you are two pretty keen young fellows," said the
officer, "I'm going to leave you my card.  There it is."

Dave glanced at the bit of pasteboard his visitor extended.  It bore
simply a name: "James Price."

"If you get the faintest clew to Ridgely or the Dawsons," continued
Mr. Price, "wire the secret service bureau at Chicago.  I will
arrange so that I shall be advised at once."

"I will do what I can for you, Mr. Price," promised Dave.

"All right, and send in any reasonable bill you like for your
service.  We feel certain that this, Ridgely, driven from one
district, will begin operations in another.  Then, too, from what I
learn these Dawsons are not above engaging in of off-color schemes."

"They aren't!" cried Hiram.  "If they had stayed, Mr. King said
they'd be barred from the meets in a few days."

"Well, help me all you can."

"Queer, isn't it?" spoke Hiram, as the revenue officer left them.

"It is a rather strange proceeding," admitted Dave.

At five o'clock that afternoon the two friends were down at the
south pylons awaiting the coming in of the machines engaged in the
non-stop race.  A great crowd was gathered, for according to
estimated schedules some of the monoplanes would be due within the
coming half hour.

"If it's the Aegis first," spoke Hiram, "it makes three winning
stunts for Mr. King in two days."

A sort of instantaneous flutter pervaded the people as some word
starting from the judge's stand passed electrically through the
crowd.

"They've sighted something," shouted an excited spectator.

"Yes, there's one of the airships," added a quick voice.

"I see it!"

"There's another!"

"Hurrah!"

Hiram stood looking up into the sky, fairly trembling with suspense.
A man standing by Dave had a field glass.

"I make out two," he spoke to an inquirer at his side.

"I think I can tell you who they are if you'll give me your glass
for a minute," said Dave.

"Certainly," replied the man.

"What is it, Dave?" cried Hiram, as, watching the face of his comrade
closely, he discerned an intense expression upon it.

"Aegis in the lead--" began Dave, lowering the field glass.

"Aegis in the lead!" ran from the spot in receding echoes as the
news passed down the line.

"That's King's craft."

"I knew it!"

"Butterfly a close second," reported Dave.

"There's another one!"

"And another!"

"See them come!" cried an excited old farmer.  "Say, it beats the
electric cars down at Poseyville!"

The field was in a wild flutter.  The contesting aircraft came
nearer and nearer.  Finally Hiram could make out the Aegis fully a
mile in the lead, the wings set for a drop straight beyond the south
pylon.

"He's won--Mr. King has won!" he shouted again and again, fairly
dancing up and down.

The crowd surged towards the landing point as the Aegis gracefully
sailed to earth, ran a stopping course, and Robert King stepped out
amid the frantic cheers of his friends and admiring spectators in
general.

The great aviator looked please and proud.  Old Grimshaw trotted at
his side on the way to the Aegis hangar.

"Say, you're taking about everything there is in sight," he
remarked, with one of his grim chuckles.

"I've run the limit on the set spurts, I guess," replied the expert
airman.  "I'm going to look, for something better."

"What is there that's better than these famous stunts of yours, Mr.
King?" inquired Hiram.

"A record beater of some account," was the quick response.

"Record breaker of what?" pressed the persistent Hiram.

"Well," said Mr. King with an animated sparkle in his eye, "you and
Dashaway come down to the hangar this evening, and I'll tell you all
about it."





CHAPTER IX

A GIANT AIRSHIP


Dave Dashaway and his friend were promptly on hand at the Aegis
hangar at eight o'clock that evening.

Usually the boys took their meals with Mr. King.  A group of the
airman's admirers, however, had insisted on a special dinner at a
hotel just outside the grounds.  Hiram piloted the way for Dave to
the restaurant on the field.  He had worked for the man having it in
charge, and the best meal possible was set out for them free of
charge.

They found Mr. King in the little partitioned off room of the Aegis
hangar which he used as an office.  The airman sat before a desk
littered up with a variety of papers.  One of these Dave noticed as
he entered, was a detailed drawing of an immense airship.

"Oh, arrived, eh?" spoke the aviator with a pleasant smile, as the
boys came into view.  "Glad of it.  Get comfortable seats and we'll
have a little chat."

The boys settled themselves in camp chairs, Mr. King closed the door
of the apartment and sat down again.  Hiram regarded him eagerly and
expectantly.

"I've got something to tell you, lads," began the airman, after a
brief thoughtful pause.  "This is business, and of course you will
be wise enough to treat it confidentially."

"I love to keep secrets," declared the ardent Hiram, and Dave smiled
and nodded assent to the sentiment.

"I have been thinking and planning for a big event for some time,"
continued Mr. King.

"As how, now?" asked Hiram, devoured with suspense.

"Well, in the first place I propose to build a giant airship."

"I know," said Hiram.  "A big passenger monoplane."

"No," interrupted the aviator.  "What I want is a dirigible
airship."

"Pshaw! only a balloon!" remarked Hiram disappointedly.

"Not at all," corrected the good-natured airman.  "Except for the
self-sustaining power, it will be constructed on the best aeroplane
principles.  I have been working on it for some months, and only
yesterday I got figures on the machine."

"What is it for, Mr. King?" submitted the inquisitive Hiram,
"exhibitions?"

"No.  It's first big feat is to cross the Atlantic."

"Cross the Atlantic Ocean!" almost gasped the excited Hiram.

"Cross the Atlantic!" repeated Dave, in a startled yet thoughtful
manner.

He sat looking fixedly at the aviator as if fascinated.  The
novelty, the immensity of the proposition, stunned Dave.

"Can it be done?" he asked in a low, intense tone, vast dreams
running through his mind a lightning speed.

"According to my calculations, yes," replied Mr. King definitely.
"Oh, it is no new idea with me.  The project has been the constant
ideal of every advanced airman.  It has got to come to that, if
aeronautics is the progressive science we enthusiasts believe it to
be."

"I would like to be the first one to win such a triumph," said Dave.

"Yes, the first one gets the fame," said the airman.  "The prize,
too.  If such an experiment was rationally started I believe the
profession and its backers would put up a small fortune to go to the
successful winner.  Now, boys, I have great confidence in you.  What
has held me back has been the lack of capital."

"Say, Mr. King," broke in Hiram impetuously, "I've got nearly thirty
dollars saved up, and Dave--"

"It will take bigger amounts than we three put together can earn
just to get the plans of the giant airship on paper," said Mr. King,
with an indulgent smile at his loyal young friends.  "If I go to any
regular aero promoters they will want all the proceeds.  I can raise
a few thousand dollars myself and do as much more among my friends
but, all put together, the amount wouldn't make even a beginning."

"How much will it take, Mr. King?" asked Dave seriously.

"At least twenty-five thousand dollars."

"Whew!" whistled Hiram.

"It's no child's play.  It's a big risk, and there's no doing it
half way," declared Mr. King.  "Last night while I was planning over
it, a sudden idea came to me.  Dashaway, you remember that fellow
who stole my watch and money and medal from you?"

"You mean the young thief who called himself Briggs, and then
Gregg?"

"Exactly."

"Yes, Mr. King."

"And how he used some letters sent to your father from a great
friend of his?"

"Mr. Dale?" nodded Dave, wondering what all this had to do with the
giant airship scheme.

"Well, as you know, that young scamp, Gregg, had gone to Mr. Dale,
who had never seen you, and by means of the letters stolen from you
made him believe that he was the son of his old friend.  So
delighted was Mr. Dale, that he practically adopted young Gregg.  In
fact, he was on the point of making the pretended Dave Dashaway heir
to all his fortune."

"You told me about that," said Dave.

"When we left Dayton to come here, we had to make a hurried jump to
fill our contract, as you know.  I let Gregg go, after recovering my
stolen property from him, but I got a written confession of his bold
imposture, first.  You know my plan was for you and me to go where
Mr. Dale lives, and introduce him to the real Dave Dashaway.  You
see, although I have managed to scare that old tyrant guardian of
yours, Silas Warner, into leaving you alone, I feared he might work
some trick to get you back in his clutches again."

"I've thought a good deal about that lately," said Dave.

"My plan was to have this Mr. Dale go to Brookville, show up Warner,
and apply for your guardianship."

"Yes, then I would feel safe," said Dave.

"Well, Mr. Dale, having been an old balloonist, would probably not
object to your remaining in the same line of business in which your
father was famous."

"I should think he would be pleased," remarked Hiram, who was always
interested and active in any conversation going on.

"I counted on that," resumed the aviator.  "At all events, not being
able to go or send Dave to Warrenton to meet this Mr. Dale, I wrote
to a friend of mine who lives at Warrenton.  I told him the whole
story, instructing him to inform Mr. Dale, so if this Gregg came
around again, he would be ready to treat him as an imposter.  My
friend wrote me only yesterday that Mr. Dale was off on an
automobile trip, and might not be back for a day or two.  He said
that Mr. Dale was a very lonely old bachelor.  He had been delighted
to take up Gregg, believing him to be the son of his old balloonist
comrade, so you would, be sure to receive a really grand welcome,
Dave."

"I'm glad of that," said Dave, filled with deep gratitude as he
contrasted his present circumstances with his former forlorn
condition.

"Now then, to business," continued Mr. King briskly.  "I don't want
to 'work' anybody with my personal schemes, but I see a chance to
put my giant airship project on its feet."

"Why," cried Dave brightly, "you mean to interest Mr. Dale?"

"That's just what I do mean," assented the aviator.

Dave rose to his feet, excited and pleased.

"Mr. King," he said earnestly, "I not only would do all I could to
have Mr. Dale join you, but I feel sure he would be glad to take an
interest in your plan."

"It's worth trying, anyway," responded the airman.  "I'm going to go
by rail to Warrenton to-morrow, in the hope of finding Mr. Dale at
home.  I shall send you to him later."

"All this isn't grand, or exciting, or anything of that sort, is it,
now!" ejaculated Hiram, as Dave and he returned to the Baby Racer
hangar.

"I hope Mr. King's plans come out, all right," responded Dave.  "I'll
do a good deal to repay him for all he has done for me."

"And me, too," echoed Hiram.  "He's a fine fellow!"

Mr. King departed on his journey the next day.  Dave was not on the
programme, so he practiced some with the hydroplane.  Coming home
for dinner, he found a letter from the Interstate people.

They were cheery and optimistic over the completion of their new
model aero-hydroplane.  It had been tested and worked splendidly.
The company stated that they would ship the machine to the meet at
Columbus two days later.

Dave told Hiram about the machine, and the hitter was in a fever of
expectation over its anticipated arrival.

The boys were eating their supper at the King hangar later in the
day, when a telegraph messenger appeared.

"Message for Mr. Dave Dashaway," he said.  "I'm your man," replied
Dave.

He signed for the message, tore open the envelope, and glanced
rapidly over the enclosure.  His face clouded as he did so, for the
message was from his employers, the Interstate Aero Company, and it
read:

"Cancel all dates.  Come on at once.  Trouble."





CHAPTER X

SOMETHING WRONG


"What is it, Dave?" inquired Hiram, tracing a sudden seriousness in
the manner of his comrade.

Dave did not reply.  With a thoughtful air he passed the telegram to
Hiram.

"Wonder what's up?" queried the latter.

"I can't imagine," said Dave.

"They tell you to cancel your dates," went on Hiram, looking very
much worried.

"Yes, that's what bothers me," replied Dave.

"And to come on to the factory at once."

"Perhaps they want to pay me off and let me go," suggested Dave,
pretending to smile.

"Don't take any trouble on your mind on that score," cried Hiram.
"They'd search a long time before they'd find a better demonstrator
than you are."

"Thank you Hiram," said Dave.  "The telegram is plain."

"Yes, cancel all dates."

"That's easy, I have nothing on the programme for the rest of the
week."

"There's the aero-hydroplane stunt."

"But the machine hasn't arrived."

"That's so."

"Let's go down and see Grimshaw.  I want to talk to him about this,"
said Dave.

They found the airman at the Aegis hangar.  Dave read him the
telegram.  Grimshaw looked bothered.

"Too bad, when things are going so finely for you," he remarked.

"I wish Mr. King was here," said Dave, "but he probably won't be
until tomorrow."

"Hardly, I should judge, from what he said," replied Grimshaw.

"I had better start right off for the Interstate plant."

"Yes.  I would do that if I were you," advised Grimshaw.

"I wish you would see the managers and explain about this,"
continued Dave.

"Suppose the Drifter comes Dave?" asked Hiram.

The Drifter was the name of the new model aero-hydroplane concerning
which Dave had received a letter from the Interstate people that
day, but written the day previous.

"I'll see that it is handled all right," promised Grimshaw.

"Tell Mr. King I will wire him just as soon as I learn what's up,"
said Dave.  "You'll look after the Racer and the hydroplane, won't
you, Hiram?"

"Surely I will," pledged Hiram.

Dave returned to his own quarters and packed a small hand bag.  Hiram
went to the railroad depot with him.  They had to wait two hours for a
south-bound train.

The factory of the Interstate Aero Company was located at a city in
Ohio.  It was over three hundred miles from Columbus.  The train
Dave was on arrived at a junction about daylight the next morning.
There he had to wait for a train on another road.

He had slept a few hours and got his breakfast at the depot
restaurant.  According to schedule he would reach the Interstate
plant about ten O'clock in the morning.

Dave had been looking out of the car window enjoying the scenery and
thinking over affairs in general, when he chanced to direct his gaze
at a newspaper the man in the forward seat was reading.  A glaring
head line had caught his eye: "A Burglar In The Clouds."

Anything suggestive of the air was of interest to the young aviator.
He wondered what the item might refer to.  Dave leaned over to try
to scan the body matter of the article, when the locomotive whistled
and the train slowed up for a station.  The man in front of him
shoved the newspaper into his pocket to leave the train.  Then the
incident drifted from the youth's mind.

Dave reached Bolton on schedule time.  An inquiry directed him to
the extensive works of the Interstate Aeroplane Company.  He found
it to be a very large plant.  The company, besides manufacturing
aircraft, also turned out automobiles.

Past the entrance gates of the big establishment, Dave became at
once interested in a large building bearing the sign "Aerodrome."
He could not resist the impulse to enter it.  Then he found himself
going from section to section, viewing the splendid assortment of
aircraft on exhibition and for sale.

To a devotee of aeronautics the display was most fascinating.  There
were monoplanes, biplanes, and hydroplanes.  In one section were
samples of the various accessories of the craft.  Dave was looking
over a splendid passenger monoplane when some one hailed him.

"Dashaway--say, we've been expecting you."

Dave turned to face the man who had been sent on by the Interstate
people to drill him in the use of the hydroplane at Columbus.

"Yes," nodded Dave, "I got a hurry call wire, and came on at once."

"Seen the manager?"

"Not yet.  I drifted in here and lost myself among so many beauties.
I don't see the new hydro-aeroplane."

A quick shade came over the face of Dave's companion.

"No," he hesitatingly replied.

"Has it been shipped to Columbus yet?" inquired Dave.

"Why--that is, I guess I had better let the manager tell you about
the machine."

Dave noticed a singular constraint in the manner of his companion.

"Come along, I'll introduce you," volunteered the latter.

Dave accompanied his guide from the aerodrome.  They passed several
large factory buildings.  In their center was a small one story
brick structure labeled "Office."

Dave had never met the manager of the Interstate Company.  He had
transacted all his business with the agent of the company and the
hydroplane expert.  His companion led him past a row of desks
occupied by clerks and stenographers and into a neatly furnished
office.

"Here is Dashaway, Mr. Randolph," he said.

A fine looking man writing at a desk wheeled quickly in his chair.
He arose to his feet with a pleasant smile and shook Dave's hand in
a welcoming way.

"I am glad to meet you," he spoke.  "You received our telegram?"

"Yes, sir, and came on at once."

"I suppose you know why we sent for you?" questioned the manager.

"Why, no, sir," replied Dave.

"We tried to keep our loss a secret," proceeded the manager, "but
the newspapers got hold of it."

Dave recalled the newspaper heading he had glanced at, "A Burglar In
The Clouds," and wondered if that had anything to do with the case.

"I have not read a newspaper since leaving Columbus last night,"
said Dave.

"Well," explained the manager of the Interstate Company, "our new
model aero-hydroplane his been stolen."





CHAPTER XI

"N. A. L."


"Stolen!" exclaimed Dave, in dismay.

"It startles you?" spoke the manager of the Interstate Aeroplane
concern.  "So it did us."

"But--"

"You are mystified--unusual occurrence rather.  You can follow the
track of a stolen automobile.  But when it comes to pursuing an
airship, you won't find many familiar roads in the clouds."

"How did it happen?" inquired Dave.

"Why, we had tested the machine and it was to have been shipped to
you yesterday.  The day before, our expert made a very fine and
satisfactory demonstration.  The tanks were full, everything in
perfect shape for another spurt early yesterday morning.  During the
night some one scaled the fence, evaded the watchman, and broke into
the aerodrome."

"It must have been some one familiar with the place here," suggested
Dave.

"We don't know that.  It is certain, though, that they knew all
about airships."

"Why so?"

"Because from the trail they left we could trace where they ran the
machine outside.  They gauged its ground run just right.  They must
have put on the muffler, for the watchman heard no sounds.  Then
they flew away."

"Do you suspect anybody?" questioned Dave.

"No."

"Could it have been a business rival?"

"Scarcely.  We have some hard competitors, but we have canvassed the
situation and do not believe they could afford to mix up in a
deliberate steal."

"It is strange," commented Dave, in a musing tone.

"Our belief is that the Drifter was selected as the nearest and
highest type of aircraft in existence.  The people who stole it did
so with some definite purpose in view."

"What could that purpose be?" asked Dave.

"We cannot as yet decide.  One thing is certain--they will not
venture to use it at any of the aero meets."

"Then they must design to take it to a distance."

"Of course."

"You have no trace of it?" asked Dave.

"None whatever.  We can account for that, however.  The night was
dark, they started out when everybody was asleep, and they could
have gone in one certain direction and struck a positive wilderness
in a few hours time."

"You mean north?"

"Among the pineries, yes."

"Or over the Canadian border?"

"Exactly."

Dave sat silent and thoughtful for some moments.  The situation was
a novel one.  He had never heard of any one stealing an airship
before.  The Interstate manager aroused him from his reverie with
the words:

"We sent for you, Dashaway, because you are our most active man in
the field."

"That sounds pretty grand for a young fellow like me," returned Dave
with a smile, and flushing up, too.

"We gage out men by what they do," replied Mr. Randolph in a
matter-of-fact tone.  "We have found blood the best in our business.
You have made good, Dashaway."

"Thank you, sir."

"Mr. King said you were the most promising aviator in the field."

"Oh, he is always saying something good about me."

"You proved it in your ideal work with the Baby Racer."

"Who wouldn't, with any pride and that perfect machine?" challenged
Dave.

"That dash of yours after that Lyon order when you outwitted the
Star people was simply brilliant.  It showed your loyalty to us.
The newspapers have given your hydroplane work so far the biggest
kind of a send off."

Dave was silent.  He looked modest and embarrassed at all this
praise.  He could not, however, feel otherwise than pleased at all
these eulogies bestowed upon him.

"The Drifter has got to be found," resumed the manager.  "It is our
first perfected model, and we can hardly build its counterpart in
time for full seasonal exhibitions.  We think you are the man to
find it, Dashaway."

"Oh, Mr. Randolph," said Dave with a slight start.

"I am expressing the opinion of the head men in the company here,
who knew your good record.  You are young, ambitious, a capable
airman, and above all you are loyal to the interest of your
employers."

"I should hope it," exclaimed Dave, roused up to genuine emotion.
"Just think--you picked me out, a mere boy, and trusted me.  And see
what you helped me do, already!"

"Exactly," interrupted Mr. Randolph quickly.  "That is just the
point--you've outdone some of the veterans in the service and jumped
to a high place in a bound.  That's why we trust you."

"I don't know about what you propose, though," said Dave, sobering
down.

"Yes, it's a pretty hard task to set.  We're all at sea."

"So am I," admitted Dave.

"Put those keen wits of yours at work, Dashaway," urged the manager
encouragingly.  "I know after thinking this affair over you'll be
ready to suggest something."

"Well, all airmen should know of the theft of the Drifter, and be on
the lookout."

"We notified every association and meet in the country after we
found that the newspapers had got onto the theft.  That advertises
it widely.  The persons, however, who stole the Drifter knew that
would come about.  Rest assured of on point, therefore--they won't
stay within range of possible identification any longer than they
can help."

"That's so," acknowledged Dave musingly.

"The company wishes you to take charge of a search for the Drifter,"
went on Mr. Randolph.  "Any machine we own, half a dozen of them if
you like, are at your disposal.  You may proceed regardless of the
expense.  If Mr. King could be induced to assist--"

"I think he is under contract clear up to the end of the season,"
explained Dave.

"Sorry for that, but he is such a good friend to you and to us, and
I fancy he would gladly cooperate with advice and direction."

"Yes, indeed," assented Dave.

"We owe you a good deal more than your contract income already,
Dashaway," said the manager.  "I don't think there's an aviator
living ever had a finer settlement than you will have if you succeed
in running down the Drifter."

"I'll try," said Dave.

"That's capital."

"Give me a few hours to think it over," suggested Dave.

The young aviator left the Interstate plant very thoughtful and
serious.  Dave decided that he had assumed a big responsibility.  He
seemed to feel an actual ponderous weight on his young shoulders.

A score of theories ran riot through his mind its to the motive for
the theft of the Drifter.  Then he decided that it must be some
professional who had done the act.  It was hard to fathom the
ultimate plans of such an abstractor, who would not dare to use the
machine in any public way and could scarcely sell it.

"It's a puzzle, a big, worrying poser," said Dave, walking slowly
from the factory grounds.

About half a mile city-wards from the plant Dave passed through a
square devoted to public park purposes.  He sat down on a
tree-shaded rustic bench.  There, alone, quiet and undisturbed, he
set his wits at work.

Whoever it was who had committed the theft must have been a
professional airman.  Dave formulated a plan to ask Mr. Randolph if
anybody in Bolton, or any employee of the plant was missing.  In
case this was not discovered then some stranger must have come to
Bolton.  There might be a trace found of the party at some of the
hotels.

"There's a bit of detective work to do by some one besides myself,"
decided Dave.  "I'm going to suggest this plan to Mr. Randolph."

"Hello, boss," spoke an approaching voice as Dave got up to return
to the plant.

He observed a man he had noticed on a bench directly opposite to the
one he had occupied sidling towards him.  The fellow was ragged and
trampish looking.  There was a queer leer in his face and his eyes
were fixed on the coat Dave wore.

"Well, what is it?" inquired Dave.

"Excuse a question, matey?"

"Oh, that's all right."

"Noticed a badge you're wearing," said the tramp.

"Oh, that?" spoke Dave lifting his hand to his coat lapel, and
wondering at the man been so observant.

"Yes--N. A. L.," nodded the tramp.

Dave eyed the speaker keenly.  At the distance he was, it was
doubtful that he could have dearly made out the monogram, yet he
named the letters glibly and correctly.

"N. A. L." stood for the National Aero League.  Dave was not a
member and neither was Hiram Dobbs.  Mr. King was and during the
meets it had become the custom with professionals to furnish their
assistants with duplicate badges, which enabled them to enter and
leave the aero grounds unchallenged by the gateman, and ticket
takers.

"You must have pretty good eyes to make out those letters on that
badge at a distance," said Dave.

"I've seen them before," readily explained the tramp.

"Oh, you have?"

"Yes, and I've got a badge for sale just like the one you're
wearing."







CHAPTER XII

DAVE'S DISCOVERIES


"You have got a badge like mine for sale, you say?" exclaimed Dave.

"That's so," bobbed the tramp with a grin.

"Where did you get it?"

"That don't go with the sale, but I didn't steal it."

"You found it, I suppose?" suggested Dave.

"Well, you might call it so."  The man drew from his pocket a badge
which was the exact counterpart of that worn by the young aviator.

"Let me have a look at it," said Dave.

"No, sir."

"Why not?"

"You can see what it is, can't you?  I don't want to get into
trouble, boss."

"I'm not going to get you into any trouble," declared Dave.

"Then why do you want to look at the badge?  It's no different from
yours, is it?"

"Are there no marks on it?"

"Why, I didn't notice.  Say, yes, there are," announced the tramp,
scrutinizing the little piece of metal on the back of the badge.
"Looks like T. O."

Dave put his hand in his pocket.

"What do you want for it?" he asked.

Evidently the tramp was about to say "fifteen cents."  He shrewdly,
however, observed an interested if not an eager expression on Dave's
face, arid added:

"--ty cents."

"It's yours," replied Dave, promptly producing the coin.  "Wh-e-w!"

Dave stared, started and gave utterance to a prolonged whistle.  He
came to his feet with a shock.  Upon the rear plate of the badge
were scratched two letters, indeed--but the tramp had read them
wrong.  As read by Dave they were a mine of information.

Dave's mind ran rapidly.  He sat down again on the bench.  The tramp
grinned broadly as Dave turned an eager and excited face upon him.

"Why," he chuckled, "you're real friendly, aren't you?"

"No trifling," said Dave seriously.  "I'll give you a good deal more
than fifty cents if you tell me truthfully and right away how you
came by that badge."

"How much now?"

"Two dollars."

"The information is yours, Cap," answered the tramp, with an assumed
air of grandness.  "I found it."

"When?"

"At one o'clock yesterday morning."

"Where?"

"By the fence of the big Fly factory down yonder."

"You mean the Interstate works?"

"That's the place, I guess."

Dave became more interested than ever.  He handed a two dollar bill
to the tramp without further question.

"Now, my man," he said, "I've been square with you."

"That's right," assented the tramp.

"I want you to tell me all about how you came by that badge."

"Well, boss, I'm troubled with asthma, and have to sleep out of
doors nights."

"Go on."

 "The police in the city know me moderately well, and I prefer the
suburbs."

"Don't fool--give me the facts."

"Night before last I camped down in a grassy spot near the fence of
the big Fly factory.  It must have been about midnight when I was
waked up.  I heard somebody say: 'Oh, at take it!'"

"Who was it?"

"A boy about your size."

"What was he doing?" asked Dave.

"He was up on top of the fence.  He had climbed up one of the
slanting outside supports, I guess.  You know there's two rows of
barbed wire a-top of the boards.  Well, there he was, making a great
fuss."

"What about?" inquired Dave.

"The back of his coat was all tangled up in the barbs.  He couldn't
pull it loose.  Then I heard some voices speak on the inside of the
fence.  There were two men there."

"You think they had got over first?"

"It looked that way.  They told the boy to pull out of his coat.  He
got his arms out, started to untwist the coat, stuck his fingers
with the barbs, and tumbled over into the factory yard."

"And then?" pressed Dave eagerly.

"H'm!  I went to sleep."

"What! not knowing but what they were burglars?"

"Boss, I never mix up with other people's business, good or bad."

"How did you come to get the badge?"

"Why, when I woke up at sunrise I saw the coat sticking on the fence
where the boy had left it.  I climbed up and got it.  The badge was
pinned to it."

"You haven't got the coat on."

"Good reason."

"What's that?"

"Well, my own coat is pretty ragged but it ain't a marker to the way
that boy's coat was riddled and torn by them barb wires."

"Didn't you search the coat?"

"Every time that, matey."

"And found--?"

"Humph! nothing."

"Nothing at all?"

"Oh, yes, there was some cigarettes, a stub of a pencil and a card
with some marks and writing, on it."

"What did you do with the card?" asked Dave.

"Tossed it into the ditch with the coat."

"Do you remember where?"

"Sure,  I do."

"I'll give you another dollar to take me to the spot."

"Say, you're a gold mine to me, Cap.  Come ahead."

Dave was doing a good deal of active thinking.  More than once, as
his companion led way around the high board fence enclosing the
Interstate plant, Dave took out the badge he had bought and
scrutinized the scratches on its back closely.

'The tramp guided the way across a bleak prairie stretch.  Then he
followed the dry ditch, until they came to a spot where thick clumps
of weeds directly lining the fence suggested a cozy resting and
hiding place for any stray wayfarer.

"There's where I was asleep, as I told you," spoke Dave's companion,
pointing to a spot where the weeds were somewhat trodden down.  "And
there's the place where the coat caught.  See, there's one or two
pieces of the cloth of the coat hanging in the barbs yet."

"Yes, I see," assented Dave.  "Now, where did you throw the coat and
the things you found In it?"

The tramp moved about from place to place, got in line with the
fence support, and looked down into the ditch.  He moved along
slowly, his eyes on the ground.  Finally he stooped down.

"Here's the coat--what there's left of it," he reported.  "Here's
that card, too.  I can't find the pencil."

"Never mind that," replied Dave, extending his hand for the
proffered objects.

"I smoked up the cigarettes."

Dave glanced eagerly at the card.  He shoved it in a safe pocket.
Then he rolled up the coat and placed it under his arm.

"Very good, very good, indeed," he said.

"Here's that dollar I promised you."

The tramp received the money, beaming all over his face.

"Say," he observed, as he moved on, "if it wasn't that you've made
me rich enough to retiree from business for a time, I'd offer to
find the owner of that coat and the fellows who were with him."

"I'll do just that," said Dave to himself in a satisfied way.

Then, his hand resting on the card in his pocket, he added:

"What luck!"





CHAPTER XIII

HIRAM DOBBS AND THE BIPLANE


Dave walked straight along the fence.  By the shortest route
possible he reached the gateway entrance to the factory yard.

The tramp had put nimbly in the opposite direction.  He was headed
for the nearest business street, where he could spend some of the
money that he had earned so easily.

The young aviator was very much excited.  He had made certain
discoveries that had amazed him.  He could not help but mentally
rejoice over the strange fortune that had come from his stray
meeting with the tramp.

"It's a clew--a sure clew," said Dave to himself.  "Now to move just
right in this affair and make no mistake."

The youth crossed the grounds of the plant and again entered the
office building.  He did not wait to announce himself, but, as he
reached the door of the manager's room and found it closed, he
tapped briskly.

"Come in," spoke Mr. Randolph.  "Hello, you, Dashaway?"

"Yes, Sir," bowed Dave, removing his cap.

"You are back soon."

"Sooner than I planned," replied Dave,  "But I--"

"You've thought the affair over, I hope?"

"Something more than that, Sir," responded Dave.  "I have come to
tell you that I think I can be of some service to you about that
stolen aero-hydroplane."

"Good for you!"

"I've thought out a plan, Sir," went on Dave.  "I feel certain that
the people who raided the aerodrome and made off with the Drifter
are bound for a distant and unsettled section."

"But why?  What benefit can they hope to secure way off from
civilization?"

"That we have to guess at and work out," replied Dave.  "I will say,
Mr. Randolph, that I think I have a faint clew to the disappearance
of the airship."

"You don't say so!"

"I shall know more inside of twenty-four hours.  In fact, Mr.
Randolph, I feel pretty certain that I can soon submit a plan that
will satisfy you that I know what I am about."

"We already think that of you, Dashaway."

"And that I can bring results."

"Capital!  I knew we were not mistaken in you.  Now, see here, I see
you have something working in your mind.  I don't want to even
hamper you by asking what it is."

"I would like to go back to Columbus on the first train, Mr.
Randolph."

"Very well."

"I want to look up some affairs there, consult with Mr. King, and
come back here the next day."

"And then?"

"I shall perhaps want to use the very best aircraft you have in your
factory."

"To hunt for the Drifter?"

"Yes, Sir."

"Dashaway, the whole plant and everything in it is at your service."

"Thank you, Sir."

"I consider this theft of the Drifter even more important than I at
first thought."

"How is that, Mr. Randolph?"

"I have been thinking that if some competitor was concerned in the
affair, he might steal and utilize many points in our new model
which are not yet protected by patents."

"I feel pretty sure that no business rival had anything to do with
the theft," observed the young aviator confidently.

"Well, you work this affair out in your own way.  Remember, as I
told you, expense is no point whatever.  When shall we see you
again?"

"To-morrow evening, or the next morning at the latest."

Something in Dave's manner seemed to convince the shrewd manager of
the Interstate Aeroplane Company that their young employee was
started on the right track.  He shook hands cordially with Dave
when the latter left the office.

Dave went at once to the railroad depot.  He learned that a train
left in two hours.

"That will bring me to Columbus before dark," he reflected.  "I
wonder what Mr. King will say?"

The young aviator had a good deal on his mind, enough to make the
average lad impatient.  He had, however, learned a hard lesson of
discipline with his tyrannical guardian, old Silas Warner.  Then,
too, since coming under the helpful influence of Mr. King, he had
acquired a certain self reliance that now stood him in good stead.

Running an airship took nerve, steadiness of purpose, a definite,
concrete way of looking at things.  Dave knew in his own mind that
the Drifter was each hour speeding farther and farther away from the
haunts of men.  He recalled the old adage, however, which says "the
more haste the less speed," and he determined to stick to the plan
he had mentally outlined at the start.

"I'm going to work on this affair slow but sure," he told himself.
"I think I can guess where the Drifter is headed for.  If I am
right, I know that I shall find it."

Dave reached Columbus about dark.  He went straight from the depot
to the aero grounds.  The plan he had formed in his mind took in a
talk with Mr. King right away.  The Baby Racer hangar, however, was
on his way to the Aegis quarters.  As he neared it he saw a light in
the shed where the little biplane was housed.  Dave went to the half
open door of the place to find Hiram Dobbs with a lantern puttering
about the machine.

"What have you been up to, Hiram?" challenged Dave.

"Why, hello!  Got back?  Good!" cried Hiram, rushing forward to
warmly welcome his best friend.

"Yes, just arrived," answered Dave.

"I've been cleaning up the machine," explained Hiram.  "It's old
Grimshaw's fault."

"What is?"

"Taking the Baby Racer out."

"Oh, the machine has been out, then, has it?" remarked Dave.

"Yes, and up.  Say, Dave, I made the five hundred feet level.  I
hope you're not put out.  It was a chance to make fifty dollars."

"Fifty dollars?"

"Uh-huh," bobbed Hiram in a broad grin.

"How was that?"

"Why, Grimshaw was piloting a party over the grounds.  Rich man and
his family-wife, son and two daughters.  The youngest one was a
daring little miss.  She wanted to fly, and would fly.  Grimshaw got
to bragging about what you had done with the Baby Racer.  Well,
nothing would do but I must roll the little beauty out."

"That was all right, Hiram," the young aviator hastened to say.  "I
should always feel that the biplane is safe in your hands."

"Well, finally the father consented to let his daughter try a fly
along the ground.  I settled her in a comfortable seat, and away we
went.  I made it a good stiff run, and there was some jolting, but
the girl was wild over it.  She begged for a second run.  We got
such a fine start that I lifted about twenty feet in the air."

"And then, of course, she screamed out in fear?" said Dave, with a
smile.

"Screamed nothing," dissented Hiram.  "She just spoke one delighted
'O-oh!' and then: 'Higher, oh, please keep on going!'  Say, Dave,
she looked so bright and brave I couldn't help it--Z--I--P!"

"What does 'Z--I--P!' mean, Hiram?" asked Dave.

"A slide, a swoop, then a circle, another, a shoot upwards, and the
girl laughing out, 'Oh, this is just grand!'  Her sister shrieked,
her mother fainted away, and her father was shaking his cane at us
and yelling for us to come back.  The Racer did her prettiest in two
grand circles of the grounds, and came down light as a feather.  The
girl jumped out, one big smile.  'Just think of it!' I heard her cry
to her sister, 'when I've told my seminary chums that I've been up
in a real airship!'  Then, seeing that she was safe, I think her
folks were just as proud of her exploit as she was.  Anyhow, she ran
up to her father in a coaxing way, and came back to place a bank
note in my hand.  When they were gone, and I found that it was a
fifty dollar bill, old Grimshaw chuckled and said he had hinted to
the party that the regular fee for a ride in an airship was one
hundred dollars.  I'm mighty glad you're back, Dave."

"Why, you seem to have got along finely without me," said Dave.

"We've missed you, all the same.  Where you going, Dave?" asked
Hiram, as his friend moved out of the shed.

"Why, I'm anxious to see Mr. King as soon as I can.  I have
something very important to talk about with him."

"It's about that rush telegram?"

"Yes, Hiram."

"What did it mean?"

"When we meet with Mr. King you shall, hear all about it, Hiram."

"Well, Mr. King isn't home yet," explained Hiram.

Dave looked disappointed.

"That is," continued Hiram, "he hadn't got back when I was last up
at the Aegis hangar."

"When was that?"

"About four o'clock this afternoon.  Mr. Grimshaw, though, said he
expected him on the six o'clock train."

"We'll go and see if he has returned," said Dave.

They started for the aviator's headquarters.  Half the distance
covered, they met him coming in search of them.  Mr. King looked
pale and worried.  Dave knew that something had happened to upset
him.

"I'm glad you're back, Dashaway," said Mr. King.  "Grimshaw told me
you had been called to headquarters by the Interstate people.  I
should have wired you to return right away if you had not returned.
Something very important has transpired."

"About Mr. Dale--about my father's old friend, Mr. King?" asked
Dave.

"That's it exactly.  Bad news, Dashaway, I'm sorry to say,"
announced the aviator in a very serious tone.





CHAPTER XIV

THE MISSING AIRCRAFT


The aviator led the way back to the Aegis hangar.  Dave saw that Mr.
King was not inclined to explain any further until they were off the
public course, so he asked no more questions, for the present.  Dave
had a good deal to tell himself.  His mind had been full of it all
day.  Something in the grave, thoughtful manner of Mr. King,
however, caused him to defer his own anxiety and impatience.

When they were inside the comfortable room where the aviator made
his office, Mr. King turned to Dave with a very sober face.

"I said I had bad news, Dashaway," he spoke, "and that's no
mistake."

"Then you failed to find Mr. Dale at Warrenton?" inquired Dave.

"He has not been there for over a week."

"Why, I thought he lived there?"

"He did.  He went away, or was kidnapped, nearly ten days ago."

"Kidnapped?" exclaimed Dave in surprise.

"That's what I think.  Mr. Dale lived alone, except for a very old
man servant.  As near as I can figure it out, that young thief,
Gregg, appeared at Warrenton two days after I had him arrested.  I
did a very foolish thing in dealing with the young scamp."

"You mean letting him go free?" inquired Dave.

"Yes, I feared at the time that I was unwise in not punishing him,
to serve as a lesson against more mischief.  He acted so scared,
though, he helped me get back the property he had stolen from you,
he signed a confession telling that he was not the real Dave
Dashaway and had imposed on Mr. Dale, so I thought he would proceed
to at once make himself very scarce.  I felt sure that he would not
be able to play any more tricks on Mr. Dale, for I expected that you
and I would go the very next day and see this old friend of your
father.  You know we were rushed from Dayton to the next meet, and
had no chance to get to Warrenton and explain matters to Mr. Dale.  I
blame myself for not sending you at, once to him at the time. As I
told you, I wrote to a friend, a lawyer at Warrenton, to learn what I
could about Mr. Dale.  He reported Mr. Dale was absent on a trip.
When I got to Warrenton yesterday and met the old Dale servant, I saw
at once that something was wrong."

"How do you mean, Mr. King?" asked Dave quite anxiously.

"Well, I learned that this young scamp, Gregg, had appeared at
Warrenton two days after I let him go."

"Still pretending to be Dave Dashaway?"

"So the old servant says.  Gregg and Mr. Dale went away together.
There is no doubt in my mind that Gregg put up a plot to get Mr.
Dale away from Warrenton before we could expose him."

"But he could not keep Mr. Dale away from home forever?"

"No, but he and his accomplices might get the old man to some remote
place and make him a prisoner."

"And force him to give up a lot of money before they let him go."

"Yes, that has been done before," admitted Dave.

"Anyhow, two days alter Mr. Dale left Warrenton, a check passed
through the bank signed by him for one thousand dollars."

Dave was both interested and alarmed.

"Four days ago a check for two thousand dollars arrived.  The bank
refused to cash it."

"Why, Mr. King?"

"Because it was a forgery."

"Not Mr. Dale's signature?"

"That's it."

"But where did the checks come from?" inquired Dave.

"From two cities, widely apart.  I know the places.  It looks to me
as if the first check was given willingly by Mr. Dale.  Then he must
have become suspicious, and refused to pay out any more money.  The
second check was numbered correctly, and Gregg must have got
possession of the old man's regular check book."

"This is a pretty serious affair, Mr. King," commented Dave.

"It is, and I came straight back here to tell you about it, and then
cancel all my engagements at the meet.  I shall start out at once to
run down this Gregg and locate Mr. Dale."

"And I must join you-I see that it is my duty," declared Dave.

"Not at all," responded the aviator definitely.  "I have mapped out
the best plan of procedure, and I believe I can run down this
business alone in a very short time."

Dave was really anxious concerning Mr. Dale.  He truly believed it
his first duty towards the old friend of his father to do all he
could to assist him.  For all that, Dave was relieved to know that
he could go on without interruption in service of his employers.

"Yes," proceeded the aviator, "I feel that I have an interest in
finding Mr. Dale.  In the first place, he is your friend.  Next, I
feel responsible for letting that young scamp, Gregg, go free.  At a
selfish motive, I believe that if I succeed in rescuing the old man
he will gladly finance my giant airship scheme."

"He surely will, Mr. King," said Dave confidently.  "I believe he
would help you, anyway.  I do hope he can be found."

"I shall not rest until he is," declared the aviator.  "Now,
Dashaway, I don't want you to take this affair on your mind.  If I
fail in what I have planned, I will certainly call you into the
case.  I fancy, from what Hiram here has told me, that you have some
important business of your own on hand."

"Yes, that is quite true," replied Dave seriously.

"Are you having some trouble with the Interstate people?" inquired
the aviator pointedly.

"Not on my account, I, am glad to say, Mr. King," replied Dave.
"There is some trouble, though, for all hands around.  It's about
the stolen aero-hydroplane, or hydro-aeroplane, they haven't just
settled on the exact name."

"The Drifter?"

"Yes, sir."

"I read about that strange case.  I suppose it puts you back in your
arrangements at the meet here?"

"Not only that, Mr. King," explained Dave, "but it has placed me in
a position where I shall have to give up all my engagements for a
time."

"Why, you don't say so, Dashaway?" exclaimed the aviator, much
disturbed.

"Those are the orders," replied Dave.  "I have hurried back to
Columbus purposely, to consult on your helping in a search for the
Drifter."

"Of course that is not possible, now that this Dale affair has come
up," said Mr. King.  "As to a search for the stolen aircraft, that
is going to be no easy task, I'm thinking.  Have the Interstate
people no theory as to the way the Drifter was stolen, and the
motive for the theft?"

"I had better tell you all I know about it, Mr. King."

"Do so, Dashaway."

Dave proceeded to relate his interview with Mr. Randolph, the
manager of the Interstate factory.  He did not refer just then to
his experience with the tramp.

"It's a good deal of a puzzle," commented the aviator.  "What is
your plan?"

"Why, I expected that I could induce you to take charge of the
search.  As you cannot, I am thinking of Hiram going back with me to
Bolton."

"What's your idea?"

"The Interstate people have offered me their best monoplane to start
the chase for the missing Drifter."

"It will be a blind start, Dashaway, without a clew."

"But I have a clew," announced Dave.

"You didn't say so."

"I hadn't come to that yet, Mr. King.  I haven't even told the
Interstate people.  I am pretty certain that the Drifter left Bolton
on a due northwest course," and Dave drew from his pocket the card
he had got from the tramp.

"Capital!" cried the aviator, becoming very much interested.  "If
you know that, you have half solved the problem."

"Besides that," went on Dave, producing the duplicate N. A. L.
badge, and glancing at the scratched initials on its back, "I know
who stole the Drifter."

"What's that?" almost shouted the aviator, springing to his feet, in
a great state of excitement.

"Say, Dave, are you sure?" pressed the eager Hiram Dobbs, worked up
to fever heat with curiosity and suspense.

"Who was it?" asked Mr. King.

"Jerry Dawson," was Dave Dashaway's reply.




CHAPTER XV

AT THE AERODROME


"That is the machine I want, Mr. Randolph," said Dave Dashaway.

It was two days after the young aviator had told his friends at
Columbus the name of the person he suspected of stealing the
aero-hydroplane, the Drifter from the Interstate Aeroplane Company.

Now, he and Hiram and the manager of the Interstate plant stood amid
the half hundred or more aero machines that comprised the stock of
one of the largest factories in that line in the country.

They had left the aero meet at Columbus the evening previous, not,
however, until Dave had explained how he came to suspect Jerry
Dawson.

"It's simple and plain, Mr. King," the young aviator had said.  "The
badge I bought from the tramp at Bolton was the property of young
Dawson."

"Sure of that, Dashaway?" Mr. King had inquired.

"Oh, yes.  The initials are crude, but they certainly stand for 'J.
D.' and not 'T. O.' as the tramp thought."

An inspection of the duplicate badge by both Mr. King and Hiram
satisfied them that Dave's theory was correct.

"Another thing," Dave had added--"the coat found on the barb wire
top of the factory fence I have seen Jerry wear many a time."

"And the card?" pressed Hiram.

"The card has some scrawls on it, made by Jerry, I think.  It shows
a sort of rough outline of the upper lake district here.  Some
arrows show a straight course due northwest.  I believe the Drifter
was started on its way over the Canadian border."

"And the two men with Jerry?" asked Mr. King.

"I can't figure out that they could be anybody but Jerry's father
and the man who left Columbus with them--Ridgely."

"The man the revenue officer was looking for!" exclaimed Hiram.

"The smuggler, as he was called, yes," replied Dave.

Mr. King and Hiram indulged in all kinds of conjectures as to the
possible motive of the party of three in stealing the aircraft.

"The way I figure it out," said Mr. King, "is that this Ridgely
wanted to get out of the country knowing that the revenue people
were dose on his trail."

"Perhaps," agreed Dave thoughtfully.  "There's another thing,
though."

"What's that?" inquired the interested Hiram.

"His coming all the way around the lakes to find his friends, the
Dawsons, looks as though he had some future scheme in view, with an
airship a part of it."

"That's so," assented Mr. King.  "Well, Dashaway, you have done
famously so far in finding out what you have.  The Interstate people
think the only way to chase the fugitives is with one of their own
machines.  I don't know anybody better adapted to do just that than
yourself."

"Thank you, Mr. King," said Dave modestly

The two boys left Columbus with pretty clear minds.  They had a
definite purpose in view, and Mr. King, Dave felt sanguine, would do
all that the interests of Mr. Dale required while they were gone.

"Say, Dave," spoke Hiram, as they boarded the train bound for
Bolton, "this is just like acting out some story, isn't it?"

"In a way," acquiesced the young aviator, "only there won't be much
acting--it will be real, earnest hard work."

"I see that, and I am anxious to do my share," declared Hiram.

"You always are, Hiram," said Dave.

Now, the morning following, the two aviator friends found themselves
at the Interstate factory, where both received a warm welcome from
Mr. Randolph.

Dave now related to the manager all that he had held back during his
first visit to the great plant.

"I say, Dashaway, that's simply wonderful," was Mr. Randolph's
enthusiastic comment.  "Anybody with the genius to gather up all
those clews cannot fail to work out this entire case.  We shall soon
receive some great reports from you."

"I hope so," said Dave.

"Now then, you and your friend go over to the aerodrome and see
which one of our machines there suits you best."

It was after Dave and Hiram had spent the most fascinating half hour
of their lives viewing the wonders of mechanism on display, that the
manager rejoined them.  It was then, too, that Dave reported to him
with the words:

"That is the machine I want, Mr. Randolph."

As Dave spoke he pointed to a monoplane of which he had made a close
inspection for over ten minutes.  The manager burst out into a
hearty laugh.

"Well, well!" he cried, clapping Dave on the shoulder in an
approving way, "I must say you are certainly a grand judge of
monoplanes."

"How is that?" asked Dave.

"You have picked out the best machine in the place."

"Why, I was looking for the best one, wasn't I, Mr. Randolph?" asked
the young aviator with a smile.

"It is our new model of the composite hydro-aeroplane," explained
the manager.  "It's the best standard built in this country--the
Monarch II."

"It's easy to see that," responded Dave.  "It is the equal of the
Drifter in a great many ways."

"That is true," replied Mr. Randolph.  "While it may not be as swift
in the water as an all-steel hydro, it is built on the best float
system and will sustain a weight of one thousand three hundred
pounds."

"And the front elevation and tail are also of the newest type," said
Dave.

"You studied that out, eh?  It's a model of lightness as such
machines go.  The engine is only three hundred pounds, it carries
twenty gallons of gasoline, and has a lifting capacity of twelve
hundred pounds, giving leeway for a three hundred pound pilot."

"Dave and I wouldn't weigh that together, Mr. Randolph," said Hiram.

"Its simplicity strikes me," remarked Dave.

"Yes," said Mr. Randolph, "and it can be knocked down and
reassembled in a hurry.  You see, the ailerons never leave their
sections and in the planes not a wire is changed.  The outriggers
fold, keeping them in pairs together, each piece is bent, not
buckled, and can be straightened good as new in case of a
disarrangement."

The manager went over the entire machine in a speedy but expert way.
He saw that all locks on the turnbuckles were fastened, and that the
locks had lock washers beneath them.  All the movable wires were
reinforced with a piece of loose hay wire, and provisions against
rust perfected.

Hiram stood mute, but fascinated, as the manager explained in detail
the fine points of the Monarch II, as the composite hydro-aeroplane
was named.

What interested Dave immensely was a self starting apparatus.  This
was operated by a handle inserted in a socket, fastened on a special
ball ratchet on the large sprocket.  Pulling this handle turned the
motor over two, sometimes three compressions, and started up the
machine without difficulty, Mr. Randolph explained.  During the
operation the throttle shut down so that the operator might resume
his seat and take the levers.

The planes had double covered fabric on top and bottom, tightened at
the rear of the planes by lacing.  A single lever controlled the
elevator and side flaps and there were radical bearings to take both
side and end thrusts.

"Tell you, Dashaway," said Mr. Randolph in conclusion, "I'll trust
you with the Monarch II because you are something more than a
grass-cutting pilot by mail trying to coast a flying machine off the
ground."

"I hope to deserve your compliment," laughed the young aviator.

"You've got a horse power engine and planes hard to beat.  There are
self-priming oil pumps, an auxiliary exhaust, and the machine
follows the lines of the lowest gasoline consumption.  Remember the
triple axis conditions, Dashaway.  One controls the fore and aft
axis, producing tipping.  The second is the vertical axis, producing
turning.  The third is the lateral axis, producing rising and
falling."

"Some one at the office wishes to see Mr. Dashaway," just here
interrupted a lad from the plant.

"To see me?" spoke Dave in some surprise.

"Yes, sir.  He asked me to give you his card, and said he had come
quite a distance to see you."

Dave took the card the lad handed him.  He was a little startled,
and then curious, as he read the name--

"JAMES PRICE, Revenue Officer."





CHAPTER XVI

THE "MONARCH II"


The manager of the Interstate factory and Dave and Hiram followed
the messenger from the plant back to the office.

"The gentleman who wishes to see me," the young aviator explained to
Mr. Randolph, "is the revenue officer I told you about."

"Ah, I think I understand the purpose of his visit, then," said the
manager.

Mr. Price was the same keen-faced, ferret-like person he always
appeared, as Dave introduced him to the manager.

"I have heard of you from our young friend, Dashaway," said Mr.
Randolph.

"Lucky I ran across him," responded the officer, in his usual short,
jerky way.  "Lucky to catch you here, too, before you got off,
Dashaway."

"Then you came specially to see me?" asked Dave.

"And your friends," replied Mr. Price with a comprehensive wave of
his hand.  "Mutual interests all around, it seems.  You see, I met
Mr. King at Columbus after you left," explained the official.  "He
told me of your remarkable discoveries, Dashaway.  You are keener
than I, young man.  I have been chasing all over the district, and
here you get a clew to Ridgely, while I and my men were blundering
around."

"If it is really a dew to him, Mr. Price," submitted the young
aviator.  "You know, it is all a theory so far."

"As the facts stand, I have no doubt from your story that Ridgely is
one of the men who ran away with the Drifter," declared the officer.

"Have you fathomed his purpose in taking the air route, Mr. Price?"
asked the factory manager.

"Most certainly."

"I am puzzled to guess what it may be."

"Why, it's plain as the nose on your face," said the officer
bluntly.

"How is that?"

"You know that this man, Ridgely, is a professional smuggler?"

"So Dashaway has told me."

"We drove him from one point on the border.  He has selected
another, that's all.  He has worn out the old methods of evading the
revenue service, so he is adopting new ones.  In fact, I rather
admire his brilliant originality.  Why, I can conceive no situation
so ideal as that capture of an airship, and professional operators
in his employ."

"Then--"

"I am positive that the Dawsons and Ridgely have made for some
obscure point, probably near Lake Superior, and will open up
business in the old way, do their work only at night, and I have
come on here to ask Dashaway to work in harmony with me."

"Most certainly he will," pledged the factory manager.

"I am after Ridgely, you are after your aircraft.  We can work
together," pronounced the officer.  "I intend to start at once for
the Lake Superior district.  I shall set my men at work clear along
the line and over the border, to try and find a trace of my man.  I
haven't an airship, though, you must remember, and wouldn't know how
to run one if I had.  That's where you come in, Dashaway.  You
search the air, I'll watch the land.  What I want to do is to give
you a list of points where I or my men can be reached at a moment's
notice any time.  If we keep in touch with each other, I believe we
can land those rascals."

For over an hour after that the officer and Dave had an earnest,
confidential chat together.  Mr. Price brought out maps, and gave
Dave great deal of information as to the smuggling system on the
border.  In the meantime, Randolph and Hiram again visited the
aerodrome.  After the revenue officer had departed, Dave came across
Hiram looking for him.

"Say, Dave," exclaimed the excited youth, "it's like a new world to
me, all this.  I declare, I never had such a time in my life.  This
Mr. Randolph is a prince."

"Fixed things up for us, has he, Hiram?"

"Right royally.  He's stocked up that monoplane like a banquet hall.
Why, say, if we can keep the Monarch II aloft, we can live like
millionaires in an up-to-date hotel for a week to come."

Hiram in his enthusiasm was exaggerating things considerably.
However, when Dave revisited the aerodrome, he found that the clever
Interstate manager had stocked up the aircraft, with every necessity
for safety and comfort he could think of.

The Monarch II was certainly a marvel in its construction and scope.
It had been made to accommodate an operator and one, or even two,
passengers.  The seating space was quite roomy, and there was a
handy basket-like compartment, arranged to hold wraps, provisions
and duplicate machine parts.

It was late in the afternoon when the Monarch II was rolled out into
the broad roomy yard of the factory.  Everything was in order for
the finest start in the world.  Dave had thought out and mapped out
every detail of the proposed air voyage.  Mr. Randolph personally
superintended all the initial arrangements.  The starter worked
liked a charm.  There was no wavering.  A turn of the handle, and
the magnificent machine spread its wings like some great bird poised
for a steady flight.

Hiram gave a great shout of delight.  Dave smiled down at the
manager proudly.

"Good luck!" cried Mr. Randolph.

Just then the factory whistle sounded out shrilly for quitting time.
Workmen appeared at the open windows of the factor.  Some came
running out into the yard.

The word had gone around that the young aviators were bound on an
extraordinary cruise--a search for the stolen airship.  A great
chorus of ringing hurrahs went up from the crowd.

"It's great, isn't it, Dave?" chuckled the delighted Hiram.

"The Monarch II acts prettily, that's sure," replied the young
aviator.

Dave delighted his companion by giving him charge of the barograph
readings and attention to some of the minor duties of aviation.  The
rapid progress of the machine in mid air was exhilarating.  The
weather conditions were ideal, and Dave had a definite goal in view.

There was not a break in the pleasant twilight journey.  The Monarch
II fulfilled all expectations and promises.  About nine o'clock in
the evening the record showed over two hundred miles accomplished,
when they descended on a level stretch of prairie near a small
bustling city.  Here the gasoline supply in the tanks was
replenished.  The basket had been stored with over a hundred gallons
of this in separate packages, without embarrassing the buoyancy of
the machine, as the young aviators were far below average operating
weight.

"This high living of ours makes and hungry," intimated Hiram, as
they finished getting the machine in shape to renew the flight.

"Time for lunch, you think?" proposed Dave with a jolly laugh.
"Here we are."

They selected from the packages in the accommodation basket enough
things for a feed.  Mr. Randolph had certainly provided for them in
a liberal way.  The packages produced two kinds of sandwiches, some
doughnuts, a cream cakes, cheese, celery and a prime apple pie.

Dave was pleased and proud with their progress thus far on their
strange journey.  There was a steady but mild head wind, and if he
held till daylight the young aviator counted on reaching the first
important destination on the route he had mapped out.

His idea was to reach a certain point in the dark.  They would then
seek a hiding place, or at least seclusion, until evening again,
resting through the day.  Dave's plan was to travel so that their
progress might not be noted and get to the Dawson group through the
public prints or by some other avenue, and thus warn them that they
were being traced.

There was not a landmark on the route, such as a city, lake or
river, that Dave had not memorized, from standard "fly" directories
during the past two days.  The Drifter, being in the hands of the
Dawsons, who knew considerable about aviation, would probably follow
the same course.  At night it was more difficult to tally off
progress than in daylight, but so far Dave felt that he had not
deviated from the due northwest course that was to bring him to a
certain destination.

For over five hours after lunch and rest the Monarch II kept
steadily on its way.  Dawn was just breaking when Dave passed a few
miles to the west of a town he knew to be Millville. He glanced at
Hiram, about to address him.  Hiram was fast asleep.

"We will have to get down somewhere near here," decided Dave.

As he changed the course of the aircraft there was a slight jar, and
Hiram woke up.

"Hello!" he cried, "have I been--"

"Asleep at the switch?" smiled Dave.  "Yes, but it hasn't needed any
attention.  We are going to land, Hiram."

Dave knew his bearings, as has been said.  His anxiety, however, was
to get to cover, so to speak, before the airship was seen by anyone
in the vicinity.  He soon knew that he had failed in this.  Circling
about and drifting in trying to select a suitable landing spot, Dave
made out rising farmer staring up at the machine from his chicken
yard.

A little farther on the driver of a truck wagon, bound town-wards
evidently, espied the Monarch II, even in the dim morning light, for
he stopped his horses, his face turned in the direction of the
machine.

Finally Dave located a spot that suited him.  It was where there had
been mining going on some period in the past.  Some hills shut in
the deserted diggings.  Several great heaps of ore surrounded a sort
of pit, broad and roomy.

"I don't think we can find a better resting place," said Dave, as
they reached the ground and he shut off the power.

"Going to stay here all day?" inquired Hiram.

"That is the programme, yes."

"Well, I suppose breakfast is the first move?" asked the young
aviator's assistant.

"I'm hungry as a bear," announced Dave.

"So am I," agreed Hiram, and he set at work to explore the
accommodation, basket.

Hiram soon had a tempting spread.  There was cold ham, a roasted
chicken, an abundance of bread and butter, and a two gallon jug of
cold coffee.

The boys did full justice to the layout.  Then Dave went over the
machine, seeing to it that every part was in order.

"I'll have to take a little nap, Hiram," he advised his companion.

"No, a good long one," corrected Hiram.

"If we're going to lay off until night, there isn't much to do.
I'll stay awake and keep a look out for anything happening.  You
see, I had quite a snooze up there in the air."

Dave made a comfortable couch by spreading out some of the wraps
found in the accommodation basket.  It was after ten o'clock when he
woke up.  He insisted on Hiram taking a turn on the couch.

"Can't do it.  Not a bit sleepy," declared Hiram.

"Well, you can try it while I'm gone," suggested Dave.

"Oh, going somewhere?"

"Yes, to the town.  I want to make a few inquiries as to the country
around here and ahead of us, and I may wire Mr. Randolph."

"All right, go ahead," replied Hiram. "I'll see that everything is
kept trim and safe about the machine."

Dave visited Millville, and posted himself as to certain
geographical points in which he was interested.  He also sent a
brief dispatch to the Interstate people.  Provided with some
railroad maps, and some fresh rolls from a bakery, he started out to
rejoin his chum.

He found Hiram busy burnishing up every bit of metal about the
Monarch II.  They had their noon lunch.  On his way back from town
Dave' had noticed a little brook.  He was telling Hiram about it,
and they were discussing a plan of a plunge and a swim, when Hiram,
facing the point where the pit began, sprang suddenly to his feet.

"Hello!" he cried excitedly.  "Someone is coming."

"Sure enough," echoed Dave, also arising.  "Why, I noticed that man
in Millville.  Can it be possible that he has followed me?  I didn't
know it, if he has."

The boys stood motionless, awaiting the coming up of the intruder.
He was a brisk, smart looking man.  There was something in his sharp
way of glancing at things that made Dave think of a lawyer.  The
stranger came up within a dozen feet of them.  Then he halted, took
in the flying machine with a grim smile, and then looked the young
aviators over from head to foot.

"Reckon I've landed on both feet," he observed, a confident,
satisfied drawl in his voice.

"What do you mean by that?" inquired Dave.

"Why, I've been looking out for an airship said to be cruising
around this neighborhood.  Truck farmer said he saw one early this
morning.  Then I noticed you in town.  I think you'll understand me,
young man," continued the stranger, "when I say that I'm on the hunt
for a chap about your size running a stolen airship, and whose name
is Jerry Dawson."

"Why," exclaimed Dave with a quick start, "so are we!"





CHAPTER XVII

ON THE WING


Hiram stared his hardest at the stranger, Dave's eyes quickened with
sudden intelligence.  Almost in a flash he took in the situation.

"You just mentioned a name," he said.  "I would like to mention
another one."

"All right, what?"

"James Price."

"Hello!"

The stranger looked flabbergasted, as the saying goes.  He furrowed
his brow as if puzzled.

"You have made a mistake," continued Dave.  "You think one of us two
is Jerry Dawson."

"I did think it, yes," admitted the man, a trifle less self assured
than at first.

"Wrong."

"Is that so, now?"

"Yes.  You know Mr. Price, don't you?"

"Perhaps I do."

"And you are on the lookout for an airship, but not this machine.
Let me explain briefly, and see if we cannot come to an
understanding."

Dave surmised that the stranger must be one of the assistants of Mr.
Price, the revenue officer.  In a very few minutes he knew that this
was true.  Assured from Dave's talk that he was not the Dawson boy, and
that the hydro-aeroplane before him was not the Drifter, the man became
very friendly.

It seemed that he was one of the agents of the revenue service.  He
made his headquarters at Millville, and had received a telegram from
Mr. Price the day previous to look out for the stolen airship.  This
was before Mr. Price had met Dave at Bolton, but immediately after
Mr. King at Columbus had told him of the discovery that the Dawsons
had made away with the Drifter.

So far as the man knew, none of the many assistants of Mr. Price had
found any traces of the missing aero-hydroplane.  Dave did not
enlighten him as to his plans and destination, for the man's present
duties were simply those of a lookout at Millville.

The stranger stayed and chatted with the boys for over two hours,
and then went away.  Dave had told him that they would not start out
again with the Monarch II until after dark.  About six o'clock the
man drove up with a wagon.

"Thought you might be getting tired of cold dry fare," he said, "so
I've brought you a real supper for a change."

"Why, say, you're a prince!" cried the impetuous Hiram, as the man
lifted a gas oven from the wagon, and then a shallow box, and the
contents of both receptacles were revealed.

The oven contained two heaping dishes of lamb chops, and potatoes,
still quite warm.  From the box the stranger produced all the
trimmings for a first class meal.

"This is pretty kind and thoughtful of you," said Dave.

"Nothing too good for friends of Mr. Price," insisted the man.
"Besides, I remember how good the present of a meal has been when
I've got stranded on duty myself."

The speaker, it seemed, had been a member of the Canadian mounted
police.  The boys whiled the time away interestingly during the next
two hours, listening to some of, his exciting experiences with
Indians and outlaws in the Winnipeg wilds.

It was just after dark when the Monarch started on the second stage
of the journey.  Three stops were made during the ensuing six,
hours.  Dave was very tired and Hiram pretty sleepy, when, at three
o'clock in the morning, the machine came to rest on a little
reed-covered island in the center of a swampy stretch.

"We may stay here for several days, I don't know exactly how long,"
the young aviator told his assistant.

"You don't suppose that the Dawsons and the Drifter are anywhere
near here, do you?" inquired Hiram.

"Perhaps not, but we are near Ironton, on the American side of Lake
Superior.  If Mr. Price's theories are all right, that fellow,
Ridgely, will begin his new operations somewhere in this district."

"I see," nodded Hiram.  "What are we to do now--sleep?"

"As much as we like for the next eight or ten hours."

"I'm ready," announced Hiram.  "It's been fine and dandy up aloft
there, but I notice that when it doesn't make a fellow hungry it
does make him good and sleepy."

"All right, we'll bunk down, Hiram.  I don't think any one is likely
to run across us in this out-of-the-way place."

"I don't think so, either," responded Hiram, and was soon asleep and
snoring.

The breakfast programme of the previous morning was repeated later.
Hiram called the whole thing a picnic, and was jolly and happy.

"One thing, though," he said; "isn't something exciting going to
happen soon, Dave?"

"We ought to be pretty well satisfied with the splendid cruise of
the Monarch II," suggested Dave.

"Yes, but I'm getting anxious to run across some of the smugglers.
I've read a lot about them in the papers and books.  They must be
great fellows to tackle, with their cutlasses, and walking the
plank, and treasure hoards."

"Why, Hiram," laughed Dave, "you're not thinking of smugglers."

"What am I then?"

"Pirates."

"Oh, yes, that's so," agreed Hiram.  "Well, the Dawsons are worse
than pirates.  They won't give up that airship without a tussle, I
can tell you."

"All I want to do is to locate them," said Dave.  "The government
will do the rest."

Dave left the camp, as they called it, about noon.  He had some
difficulty in getting from the island to the mainland, as the soil
was soggy and at places two feet deep with water.  He accomplished
the task, however, with only a slight wetting.

The young aviator had been given the address, of one of Mr. Price's
men at Ironton.  He visited his office, but found him absent for the
day.  Then he wired his progress to the Interstate people and told
them if necessary to reach, him at the Northern Hotel.

Dave went to the hotel and made arrangement with the clerk as to
mail and telegrams.  He decided to remain in the vicinity of Ironton
till he got in touch with the revenue officer's agent there.  He was
just leaving the hotel when one placed a hand on his shoulder, with
the friendly words:

"Why, hello, Dashaway."

Dave turned quickly, startled for a moment.  Then his face broke
into smiles of warm welcome.

"Mr. Alden," he said, and returned the friendly hand clasp of his
companion.

The chance meeting took Dave's mind back instantly to a most
pleasant period of his experience since leaving his guardian's home
at Brookville.

It was Mr. Alden, the moving picture man, who had given Dave what
might be called his first start in business life.  Dave had posed
for the "movies," and later he and Mr. King had taken a prominent
part in some motion pictures bringing in the monoplane, the Aegis.

"I didn't expect to see you way up here, Dashaway," spoke Mr. Alden.
"How are you getting along?"

"First class, thanks to the friendly help you gave me in the first
place," responded the young aviator.

"I'm glad of that.  Come up to my room and tell me all about it,
Dashaway.  Now then, for a talk over old times," resumed the moving
picture man, as they were comfortably seated in his room at the
hotel.

Dave parried a good many questions.  He did not exactly wish to tell
Mr. Alden about his business, which in the present case was also
that of his employers.  He managed to lead Mr. Alden to talk of his
own affairs.

"Oh, I've had the actors up here on a lot of marine scenarios,"
explained the moving picture man.  "They went away only this
morning.  We've been picturing 'The Island Hermit of Lake Superior,'
'Iron Miners' Revenge,' 'Flight Across the Border,' and 'The
Mystery of the Pineries.'  Great scenery around here for fittings,
you see.  There are some of my key negatives on the table there,
look them over."

Dave examined some of the films with interest.  The former kindness
of Mr. Alden and his party had left a warm spot in the heart of the
young aviator for anything concerning the movies.

"There's some plain slides we made to catch the costumes and
figures," added Mr. Alden, pointing to a rack containing about a
dozen glass negatives.

Dave began holding them up to the light in turn.  He had inspected
perhaps one half of them, when he somewhat startled the moving
picture man with a sharp sudden exclamation.

"Mr. Alden," he asked quite excitedly, "where did you take that
slide?"





CHAPTER XVIII

ON DESERT ISLAND


The young aviator might well ask the question he put to the moving
picture man, for the negative in Dave's hand showed plainly the face
and figure of Jerry Dawson.

There could be no mistake.  The boy who had run away with the
Drifter had features strongly marked and not readily forgotten.  The
picture had been taken in the open street.  Jerry was standing there
talking to a Chinaman.

"Some scene you know, Dashaway?" asked Mr. Alden.

"No, somebody I know--and am very anxious to find," replied Dave.

"So?  Let me have a look at it."

Dave handed the plate to the moving picture man, who slanted it
against the light and nodded intelligently.

"Oh, that?" he said.  "Yes, I remember all about it."

"Where did you take it, Mr. Alden?" pressed Dave.

"At Anseton.  There's a sort of foreign quarter there, and I was
catching up some street scenes.  It was the Chinaman I shot.  Wanted
the costume, you know."

"When was that?" asked Dave.

"Yesterday morning."

Dave asked a score of questions.  The moving picture man saw that
Dave had some important motive in his inquiries.  He did not ask
what it was, and was patient and careful in his replies.

Dave left Mr. Alden feeling that he had learned a good deal.  The
presence of Jerry Dawson in Anseton, and that, too, with a Chinaman,
verified many of the theories of the young aviator.  Dave lost no
time in getting to a telegraph office, to send a dispatch that would
reach Mr. Price.  It told briefly of the progress of the Monarch II
and of the definite clew Dave had just discovered.

That afternoon our hero hired a hand cart he saw in a blacksmith's
yard labeled "For Sale."  He drove it as near to the swamp island as
he could, without getting stuck in the mud.  Then, he called to
Hiram, who put himself in wading trim.  The empty gasoline cans were
over to the cart by Hiram.  Dave trundled them to the town, got them
filled and to the island, and, returning the cart, was ready to
prepare for a new night journey.

"It's less than sixty miles that we have to go, Hiram," he advised
his assistant.

"Then you've found out something definite?" guessed Hiram.

"Yes, I have got a trace of Jerry Dawson."

"You don't say so!"

"I do, and I'll tell you how," and Dave recited the story of his
meeting with the moving picture man.

"Why, that's just grand," commented Hiram in his exuberant way.
"You've good as run down the Drifter."

"Not quite, Hiram."

"Oh, you'll find the stolen airship.  I feel it in my bones.  I've
felt it ever since I saw the way you took hold of this affair."

"Well, I've had good help and a splendid machine, you must
remember."

"I don't go much on the help," declared Hiram modestly.  "As to the
Monarch II, though, I never saw such a well-behaved machine.  If she
does in the water what she's done in the air, she's a record
breaker, sure."

The machine was put in the best possible trim.  It lacked two hours
of nightfall but Dave had plenty to occupy his mind.  For over an
hour he sat looking over maps and memoranda, and blocking out his
course.  He had been very explicit and painstaking in questioning
the moving picture man.  He had made inquiries concerning Anseton
and its vicinity down to the smallest detail.  From all this Dave
had decided on a permanent landing place, a sort of headquarters
from which he could branch out in his personal investigations in the
day time and sally forth on an air hunt in the dark.

The aviators could distinctly hear a bell in some tower tolling the
hour of nine as they circled a busy city that lay beyond and below,
them, a blur of light.  Dave at the levers kept the Monarch II at a
fair height, constantly scanning an expanse to the north dotted only
here and there with lights.  Once past the outskirts of the city he
turned due north.

"Why, hello!" exclaimed his companion, "we're over water!"

"Yes," replied Dave, "it's the lake."

"Lake Superior!  Dave, are we going to cross it?"

"A good many times in the future probably, but not tonight.  I am
looking for a revolving light west of the city, right along the
coast."

"I'll keep a lookout, too."

The lake was here and there dotted with the signal lights of
steamers.  Along the shore, which Dave skirted closely, various
lights their met view.  Both boys strained their gaze.  Finally
Hiram called out sharply: "I see it, Dave."

"See what?"

"A revolving light."

"Where?"

"See, just beyond that little cluster of town lights--quite high
up."

"Yes," answered Dave in a tone of satisfaction.  "That is Rocky
Point lighthouse.  I know my bearings, now."

"Are you going to land, Dave?"

"Presently."

"But you're driving out further over the lake."

"Just for a short distance, Hiram," advised Dave.  "There's an
island down shore where they run a smelter--ah, I think I locate
it."

Dave was not mistaken.  He came within range of some tall, stacks
sending out sparks and flames.  Now he changed his course.  He kept
his glance fixed below him and to the right as steadily as his
duties at the lever would permit.

The Monarch II passed over two small islands.  Half a mile beyond
them arose a third larger one.  It was quite prominent, for the
reason, that it presented a range of great cliffs.  Dave navigated
the air in narrowing circles.  Then, timing and calculating a
volplane glide, he let the machine down easily to the ground.

"Well!" ejaculated Hiram, "you've hit on a pretty dark spot for a
camp, Dave."

"And a safe one," replied the young aviator.  "Mr. Alden described
this place to me.  It is called Desert Island, and has no
inhabitants on it.  It seems dark because we are so shut in, but
your eyes will soon become used to that."

It was a singular place into which the Monarch II had descended.
High declivitous, masses of rock formed a sort of immense cairn.
They seemed shut in on every side, fully one hundred feet below the
level of the cliffs.

The farther north they had run the cooler air currents had become.
Both boys felt somewhat chilly.

"See here," spoke Hiram, after they had seen that the machine was
all right and a rubber sheet thrown over the machinery to protect it
from the heavy night dews, "a warm cup coffee wouldn't hurt us."

"That's right, Hiram," agreed Dave.  "We are all shut in here, and
even a big fire wouldn't show from the land or the deck of a
passenger steamer.  You can try your hand at coffee making, if you
like."

"The coffee is all made, but cold, in these bottles," explained
Hiram, fishing out two from the accommodation basket.

There were both trees and bushes near by.  Hiram gathered some dry
branches and  roots and soon had a comfortable little campfire
going.  He poured out the coffee from the bottles into a tin water
pail, and soon had it steaming hot.  Sandwiches and some bakery
stuff Dave had bought at Ironton made a very satisfactory meal.
Then they spread some wraps over a heap of dried grass, which they
gathered up without much trouble.  They rested in luxurious ease,
watching the bright, snapping fire glow and feeling its genial
warmth.

"Well, this is just like Robinson Crusoe, isn't it, Dave?" asked
Hiram, with an air of great comfort.

"If you are a man Friday, then," rejoined the young aviator with a
smile, "you scout around in the morning and see if there are any
breaks in these great walls of rock shutting us in."

"Oh, then you're not counting an leaving here again by the air
route?" inquired Hiram in some surprise.

"Not in daylight.  I want to find some other way out for that.  You
see," explained Dave, "this is just an ideal spot as a rendezvous.
I want to get over to the city tomorrow, though, to attend to some
important business."

"How are you going to get there?"

"Why, I'll have to trust to my swimming skill, I guess," replied
Dave.

"Um-m," observed Hiram thoughtfully, and, if the young aviator had
been more watchful, he would have noticed that for the rest of the
evening his willing assistant seemed to have something on his mind.





CHAPTER XIX

THE SEARCHLIGHT


"Hallo!  Hallo!"

Dave made the echoes ring with the loud call as he moved up and down
and across the queer basin, or cairn, where they had landed in the
Monarch II the night previous.

He had awakened just at daylight to find Hiram Dobbs mysteriously
missing.  Dave was not worried at the first, but as he looked around
and then explored the immediate neighborhood, he began to get
mystified, if not alarmed.

Neither did his vigorous shouting bring any response.  Dave came
back to the camp spot to make a new discovery that puzzled him.  On
the ground near where they had slept were Hiram's coat, vest, shoes
and cap.

"Why, I can't understand this at all," mused the young aviator.
"Hiram couldn't have done much in the way of climbing up, he appears
to be nowhere within hail, and he is not given to play tricks."

Dave did not wait to eat anything.  He was really concerned about
his comrade.  He got a long tree branch, stripped it, and went along
the side of the cairn, poking in and out among the dense dumps of
shrubbery.

"Hello," he exclaimed suddenly, as disturbing some vines he saw an
opening, and not twenty feet away a natural rocky tunnel, "daylight,
and the waves of the lake.  I think I understand now."

Dave penetrated the passage.  As he came out at the other end, he
found he faced a rock-strewn stretch of sand.  The waves of the lake
lapped this.  In the distance he could make out Anseton, and nearer
still, about a mile distant, the main shore.

The shore he was on terminated in a ridge of rocks that ran far out
into the water.  Dave wondered if the exploring spirit had moved
Hiram to attempt an entire circle about the island.

"He went away in swimming trim," thought Dave, "so that may be so.
I'll go out on that ledge of rocks and explore a little myself."

"Hello, Dave Dashaway!" sang out an exultant voice, just as Dave was
about to remove his shoes.

Around the ledge of rock came a light skiff.  The oarsman was Dave's
missing comrade.  He drove the boat upon the sandy beach and leaped
out with a gay laugh.

"Why, Hiram," exclaimed the young aviator in marked surprise.

"It's me," chuckled Hiram.  "Stole a march on you.  Nearly dry," he
added, shaking his clinging garments.  "And oh! what a swim."

"You have been to the mainland?" questioned Dave.

"Where else?  When you said 'swim' last night, it gave me an idea.
I'm some swimmer, Dave Dashaway.  Always was.  Took the prize in a
contest in Plum Creek back at home one Fourth of July.  I found a
way out of that shut in place and made a jolly dive for shore."

"But the skiff?"

"You'll need one, won't you?" challenged Hiram.

"Why, yes.  I intended hiring one when I got across from the
island."

"So you said, and I acted.  I did better than hiring a boat, Dave."

"How is that?"

"Bought one outright.  I took my money with me.  Found an old fellow
who lets out a lot of boats for fishing, and made a bargain.  The
skiff isn't the staunchest craft on the lake.  Leaks a little, and
one oar has been split and mended, but it's all right for our little
use.  Four dollars and a half--and we can sell it for something when
we get through using it."

"You're a great fellow, Hiram, I must confess," said Dave
admiringly.

"I'd like to do something to help on this trip of ours, you know."

"You've done a good deal this time, I can tell you that," declared
Dave.  "I can manage all my plans finely, now."

They pulled the boat into the shelter of some rocks.  Then they
returned to the rocky hollow.  A good breakfast was in order.  Dave
announced the importance of his getting to Anseton at once.

An hour later the little skiff was launched once more.  Dave rowed
over to the mainland and lined the shore till well into city waters.
He secured the skiff near a public pier, and started on foot for his
destination.

Left to himself on the island, Hiram proceeded to dry his clothing.
Then he puttered about the machine.  He read for an hour or two in a
book on aeronautics he found in the basket, well on towards the
afternoon.

Hiram got tired of waiting for Dave.  He went through the tunnel
finally and roamed about on the rocky shore.  There was more of
scenery and variety here.  The youth watched the boats in the
distance.  Then he made out the little skiff he had bought that
morning making its way in and out among other craft between the
island, and the mainland.

"What's the news, Dave?" inquired Hiram, as they gained the camp
after securing the skiff where it could not be easily seen or found.

"The best ever," reported Dave cheerily.

"Tell me about it, won't you?"

"Well, I saw Mr. Price."

"Is he here at Anseton?"

"Yes, with his men.  I had a long talk with him.  He feels pretty
good to know that we got here safely with the Monarch II.  I told
him all about the place where the moving picture man saw Jerry
Dawson and the Chinaman.  He thinks that is an excellent clew."

"I should think it was," said Hiram.

"He wants us to try and discover the Drifter.  He says it's only a
question of time, he and his men running down the smugglers.  You
see, Hiram, we are interested mainly in finding the aero-hydroplane,
and getting it back to the Interstate people."

"That's so."

"And we must think of that first."

"I understand."

"We will make a long trip tonight--clear across the lake."

"Suppose you get a sight of the Drifter?"

"Then we'll know that it is really here, won't we?"

"Yes, but are you going to jog right into them and capture them?"

"Hardly," laughed Dave.  "I hope if we do come across the Drifter,
that we can follow it or keep it company, or find out where it is
hidden away in the daytime.  We will have to run across it before we
can decide what circumstances will lead us to do."

"They're an ugly crowd--the Dawsons, and probably the fellows with
them, too."

"I realize that.  Mr. Price insisted on my taking these," and Dave
began opening a boxlike package he had brought with him in the
skiff.

"Hello," cried Hiram, as two good sized weapons and some boxes of
cartridges were disclosed.  "Do we have to use them?"

"I hope not," replied Dave, "but Mr. Price said we might come to a
pinch where we could use them to show we were not unprotected, and
to scare any crowd that tried to interfere with us."

"Well, it begins to look like real business," commented Hiram.

"That's what we're here for."

"Yes, indeed."

They had no difficulty in getting the Monarch II aloft, the hollow
extending for several hundred feet.  The night was ideal for a
secret sky voyage.  A slight mist hung over the ground, but at a
height of five hundred feet the air was perfectly clear.  There was
bright starlight, and against the radiance they could make out
flying birds quite a distance away.

Dave took a route across the lake diagonally from Anseton.  They
skirted the other shore for about ten miles.  Then they recrossed
the lake.  The machine made a sweep along the coast line.

"Well, Dave," remarked his trusty assistant, "we've run across no
air bird so far."

"I didn't expect to, all at once," was Dave's reply.  "We can only
keep at it."

"And trust to luck--I say!"

Hiram interrupted himself with a shout.  Just beneath them an
excursion steamer was ploughing its way through the waves, bound
citywards on its return trip.  They could hear the music of the band
aboard, until now drowned out by hoarse blare of the fog whistle.

At the same moment a broad vivid flare of electric radiance shot
across the sky from the deck of the steamer.  It waved horizontally
in some signal to the landing dock two miles further away.  Then the
operator of this glowing searchlight sent its gleams upwards in a
slow way, as if for scenic effect for the passengers on board.

"The mischief!" exclaimed Dave bending to levers and starting the
Monarch II forward at best speed.

Hiram sat staring.  He blinked, half-blinded.  The machine was
irradiated in clear, sharp outlines as the great searchlight glare
was focused, a speck of action in the sky.

A chorus of cheers went up from the deck of the steamer as its
passengers caught sight of the airship.  Only for a moment, however,
was the brilliant sky picture in view.  Dave turned the head of the
machine on a volplane sweep, and the searchlight operator could not
locate it again.

"Well, we've been seen," observed Hiram,

"I'm sorry for it," replied Dave simply.

"Look there!" cried Hiram abruptly.

Dave had selected a course leading over the land, away from the
water.  As Hiram spoke, his own eye caught sight of some brilliant
sparkles of light.

It was a rocket, exploding in mid air directly in their course, and
it was to this that Hiram Dobbs had directed the attention of the
young aviator.





CHAPTER XX

ACROSS THE BORDER


"Did you see it?" asked Hiram, in a great state of excitement.

"Yes," responded Dave.  "A rocket."

"See!  See!" continued Hiram-"there's it second one!"

"Sure enough."

"Dave, this means something."

"For us, you think?"

"Yes, I do.  Keep near the place where these rockets were fired,
Dave.  Now then, what do you think?"

Dave slowed down.  There was certainly something to his companion's
surmises or suspicions, whatever they were.  Directly at the spot
whence the rockets had been fired there now suddenly flared up a
great reach of flames.

Watching these, the interested aviators saw them change to a reddish
hue.  Three times, at brief intervals, they did this.

"Don't you see?" persisted Hiram.

"See what?" asked Dave.

"A signal."

"You think so?"

"I surely do.  Now, then, look sharp.  There are figures about the
fire.  The fire is pitch or oil, or something that could be made to
flame up quickly.  One of the men threw something into it from a
box.  It was red fire."

"Why, yes," observed Dave slowly.  "I'll admit that was some kind of
a signal."

"For the airship," interrupted Hiram quickly.  "Look, look again,
Dave!  One of the men is shading his eyes from the glare of the
fire, and is looking straight up into the sky.  Why, it's plain as
day.  They saw our airship when that searchlight caught us.  They
were waiting for an airship to come along."

"Another airship than ours, you mean?"

"That's it, and I'll bet the Drifter!  They took ours for the
Drifter.  They want us to land.  Why, see there, one of the fellows
is looking through a field glass--as if he could make us out in the
dark away up here!"

It did not take Dave long to drift to Hiram's way of thinking.  The
spot where the fire showed seemed to be a large yard of some kind,
attached to a factory.

"Of course this is all guess work, Hiram," said Dave, after a
moment's thought.  "Just the same, it fits in to your theory."

"Say," spoke Hiram suddenly, "I've an idea."

"What is it, Hiram?"

"Make a stop just as soon as you can."

"What's that for?"

"Let me out, and give me a chance to find out who that signal was
intended for."

"I declare, it's not a bad plan," said Dave at once.

"Can't you find some safe place where we can land?"

"There won't be much trouble about that."

"Do it, Dave," urged Hiram, "and right away, so I won't lose track
of the place yonder."

Dave inspected the country below as closely as he could at a
distance.  He circled to a lower level, and selected a patch of high
grass between two corn fields.

"Now then," announced Hiram.  "I'm off."

"I shall wait anxiously for your return, Hiram."

"Don't worry, I shan't get into any trouble."

Dave did not leave the flying machine.  He kept himself in readiness
for a flight, should anyone approach the spot.  There was not much
fear of that, though, he reasoned, as the place was away from the
traversed roads and paths.

The young aviator had quite a spell of waiting.  He began to fear
that Hiram had lost his way or that something had happened to him,
as an hour passed by.  Suddenly, however, his active young assistant
bounded into view, chipper and lively as usual.

"What news, Hiram?" inquired Dave.

"The best in the world."

"You have found out something?"

"You'll think so when I tell you," declared Hiram.  "I found the
place where they sent up the rockets without much trouble."

"What was it, Hiram?"

"An old factory yard.  Part of the buildings have been burned down,
and three or four loaferish looking fellows seem to live in an old
shake down there.  They belong to the crowd of that fellow, Ridgely,
the smuggler, right enough."

"How did you know that, Hiram?" asked Dave.

"Because I overheard them.  They had let their signal fire burn down
low, and were sitting around it talking.  I crept up behind an old
shed and listened.  It was as near as I dared to get, and I could
catch only a word now and then.  They spoke the name Drifter,"
asserted Hiram positively.

"You didn't see anything of Jerry Dawson?" asked Dave.

"No, but--say, yes, they mentioned his name, too.  They were all
excited about seeing our airship.   It seems they were trying to
warn the Drifter."

"To warn the Drifter?" repeated Dave somewhat puzzled.

"Yes."

"Why, what for?"

"To keep away from the American shore.  Somehow, they had found out
that the revenue officers were at Anseton.  They knew, too, that the
Interstate people had an airship out after them.  It seems that when
we didn't reply to their signal, they guessed that they had hailed
the wrong airship.  They have sent a man to the city to telegraph to
the men on the Canadian side to look out for an airship on their
track."

"You don't know where they are going to telegraph to, Hiram?"

"But I do," cried Hiram triumphantly.  "That's my big discovery.
They talked over the whole thing.  The message is to be sent to a
friend at Brantford.  He is to ride post haste horseback ten miles
west of that place to where the Drifter people have a camp in what
they call Big Moose Woods."

"Hiram," applauded the young aviator, "you're a jewel.  Why, you
have simplified the whole business."

"And you're going right after the Drifter?" propounded Hiram
eagerly.

"'We're going to try to," replied Dave, "but first we must get word
of all this to Mr. Price."

The Monarch II had mounted aloft while they were conversing.  Dave
started the machine in a direction opposite to that in which they
had been going.  Hiram noted this.

"Are you going back to Desert Island?" he asked.

"First, yes.  Then I shall skiff over to Anseton and report to Mr.
Price direct or through any of his agents I may find."

The machine was brought safely to her old moorings within an hour.
Dave, after landing on Desert Island, at once rowed over to the
mainland.  Hiram was full of curiosity when he returned.

"It's all right," Dave explained.  "I was lucky enough to meet Mr.
Price himself.  He and his men had already acted on the clew that
picture of Jerry and the Chinaman gave us.  The old factory yard
where the rockets were sent up will be under watch before the night
is over, and Mr. Price is going to Brantford on a special boat."

"Then the crowd who stole the Drifter are as good as caught!"
exclaimed Hiram hopefully.

"Hardly," replied Dave.  "Mr. Price has advised me to get the
Monarch II over to the Canadian side of the lake to night!"

"Which you are going to do, Dave?"

"Right away."

Dave, while in Anseton, had made some necessary inquiries as to the
location of Brantford.  He had also got a very good idea of Big
Moose Woods.  His arrangements with the revenue officer had been
precise.  He was aware that their only chance of getting near to the
missing airship was to make new headquarters somewhere in the
vicinity of Brantford, just as they had on Desert Island.

The darkness was fading in the east when Dave selected a plateau on
the top of a high hill as a landing place.  Once landed, trees and
bushes at its crest hid them from view except from overhead.  Dave
had used diligence and haste in getting out of possible sight, for
day was breaking.

They had reach Brantford, sailed over it, and Dave calculated had
skirted the vicinity of Big Moose Woods.  Nowhere, however, had
lights, a campfire or any other token indicated the camp or
rendezvous of the Drifter party.

"We are within twenty miles of Brantford," Dave announced.

"And what's the programme?" inquired Hiram.

"Sleep, for we need it.  We seem to be safely shut in here.  Later
we'll plan just what we will do."

"If the Dawson crowd are warned all around about us and the revenue
officers, they may run for some other territory," suggested Hiram.

"We want to be on the lookout for that," replied the young aviator.

They made themselves a comfortable bed, and both were soon asleep.
Hiram woke up first; and found the sun shining in his eyes, and was
about to shift his position, intent on a longer nap, when he checked
himself not moving a muscle.

Through his half closed eyelids, still feigning sleep, Hiram kept
his glance fixed on one spot.  He almost held his breath.  Thus for
nearly five minutes he lay inert, but every nerve on the keenest
edge.

His glance widened and seemed to be following some disappearing
object.  Then he sat straight upright, stared fixedly down the hill,
and leaning over pulled his companion by the sleeve.

"Dave! Dave!" whispered the excited boy-"wake up! We've been
discovered!"





CHAPTER XXI

A CHASE IN MID AIR


Dave roused up, wide awake in an instant.  He was about to spring to
his feet, when Hiram pulled him back with the words:

"Don't get up."

"Why not?" inquired the somewhat puzzled young aviator.

"You'll be seen."

"Who by?"

"A man who was just here."

"Do you mean that, Hiram?" exclaimed Dave in a startled tone.

"I certainly do.  Look," said Hiram, pointing, and then he added:
"No, the trees shut him out now.  As I just said, though, we have
been discovered."

Now Hiram arose to his feet, the danger of being seen appearing to
have passed.  Dave followed his example.

"Some one was here, you say?" began Dave.

"Yes."

"Who was it?"

"A fellow who looked like some of the half breed Indians we saw
fishing over near Anseton.  I woke up, and he came in range clear as
a picture.  It was over by that thicket of pine trees.  There he
stood, staring at our machine, then at us.  He seemed to take it in
with a good deal of surprise.  Finally he threw up his hands as if
he was making up his mind to something, and started on a run down
the hill."

"In that direction?" asked Dave, pointing due east.

"Yes, in the direction of Brantford.  I tell you, Dave, he's a spy.
If he ran across us accidentally then he's gone to tell his friends
about discovering the airship."

"That doesn't follow," remarked Dave thoughtfully, "but I'm glad you
saw him."

"Yes, I think we need to keep a pretty close lookout.  Say, Dave,"
questioned Hiram, "if he is some friend of the Dawson crowd, and has
gone to tell them about us, what do you suppose they'll do?"

"I have no idea," replied the young aviator.  "But they won't catch
us napping."

Dave kept a close watch out in all directions while Hiram hurried up
a quick breakfast.  They got through with the meal rapidly.  Then
Dave went over the machine, seeing that the gasoline tanks were full
and the gearing and oiling apparatus in good order.

Two hours went by, and there were no developments that indicated
that the visitor to their camp had been other than a straggler, with
no purpose in view in his rapid disappearance.  Hiram became more
matter-of-fact, and guessed he had "got scared for nothing."  All
the same he kept a close lookout all of the time, particularly in
the direction of Brantford.

Dave was planning a visit on foot to that town.  He decided,
however, that he would wait till afternoon so as to be sure that
there was no occasion for worry.  Both lads discovered the fallacy
of their theories at the same moment.

"Look!" suddenly shouted Hiram, pointing.

"I see," said Dave calmly, but under the surface greatly stirred up.

"It's the Drifter!"

"Yes."

"What are you going to do?"

"Come," spoke Dave simply, and sprang into his seat in the Machine.

Hiram hastily collected their few belongings scattered about the
spot.  He bundled them into the accommodation basket, and was in his
place almost as soon as Dave.

The eyes of both of the young aviators were fixed on a rapidly approaching
object--an airship.  Dave did not have to glance at its construction more
than once to know definitely that it was the stolen Drifter.

Whoever was at the levers, Jerry or his father, thoroughly
understood his business, Dave saw that.  The aero-hydroplane came
rather abruptly into view over a wooded hill top, and was rapidly
approaching them.

"You see, I was right," said Hiram hastily.  "That half breed was a
spy, at least to that crowd.  He has directed them here."

"All ready," ordered Dave, in a set, sturdy tone, and the self
starter began to work.

"What is it--a chase?" fluttered Hiram.

"We'll have to wait and see.  You know what kind of fellows the
Dawsons are.  I'm not going to sit like a bird in a nest and have
them swoop down upon us, though."

"There are three--you can count them in their airship," said Hiram,
shading his eyes and craning his neck.

"Four," corrected Dave.  "The Drifter has a capacity of five
ordinary people, Mr. Randolph told me."

The Monarch II made a magnificent slanting rise up into the air.
Dave knew the splendid qualities of the machine under his control.
They included an ability for a quick light ascent.  He had no idea
of the purpose of the Drifter crowd, but of course their main object
was to capture their rival.  The question was, failing in this, how,
far would they go in the way of crippling or even destroying the
Monarch II.

The Drifter was headed on a course directly towards the eminence
which the boys had just left behind them.  There had come up an
eight hour wind about noon, and Dave knew that would be child's play
maneuvering to avoid the enemy intent on annoying or injuring them.
He drove ahead at a six hundred feet level and waited for the
Drifter crowd to indicate what their purpose was.

"They are changing their course!" said Hiram quickly, as the Drifter
wheeled suddenly.

"They are going to try a new ascent," explained Dave.

"Why?"

"To get to a higher level than ourselves."

"Then they mean mischief?"

"I am afraid that they do," replied the young aviator.

"Maybe they are trying to scare us," suggested Hiram.

Dave was now certain that the purpose of the Dawsons was to pursue,
capture or intimidate them, or drive them away.  They had a superb
machine, and as they made a far lateral shoot it brought them
considerably higher up than the Monarch II.

In fact, after one or two circles, like a huge bird swooping after
prey, the Drifter came almost directly over them.

Dave's tactics were now purely defensive and evasive.  There were
five people aboard the aero-hydroplane, and they were desperate
persons.  He was not surprised when an object same shooting
downwards from the Drifter.  It struck one of the plane wires and
then dropped earthwards.

"Something's whipped loose," spoke Hiram quickly.

"It's one of the elevator wires," said Dave, darting a quick glance
at the spot.  "This won't do."

Now it was an over-water flight with no measured course to pursue.
The Drifter tried to repeat its recent tactics.  Dave noticed that
the Monarch II had become somewhat faulty in its running.  He was
anxious to get away from the enemy.  His main efforts were directed
towards preserving a sure balance, for once or twice there was a
wobble, as if the machine was hurt in some vital part.

The young aviator made out a buoy a few miles to the west.  Beyond
it was a little settlement.  He set his course for reaching it, and
directed his full attention to the levers and the angle indicated.

The indicator was directly in front of the pilot seat.  It showed
positively how the machine was flying, on the top or down bank.  It
comprised a cup with lines set about ten degrees, and gave a sure
safety limit.  Only the pendulum was movable.   This was mounted on
an arm always perpendicular, a small mirror reflecting the
variations of the pendulum.

Climbing and banking, Dave got quite a lead on the Drifter, but the
aero-hydroplane kept up a steady pursuit.

"There's something the matter besides the broken wire," spoke Dave
to his anxious companion.  "The oil intake is dogged or one of the
planes loose.  We can't take any risks."

Dave sent the Monarch II on a downward shoot.  There was a single
pontoon in the center of the craft, with small tanks beneath the
planes to prevent tipping over in the water.  Dave aimed to hit the
bay near to the shore.

Suddenly the aircraft acted queer.  It had evidently struck a hole
in the air.  The machine seemed fairly to drop from under its
occupants, and thirty feet from the water, Dave was lifted from his
seat and took a sudden plunge over-board.

He went under the surface and came up dazed and nearly stunned.  As
he floated, dashing the water from his eyes, he saw the Drifter, now
a flying boat, cut around a point of rocks, bearing straight down
upon him.

Dave looked quickly about him for the Monarch II.  To his surprise,
as it scudded across the waves for perhaps a hundred feet on its
momentum, it lifted again free of the surface of the bay.

He made out Hiram clambering from his seat like a sailor among the
riggings of a ship.  He saw the machine go up on a sharp slant,
clear the shore of the bay, and disappear beyond the high cliffs
lining it.

Then something struck him.  It was some light part of the rotary
engined aero-hydroplane, the Drifter, cutting the water like a
knife.  His head dizzied, and the young aviator went under the
surface of the lake with a shock.





CHAPTER XXII

DAVE A CAPTIVE


It took Dave an hour to find out just what had happened to him.  He
roused up to find two men carrying him, one at his feet, one at his
shoulders.  All that he could guess was that they were on land.  How
he had been fished out of the water, and what had become of the
Drifter, the young aviator had no means of knowing.

The two men were rough looking fellows and reminded Dave of dock
laborers or loiterers.  They were big and sturdy, and as Dave
stretched out and showed signs of life, one of them remarked
gruffly.

"None of that--no squirming, now."

Dave's clothes were soggy and dripping.  He felt somewhat sore on
one side of his head, but so far as he could figure it out he was
not crippled; or seriously hurt.

The young aviator cast his eyes about him to, learn that they were
going through a patch of timber.  Then came a meadow-like stretch,
and then a thicket.  They had not gone far into that before the men
dropped him on the ground and stood over him.

"Can you walk?" asked one of the two.

"I think I can," replied Dave, arising quite nimbly to his feet.

The instant he did this both of the men reached, out and seized an
arm.  Dave was thus pinioned tightly as the men forced him along.

"Most there," growled one of them gruffly.

"Good thing," retorted the other.

Finally they came to a dense thicket that covered a rise.  About
half way up this, almost hidden by saplings and vines, Dave made
out a grim looking patched-up building.

It was an old hut to which various additions had been made.  One of
Dave's companions uttered a peculiar whistle.  The door of the place
was opened, and a disreputable looking fellow like themselves
admitted them.

"Hello, who's this?" he spoke in a tone of curiosity.

"Oh, some one to take care of," was the short reply.

"He don't look like a revenue."

"Worse than that.  Ridgely will tell you when he comes," was the
indifferent retort.  "Have you a place to keep him tight and safe?"

"I guess so," laughed the other, "a dozen of them."

"One will do."

Dave was led through several rooms.  Then they came to a partition
formed of heavy timbers.  In its center was a stout door with an
immense padlock.

"Get in there," spoke the most ferocious of his captors, giving Dave
a push.

Then the door was closed with a crash that showed how heavy it was.
Dave could hear those outside securing the padlock.

"A prisoner, eh?" mused Dave, looking about him.  "Yes, it is,
indeed, tight and safe."

Dave's prison place was gruesome in the extreme.  On three sides was
solid rock, forming a semicircular back to the room.  The partition,
closed the entire front.  Near its top in several places were cut
out apertures, admitting air and a little light.

There were some broken boxes in the place and a heap of burlap.
Dave decided that it had been used at some time or other as a place
of storage.  He did not yet feel normal, so he sat down on one of
the boxes and felt about his head.

"Just a bruise," he reported.  "I suppose they, dragged me aboard of
the Drifter from the water, but what about Hiram and the Monarch
II?"

Dave started up, all weakness and dizziness disappearing as if by
magic, as he thrilled over the possible peril of his comrade.  With
a recollection only of his last sight of Hiram grid the Monarch II,
he feared what might have happened to either or both.

It worried Dave a good deal and made him restless and unhappy, but
finally he figured out a theory.  In some unaccountable way the
Monarch II had no sooner glided along on its pontoon, than it had
run straightway up into the air, as though the self starter was in
perfect action.  Dave recalled Hiram struggling to reach the pilot's
seat.  Then he had witnessed the disappearance of the Monarch II.

"I doubt if Hiram could manage the machine--I even doubt with
something wrong with it, as there surely was, if he could keep it
adrift," decided Dave.  "What then?"

The young aviator pictured Hiram and the machine in a tangle among
the trees, or dropping upset among the rocks.  He had not seen
anything of the Dawsons or the Drifter since he had fallen into the
water of the bay.  Perhaps, he reasoned, they had resumed an air
chase of the fugitive.

Dave had several hours to himself.  He detected no sound or movement
outside of the strange room he was in.  It was dreadfully dull and
lonesome, and he wondered what the outcome of his present adventure
would be.

It was well along in the day, when Dave from sheer weariness and
worry had lain down among the heaps of burlap, that a diversion came
to monotony.  He started up as he heard voice outside of the door.
Then the padlock rattled, the door opened, and some one stepped
across the threshold.  The visitor stared about to locate Dave, and
spoke the words:

"That you, Dashaway?"

The room was lighter now, with the door half open.  Dave rubbed his
eyes and strained his gaze, and took a good look at the speaker.

"Don't you know me?" challenged the latter.

"Oh, yes," replied Dave, "I see now.  You are the gentleman we
rescued from the lake at Columbus."

"I don't suppose you think me much of a gentleman just now,
Dashaway," spoke Ridgely, for, he was, in fact Dave's visitor.

His tone was somewhat regretful, and not at all unfriendly.  Dave
was shrewd enough to discover this, and politic enough to take quick
advantage of it.

"Oh, I don't know," he said.  "Of course you are with the crowd who
had me locked in here."

"I'm sorry to say that's true," responded Ridgely.

"It's not pleasant here, I can tell you," said Dave, "and the whole
thing is pretty high handed, don't you think so, Mr. Ridgely?"

"I don't think it, Dashaway, I know, it. See here, I've got nothing
against you.  On the contrary, I owe you a good deal.  I'm not
forgetting that you saved my life when my launch struck the rocks
near Columbus."

Dave was silent, resolved to let the man have his say out.

"I was in a fix then, I was in a fix before I got there, and I'm
afraid I'm in a fix now," continued Ridgely.  "I've come to see you
in the right spirit, Dashaway."

"How is that?" inquired Dave.

"Sick of the whole combination.  I thought I was smart, but you and
your people are smarter.  Young Dawson convinced me that we could
run things so our airship could make trips for a long time, and here
you are on our trail within seventy-two hours."

"Yes, Mr. Ridgely," acknowledged the young aviator.  "They found a
clew and started pursuit right after you stole the Drifter."

"You mean you did.  Don't be modest, Dashaway.  I've learned a good
deal about you, and if I hadn't about decided to quit business I'd
offer you a job."

"What!" smiled Dave--"smuggling?"

"Well, it pays pretty big, you know."

"Does it?" replied Dave.  "I fail to see it.  I wouldn't like to be
in a position where I was being chased half over the country."

"H'm, we won't discuss it," retorted Ridgely in a moody tone.  "I
came to tell you that you won't be hurt any."

"But I want to get away from here," insisted Dave.

"That will be all, too," Ridgely assured him.  "You see, we know now
that things are going to break up.  I don't suppose you would tell
me how closely the revenue officers are on our track."

"So close," replied Dave gravely, "that you won't dare to cross the
border any more."

"Are they on the Canadian side yet?" questioned Ridgely anxiously.

"I don't know that, and I shouldn't feel right in telling you if I
did," replied Dave.  "You had better let me go, Mr. Ridgely.  It
won't sound well, when things get righted, that you kept me a
prisoner here."

"I haven't all the say about that, Dashaway," confessed Ridgely in a
rueful way.  "I don't think the Dawsons will let you go until they
are sure of making themselves safe."

"Do you know what became of our airship, Mr. Ridgely?" Dave asked
pointedly.

"No, I don't--none of us do.  Young Dawson is pretty good in the
air, but he didn't seem to know how to get off the water quickly.
After we got you aboard, we lost a lot of time getting you ashore,
and, up in the air again, when we started in the direction we had
seen your airship go, we could find no trace of it."

"I hope nothing his happened to Hiram," thought Dave, very
anxiously.

"If I get away," resumed Ridgely, "I want you to tell the people
after me, if you can, that I'm all through with the smuggling
business.  I've had my fill of it."

The speaker turned to leave the room, but Dave halted him with the
question:

"What are you going to do about me, Mr. Ridgely?"

"I am going to order the people here to treat you the best they know
how," was the prompt response.

"That's all very well enough," said Dave, "but I have business to
attend to."

"What business, Dashaway?"

"Our airship and my friend."

Ridgely looked troubled.  He was thoughtfully, silent for a moment
or two.  Then he said:

"Look here, Dashaway, our men are looking for your airship, and that
means your friend, too, of course.  I've got to go to Brantford, but
I shall leave word that they must look after your friend, and let
you go the minute I send back word that the coast is clear for them
to scatter."

"But what about the Drifter, Mr. Ridgley?" persisted Dave.  "It is
the property of my employers.  I came after it, and I want it."

A faint smile of mingled amusement and admiration crossed the face
of Ridgely.  Reckless fellow that he was, he could not fail to
recognize the fact that Dave, indeed, had business to attend to.

"You take it pretty cool, Dashaway," he observed.

"Because I am in the right," asserted Dave, "as you well know.  The
Dawsons are malicious people.  I want you to warn them that if they
do, any unnecessary injury to the Drifter, it will make it the worse
for them in the final reckoning that is bound to come."

"I don't think they will do the airship any injury."

"You don't know them as I do.  Desperate fellows like the Dawsons
will do anything at times."

"Dashaway, don't you think you are rather hard on them--and on me?"

"I know the Dawsons--I don't know much about you."

"I am not so bad as you think I am."

"Then why don't you set me free?"

"We won't discuss that, now.  You had better think it over."

"I have thought it over. I am grateful to you for saving me,
but--well at present I can't do anything."

"You mean, you won't."

"Well, have it that way if you wish."

"You'll be sorry some day," said Dave, bluntly.

Ridgely left the room.  He closed the door after him with an
assurance to Dave that things would be "all right."  Just then there
was the sound of some one hurrying into the next room, and an
excited voice shouted out in an exultant tone:

"Say, father, we've got the other one, too!"





CHAPTER XXIII

HIRAM'S ADVENTURES


The young aviator at once recognized the voice in the adjoining room
which spoke the excited, words:

"We've got the other one, too!"

It was Jerry Dawson who had spoken.  Dave knew that the statement
could refer to no other than his missing chum.  Dave was in
something of a flutter of suspense.  Then his eye brightened and a
cheery smile overspread his face, as he caught the words in a dearly
familiar tone:

"Say, do you want to kill a fellow?"

It was Hiram who spoke, in a resentful and disgusted voice.  Its
accents were as pert and ringing as ever, and Dave was overjoyed to
know that his loyal comrade was alive and apparently unhurt.

"Say, Dawson," here broke in Ridgely, "I want to speak to you."

"Put this fellow in with Dashaway," ordered Jerry, and then the door
of Dave's prison place was pulled open.  A familiar form came
limping and stumbling across the threshold, and the door was slammed
to and locked after him.

"Hiram!" cried Dave in genuine delight.

He drew back as his friend faced him.  He had noticed that Hiram
limped.  Now he saw that one arm was in a sling.  Besides that,
Hiram's face was one mass of cuts and scratches.  One eye was nearly
closed.

"Oh, Hiram!" cried Dave aghast.

"Look is if I'd been through a threshing machine, do I?" grinned the
plucky lad.

"What happened?" asked Dave seriously.

"Dave," declared Hiram almost solemnly, "I honestly don't know.  The
machine drove upwards so quickly I wondered if some jar or the
broken wire that was switching about didn't start the lever.  By the
time I got to the pilot's seat the machine was on a terrific whiz."

"What did you do?" asked Dave.

"Not much of anything, except to get rattled," confessed Hiram.  "I
tried to circle, and she went banking.  Then the Machine took the
prettiest drift you ever saw.  All of a sudden one of the planes
dropped and then we landed."

"Where?"

"On top of some trees.  Right beyond was a deep basin, chuck full of
undergrowth.  The machine just took a slide off the tops of the
trees, and slipped down to the bottom of the basin.  Then she
turned, I was thrown out."

"What then, Hiram?" pressed Dave in a concerned way.

"Well, Dave, we had briers and brambles on the farm, but nothing to
compare with those Canadian thistles, or whatever they were.  Look
at my face."

"And your arm?"

Hiram shrugged his shoulders resignedly.

"The half breed who looked at it said it was broken.  He seemed to
be some kind of an Indian doctor.  He rubbed my scratches and
bruises with some leaves and set my arm in splints."

"Why, where did the half breed come in?" inquired Dave.

"Well, as soon as I got my wits from the tumble, I thought of you.
I tried to get up out of the basin, but the sides were so steep I
couldn't make it.  So I--well, Dave," added Hiram with a queer
laugh, "I sort of busied myself about the airship.  It wasn't much
battered up.  I feared the Dawson crowd might come hunting for the
machine, so--well, I sort of busied myself about the airship,"
repeated Hiram, with a strange chuckle.  "I was resting when that
half breed and another fellow came along.  The Indian is a great
trailer, I guess, for he was sharp enough to notice the tree tops
and the bushes the machine had rolled over.  Anyhow, down he came on
a rope into the basin and found me."

"And the Monarch II," said Dave.

"No, he didn't find the machine," declared Hiram.

"But--"

"Let me tell my story, Dave," interrupted Hiram.  "He got me up
aloft.  Then he said I was badly hurt, and started in to mend me up.
Then they brought me here. They kept talking about the airship, and
tried to make me tell where it was.  I wouldn't, and didn't."

"Wasn't it in the basin you spoke of?" inquired Dave wonderingly.

"Yes."

"Then why--?"

"Hush!  We're going to have visitors."

This was true.  There was a sound at the door of their prison room,
and the padlock was displaced.  Jerry Dawson stepped into view, his
father behind him.

"Well," he said, with a leer meant to be clever, "I suppose you
fellows know me?"

"We know you, Jerry," retorted Hiram, "only too well."

"I'm boss here," boasted Jerry.

"That's fine, isn't it?" said Hiram.

"And I've got you.  We'll have your airship soon, too.  You'll do
some walking getting back home, I'm thinking."

"What do you want of us, Jerry?" inquired Dave, coolly.

"I want to know where that airship of yours is in the first place."

"Put it in the last place, Jerry," suggested Hiram, "for you won't
find out from me."

"I'll bet I will," vaunted Jerry.  "I have a good mind to punch you
for making all the mischief you have."

"You're safe, Jerry, seeing I'm disabled," said Hiram.

"Bah!  Say, Dashaway, who's working against us here or across the
lake besides yourself?"

"You will have to, guess that, Jerry," replied Dave.

"You won't tell?"

"No.  I'll say this, though: You had better try to even up things in
some way.  The Interstate people and the government know all about
you, and you are likely to have some explaining to do."

Jerry looked worried, but he feigned indifference.

"I'll keep you two safe and quiet till I get ready to quit, all the
same," he snapped out, and slammed the door shut and locked it.

Dave and Hiram listened in silence for some minutes to sounds in the
next room.

They could only catch the echo of voices.  Jerry and his father
seemed to be engaged in conversation.

Suddenly there was an interruption.  There was the sound of an
excited voice, drawing nearer each moment.

A door slammed.  Then heavy running footsteps echoed out, ending
only as some one appeared to burst unceremoniously into the next
room.

"What's the row?" the boys heard in the gruff tones of Jerry's
father.

"Say!" shouted the intruder, evidently a member of their group,
"they've done it!"

"Who have?" shouted out Jerry quickly.

"The revenuers."

"What do you mean?"

"They got Ridgely."

A cry of dismay and excitement ran through the next room.

"How do you know?" demanded the elder Dawson.

"I saw them myself--right near Brantford.  What's more, they're
coming this way to get the rest of us."

At this announcement came another cry.

"You are sure of that?"

"When was this?"

"How soon will they be here?"

"Who is responsible for this?"

So the cries and questions ran on.  There was an excited discussion
all around.

"Maybe Ridgely is a turncoat!" cried somebody.

"Well, we can't talk about that now--we must look out for
ourselves," said another.

"Right you are.  Let us get out of here as soon as we possibly can!"

"That's the talk!"





CHAPTER XXIV

THE ESCAPE BY AIRCRAFT


"That's good," instantly cried Hiram Dobbs.  "They'll have troubles
of their own now, maybe."

He and Dave listening closely, could now detect bustle and
excitement in the rooms beyond their own prison place.

They could hear Jerry Dawson fussing and bawling about, while his
father's gruff voice seemed to give orders to the men in the place.

"I wonder what they will do with us now?" inquired Hiram.

"We shall probably soon know," returned Dave.

"Get those fellows out of there, you two," they finally heard Jerry
Dawson order.

The door of the prison room was unlocked and thrown open.

"March out," ordered Jerry.

Dave and Hiram took their time about obeying the mandate.  Then at a
word from Jerry two of his men hastened them across the threshold,
seizing them by the arms.

"Ouch!" roared Hiram.  "Do you want to smash my arm all over again?"

The man who held him was less rough at this.  In the room the boys
saw Jerry, his father, the two men who held them and three others.
Before Dawson lay a large, round bundle.  A smaller one lay at the
feet of one of the other men.

"Now, then," spoke Dawson, "ready and quick is the word.  I've
divided it up fair, and you'll find your share in that bundle.  You
three had better get it and yourselves to some safe place."

"Yes," spoke one of the men, "the revenuers will surely be here
soon."

"You two," continued Dawson to the men had Dave and Hiram in charge,
"bring the boys along."

"Where to?" was asked.

"Just follow us," was the surly response.

"Give a hand, Jerry."

The two Dawsons lifted the bundle at their feet and started from the
room.  There were sounds as if some one was pounding on the door at
the front of the building.  The Dawsons, however, did not go that
way.  They quickened their steps, the captives were led through
several rooms, and finally a door at the rear of the place was
opened.

"Hold them tight now," ordered Jerry.

"Yes, and if they make any outcry quiet them the way you know how,"
added his father.

Dave and Hiram were surprised to find themselves now in complete
darkness.

"We're going through some kind of a tunnel," whispered the young
aviator to his companion a moment later.

Their captors forced them along in the steps of the Dawsons.  They
must have proceeded several hundred feet thus, when the tunnel grew
lighter.  Then they arrived at an exit letting out into a deep,
narrow ravine.

"They must have taken this route to escape from the revenue
officers," Dave told his companion, in a guarded tone.

"Shall we set up a fight and yell?" proposed the audacious Hiram.

"Not with that broken arm of yours and four to one," dissented Dave.

"Broken arm, nothing!  Say-hello!  Why, they're taking us to their
airship!"  exclaimed Hiram.

They had come upon the Drifter at a point where the ravine spread
out and a long level space showed.

"Now then, brisk is the word," spoke the elder Dawson.

He and his son carried the bundle up to the Drifter and managed to
stow it aboard.  Jerry climbed into the pilot's seat.  His father
drew some stout double cord from his pocket.

"Tie up those boys hand and foot," he ordered grimly.

"See here, Mr. Dawson," spoke up Dave, "what are you going to do
with us?"

"You'll find that out very soon," was the gruff reply.

The two men proceeded to secure the arms and feet of the captives.
Dave knew it was useless to resist the rough treatment he received.
Hiram was not so patient.

"Say, this is an outrage!" he cried out.

"What's the matter with you?" demanded Jerry Dawson, leaning from
his seat with a scowl on his face.

"What do you want to tie a one-armed fellow up for?" grumbled Hiram.

"That's so," said the elder Dawson.  "Just attend to his feet and
one arm.  No use making him safer.  He won't be very dangerous with
only a broken arm free."

First Dave and then Hiram were lifted into the seats behind the
pilot's post.  As has been said, the Drifter could carry five
passengers, and they were not crowded or uncomfortable.

"They are going to carry us away with them," whispered Hiram to his
companion.

"Let them," replied the young aviator.  "It may give us a chance to
outwit them someplace along the line."

Hiram chuckled. Dave stared at him strangely, but his doughty
companion did not explain what he had in his mind.

"All ready," announced Jerry, his hand on his lever.

His father got into the seat behind him.

"Wait a minute," he spoke to his son.  "You two," he added to the
men who had accompanied them, "better get to your friends, divide up
your plunder and make yourselves scarce as soon as you can."

"That's what we intend to do," replied one of the men.

"Hold on!" exclaimed his companion, suddenly turning around at the
echo of a loud shout.

"What's the trouble now, I wonder?"

"Hey, stop the airship!  Stop them!  Stop them!" yelled the strident
voice of a man coming pell mell down the ravine path.  He was in a
frantic state of excitement and waving his arms wildly.

"Don't lose a second," spoke Dawson quickly.

Jerry gave the starter a whirl.  Dave noticed that his father was
quite excited and kept watching the advancing runner.

"Stop them, I tell you!" yelled this individual whom Dave recognized
as one of the three individuals left behind at the hut with the
other bundle.

"What for?" shouted one of the two men near the airship.

"Robbers-thieves!  That bundle they gave us!"

"What about it?"

"No silks--nothing but a lot of worthless truck.  They've cheated us
and are making away with the real plunder."

Whiz! up went the airship.  The three men ran after it.  The
newcomer shook his fist vengefully after the machine.  The other two
picked up rocks and hurled them in its wake.

"O. K.," chuckled Jerry, as the Drifter shot far out of reach of
their deluded confederates.

"Do your level best, Jerry," spoke his father.

"The revenue men may have another airship in commission."

"Oh, I guess not," retorted Jerry airily.  "Say, what about the one
these fellows had?"

"They know and won't tell.  Some of crowd will find it, though I
told them if they did to dismantle it.  They can get something for
the old junk."

"About all they will get, eh?" leered Jerry.

"I'm thinking so."

"You didn't give them any of the silk?"

"Not I."

"That was slick," chuckled Jerry.

"Hear him!  He's a fine one, isn't he?" observed Hiram to Dave.

"Yes, Jerry can't be true, even to his friends," replied the young
aviator.

Dave watched Jerry at the lever.  He had to admit that his enemy
knew considerable about running an aircraft.  The only criticism he
could make was that several times Jerry took some big risks in
daringly banking, when the least variation of the wind would have
made the Drifter turn turtle.

It was six hours later when the airship descended.  At times the
machine had made fully sixty miles an hour.  Long since they had
passed the apparent limits of civilization.  The course was due
northwest.  Vast forests spread out under them.  It was only for the
first time in one hundred miles, as they neared a small settlement
on a river, that Jerry let down on the speed, and they descended at
a spot about a mile from a settlement in the center of a big field.

Dave and Hiram were left in the chassis, while Jerry and his father
left the machine.  They conversed for some time, then it was
arranged that Jerry should proceed to the settlement and purchase
some provisions.  His father came up to the machine as Jerry
departed.

"See here, you two," he spoke in his usual gruff way, "we'll give
you something to eat and, drink when Jerry comes back."

"Where are you taking us to, Mr. Dawson?" asked the young aviator.

"We are taking you so far from home, that you can't tramp back in
time to pat any more of your friends on our track," was the blunt
reply.  "Another couple of hundred miles, and, if you behave
yourself, we'll set you loose."

The man spoke as if the proposition was perfectly simple and honest
one.

"Another couple of hundred miles?" repeated Dave.

"That is what I said, Dashaway."

"You are carrying things with a high hand, Mr. Dawson."

"Yes?  Well, I know what I am doing."

"You may overreach yourself."

"Humph!  I'll take my chances on that.  You are smart, Dashaway, but
you can't scare me and you can't get the best of me."

"But the law will get you, some day or another."

"Bah!  I'm tired and don't want to listen to your talk.  I tell you
I know what I am doing."

"You won't release us now?"

"No."

"That is final?"

"It certainly is, and you may as well save your breath and not
mention it again.  I am tired out and don't want any more of such
talk."

"Well, see here--" broke in Hiram.

"I won't listen to any more.  Shut up."

With the words Dawson went over to a hammock at a little distance,
spread his coat over it, and lay down to rest.  It was not five
minutes before his captives could hear him snoring loudly.

Hiram had been watching his every movement in an intense way.  Now
he leaned over towards Dave.  His eyes were snapping with excitement
and there was a broad smile on his face, as he whispered into the
ear of the young aviator one word.  It was:

"Hurrah!"





CHAPTER XXV

CAUGHT CONCLUSION


"Hurrah!" was the word that Hiram Dobbs spoke exultantly, and Dave
looked at him in profound surprise.

Hiram had lifted himself up from the seat.  Now he went through some
movements that almost startled the puzzled young aviator.

Suddenly his arm shot out of the sling, and as suddenly Hiram,
though with a wince, swung it around once or twice, and the three
splints holding it cracked and split audibly.

"Hey, Hiram!" gasped Dave.

"S-sh!" uttered his assistant warningly.

Hiram ran his free hand down into his pocket.  He drew out the big
pocket knife he carried.  It was more of a tool than a whittling
toy, for he used it in tinkering about the airship.

With his teeth, Hiram opened its largest blade.  He gave a slash at
the cords surrounding his other arm and his feet.  Then he leaned
over towards Dave.  A few deft strokes of the keen blade, and Dave,
like himself, was free.

"Easy," he whispered, as Dave started up.  "I'll watch Dawson.  You
get into the pilot's seat."

"Good for you, Hiram!" whispered back the young aviator, fairly
thrilling with the excitement of the moment.

Dave took in every detail of the mechanism before his eyes.  He made
sure of no faulty start.

"All ready," he announced after a minute or two.

"Good-bye!" spoke Hiram, with a gay bold wave of his hand in the
direction of the sleeping, Dawson.

"Put on the muffler," ordered Dave, as the exhaust began to sizzle.

Hiram did so.  It was too late, however, to avoid sounding a warning
to Dawson.  The big man started up with a yell.  He came to his feet
roaring out:

"Come back!"

"I hope you'll find the walking good!" shouted Hiram, waving his
hand in adieu to the amazed Dawson.

"Hiram, you're a genius!" cried Dave.

The Drifter struck a course as true as a die.  The splendid machine
and the young aviator were both at their best.  There was a last
fading picture of a forlorn man convulsed with rage and despair.
Then the two boy aeronauts turned their back on the enemies who had
been hoisted by their own petard.

"It's great, its grand," cheered Hiram, bubbling over with joy, as
the exhilarating air and their magical progress made him realize
what freedom meant to its fullest extent.

"I don't understand.  Your arm, Hiram?" said Dave.

His jolly assistant waved the arm in question gaily.

"Wasn't it hurt?"

"Yes, and badly, I thought," reflected Hiram.  "It was numb and
useless when the half breed attended to it, but he was mistaken and
so was I in thinking that any bones were broken."

"They were not?"

"Not a bit of it.  Don't you see?  It pains, and I'm bragging when I
swing it around as if it was as good as ever, but I can use it."

"You have used it to a grand purpose, Hiram."

"I didn't notice that I could use it until they locked me up with
you."

"Why didn't you tell me then?"

"Oh, I wanted to surprise you."

"You have, Hiram."

"I thought I'd play 'possum on those smart fellows.  I played the
cripple strong.  You see what has come of it."

When they had gone nearly one hundred miles, Dave saw that the
gasoline supply was running low.  Luckily they were near a little
town.  They made a descent on a river, much to the delight and
wonder of the whole place, bought a new supply, and resumed their
flight.

It was after ten o'clock in the evening when the welcome lights of
Anseton came into view.  Dave did not look around for some hiding
place on the outskirts on this occasion.  He startled a drowsy
policeman by landing in the middle of some vacant lots on his beat.

A brief explanation was made to the officer, and a man hired to
watch the Drifter until they returned.  Then Dave and Hiram hurried
to the hotel in Anseton where Mr. Price made his headquarters.

The revenue officer was found.  He listened to the story of the two
young aviators in amazement and admiration.  Then he reported
results of his own efforts.

Ridgely was under arrest, two of his accomplices were being then
pursued by his assistants, and the smuggling combination was all
broken up.

"The clews you have given us were fine ones, Dashaway," said the
official gratefully.  "You have done the government a vast service,
I can tell you."

Mr. Price insisted on the boys taking a needed rest.  He sent one of
his men to guard the Drifter, and, after a famous meal, made his
guests agree to sleep in a comfortable bed for the first time in
nearly a week.

It was just after they had entered their room that Dave made the
remark.

"You know we had better see if those friends of the Dawsons have
found the Monarch II and made away with it, Hiram."

"Well, I can tell you that they haven't," replied Hiram, with a
confident chuckle.

"How can you know that?"

"Why, Dave, when I was shut in with the machine in that basin, I
took it apart.  You know it was made to do that, so it could be
shipped readily.  Well, I'll bet you I hid those parts in places in
that basin where nobody can locate them but myself."

"Good for you!" commended Dave heartily.

"I think the Interstate people will have something pleasant to say
to you when they know all the wonders you've done in chasing their
stolen airship."

It was the brightest day in the year, it seemed to the two young
aviators, as they reached Columbus by train, and started at once for
Mr. King's hangar.

Old Grimshaw had met them at the depot.  He was full of friendly
chatter, seemed to be chuckling over some secret surprise he had in
store for them, and rushed them towards the headquarters of the
Aegis.

"Yes, Mr. King is back," he advised the boys.

"Did he find Mr. Dale?" inquired Dave anxiously.

"He'll tell you."

Dave and Hiram had much to relate.  Two boys probably never received
a more pleasant welcome than they, when with the Drifter they
reported to the manager of the Interstate Aeroplane Company.

Mr. Randolph had the president and two directors of the concern on
hand to meet them.  Their stirring story was taken in by the august
business men with an attention and appreciation that of itself paid
the lads well for all the duty done.

The boys had remained long enough at Anseton to have some men go
with them and locate the hidden sections of the Monarch  II, and
arrange to have them shipped by rail back to the factory.

Dave felt pretty rich when he left the Interstate works with a check
for five hundred dollars in his pocket, and an offer of advanced
employment for himself and his loyal and useful assistant for two
seasons ahead.

"I want to see Mr. King before I decide what I will do," Dave told
Mr. Randolph, his mind full of the much discussed flight across the
Atlantic in the giant airship.  "You can have your two hundred and
fifty dollars any time you like, Hiram." he added to his chum on
their way to the depot.

As they now reached the Aegis hangar, Grimshaw stepped aside with a
pleased laugh.

"Safe and sound and famous.  Here they are, Mr. King!" he shouted.

"There's no doubt of that," chorused the friendly voice of the
expert aviator.  "Dave!  Hiram!  A thousand times welcome."

If he had been own father to the lads, Mr. King could not have
greeted them more affectionately.

"You've done us all proud, Dashaway," he declared.  "Got a telegram
from the Interstate folks, and the noon paper.  The paper has given
you two columns.  This way.  A friend waiting to see you."

Mr. King pushed Dave across the little room in the hangar he used as
an office.

A middle aged, noble looking gentleman arose from a chair as Dave
entered.  His face was beaming, and there was an eager light in his
eyes.

"Dave Dashaway?" he said, half inquiringly.

"Yes, sir," assented Dave, grasping the extended hand of the
gentleman.

"My best and oldest friend's boy," continued the gentleman.

"It is Mr. Dale, Dashaway," spoke Mr. King, following Dave into the
room.

Somehow the young aviator felt his heart warm to the man of whom he
had heard so much, but had never before seen.  The old gentleman's
eyes rested on him in a kindly earnest way that made Dave feel less
lonely in the world.

Briefly Mr. King told of the chase he had made to locate Mr. Dale.

"I've got a long story to tell," said the aviator, when he could get
a chance to talk.  He turned to Mr. Dale.  "That is, if you wish me
to tell it," he added.

"Certainly," was the ready reply.  "You can probably tell it better
than I can."

"Well, to begin with, it was no easy task to get on the track of
this fellow Gregg," commenced the well-known aviator.  "I had to do
some tall hunting before I could locate him and his two cronies."

"His cronies?" repeated Dave.

"Yes, he had two fellows in the game with him.  I guess he found out
that he could not manage it alone.  The three of them called on Mr.
Dale and at first got him to take an automobile ride.  Then they
took him to a lonely house down near Slaytown, and there they kept
him a prisoner."

"A prisoner!"

"Yes."

"Just as we were kept prisoners," muttered our hero.

"Mr. Dale says he was treated very nicely, for Gregg no doubt, had
an idea he could get more money that way."

"Well, after a good deal of hard work I located the spot and saw Mr.
Dale from a distance.  I knew I could not rescue him single handed,
so I went back to town and notified the police.  I had hard work
getting three officers to accompany me, because the police just then
were having their annual inspection and parade and all wanted to be
present.  When we got to the lonely house we got a big surprise."

"How was that?"

"Gregg and the two men and Mr. Dale were gone."

"Where to?"

"At first I couldn't find out.  But we saw wagon tracks in the soft
roadbed and followed these along the road and through a big field.
Presently we came to a patch of woods, and there found what in years
gone by had been a lumber camp.  At the old house we saw a horse and
wagon, and we knew the crowd must be somewhere around.  We
separated, and came up to the place from all sides.  In a shed near
the house we found Gregg and the two men.  They were discussing the
situation, when we pounced on them and surprised them."

"Did they resist?"

"Gregg did, and as a consequence he got a blow in the mouth from a
policeman's club that broke off two of his teeth.  Then all of the
crowd gave up, and we handcuffed the lot and made them prisoners."

"And Mr. Dale?" asked Dave, with interest.

"We found him in the old house, tied up."

"And very grateful for the rescue," put in the old gentleman,
warmly.

"All of us came to town in the wagon the rascals had hired.  Then
Gregg and his accomplices were put in jail, and Mr. Dale and I came
on here," concluded Mr. King.

"I am mighty happy to see things have turned out this way," said our
hero, heartily.

"I am so glad to find the son of my old balloonist friend," said Mr.
Dale, "that I shall have to adopt you legally, Dave, before you slip
away from me again.  Let me be your second father, my boy, and take
an interest in your progress.  I stayed over here with our mutual
friend, Mr. King, purposely to go over this wonderful plan to cross
the Atlantic in an airship."

"Then you think well of it?" asked Dave.

"You do not have to ask that of an old aeronaut enthusiast, my boy,"
replied Mr. Dale.

"Yes, Dashaway," said the aviator, "Mr. Dale has promised gladly to
furnish the capital to put through our newest giant airship scheme."

So, for the present, we leave Dave Dashaway, the young aviator, and
his friends.  What happened to them in their new and daring project,
will be told in the next volume of this series, to be called, "Dave
Dashaway and His Giant Airship; Or, A Marvelous Trip Across the
Atlantic."

The young aviator had won his way through pluck and perseverance.
Dave had already done some great things in his apprenticeship as a
junior aeronaut.

Now, the friend, and assistant of a noted expert in aeronautics, he
was eager and buoyant at the prospect of winning fame and fortune in
an attempt that was the dream of the expert airman of the world.

THE END










End of Project Gutenberg's Dave Dashaway and his Hydroplane, by Roy Rockwood

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DAVE DASHAWAY AND HIS HYDROPLANE ***

***** This file should be named 6714.txt or 6714.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/6/7/1/6714/

Produced by Sean Pobuda

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
