The Project Gutenberg EBook of Jimgrim and Allah's Peace, by Talbot Mundy

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Jimgrim and Allah's Peace

Author: Talbot Mundy

Release Date: February 28, 2004 [EBook #11357]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK JIMGRIM AND ALLAH'S PEACE ***









JIMGRIM AND ALLAH'S PEACE

by Talbot Mundy



To Jimgrim:  whose real name, rank, and military distinctions,
I promised never to make public.


Contents

I.  "Look for a man named Grim."
II.  "No objection;  Only a stipulation."
III.  "Do whatever the leader of the escort tells you."
IV.  "I am willing to use all means--all methods."
V.  "D'you mind if I use you?"
VI.  "That man will repay study."
VII.  "Who gives orders to me?"
VIII.  "He will say next that it was he who set the stars in the
sky over El-Kerak, and makes the moon rise!"
IX.  "Feet downwards, too afraid to yell"--
X.  "Money doesn't weigh much!"
XI.  "And the rest of the acts of Ahaziah--"
XII.  "You know you'll get scuppered if you're found out!"
XIII.  "You may now be unsafe and an outlaw and enjoy yourself!"
XIV.  "Windy bellies without hearts in them."
XV.  "I'll have nothing to do with it!"
XVI.  "The enemy is nearly always useful if you leave him free to
make mistakes."
XVII.  "Poor old Scharnhoff's in the soup."
XVIII.  "But we're ready for them."
XIX.  "Dead or Alive, Sahib."
XX.  "All men are equal in the dark."
------------




Chapter One

"Look for a man named Grim."


There is a beautiful belief that journalists may do exactly as
they please, and whenever they please.   Pleasure with violet
eyes was in Chicago.  My passport describes me as a journalist.
My employer said:  "Go to Jerusalem."  I went, that was in 1920.

I had been there a couple of times before the World War, when the
Turks were in full control.  So I knew about the bedbugs and the
stench of the citadel moat;  the pre-war price of camels;  enough
Arabic to misunderstand it when spoken fluently, and enough of
the Old Testament and the Koran to guess at Arabian motives,
which are important, whereas words are usually such stuff as lies
are made of.

El Kudz, as Arabs call Jerusalem, is, from a certain distance, as
they also call it, shellabi kabir.  Extremely beautiful.
Beautiful upon a mountain.  El Kudz means The City, and in a
certain sense it is that, to unnumbered millions of people.
Ludicrous, uproarious, dignified, pious, sinful, naively
confidential, secretive, altruistic, realistic.  Hoary-ancient
and ultra-modern.  Very, very proud of its name Jerusalem, which
means City of Peace.  Full to the brim with the malice of
certainly fifty religions, fifty races, and five hundred thousand
curious political chicaneries disguised as plans to save our
souls from hell and fill some fellow's purse.  The jails
are full.

"Look for a man named Grim," said my employer.  "James Schuyler
Grim, American, aged thirty-four or so.  I've heard he knows
the ropes."

The ropes, when I was in Jerusalem before the war, were
principally used for hanging people at the Jaffa Gate, after they
had been well beaten on the soles of their feet to compel them to
tell where their money was hidden.  The Turks entirely understood
the arts of suppression and extortion, which they defined as
government.  The British, on the other hand, subject their normal
human impulse to be greedy, and their educated craving to be
gentlemanly white man's burden-bearers, to a process of compromise.
Perhaps that isn't government.  But it works.  They even carry
compromise to the point of not hanging even their critics if
they can possibly avoid doing it.  They had not yet, but they
were about to receive a brand-new mandate from a brand-new
League of Nations, awkwardly qualified by Mr. Balfour's
post-Armistice promise to the Zionists to give the country to
the Jews, and by a war-time promise, in which the French had
joined, to create an Arab kingdom for the Arabs.

So there was lots of compromising being done, and hell to pay,
with no one paying, except, of course, the guests in the hotels,
at New York prices.  The Zionist Jews were arriving in droves.
The Arabs, who owned most of the land, were threatening to cut
all the Jews' throats as soon as they could first get all their
money.  Feisal, a descendant of the Prophet, who had fought
gloriously against the Turks, was romantically getting ready in
Damascus to be crowned King of Syria.  The French, who pride
themselves on being realistic, were getting ready to go after
Feisal with bayonets and poison-gas, as they eventually did.

In Jerusalem the Bolsheviks, astonishingly credulous of "secret"
news from Moscow, and skeptical of every one's opinion but their
own, were bolsheviking Marxian Utopia beneath a screen of such
arrogant innocence that even the streetcorner police constables
suspected them.  And Mustapha Kemal, in Anatolia, was rumoured to
be preparing a holy war.  It was known as a Ghazi in those
days.  He had not yet scrapped religion.  He was contemplating,
so said rumour, a genuine old-fashioned moslem jihad, with
modern trimmings.

A few enthusiasts astonishingly still laboured for an American
mandate.  At the Holy Sepulchre a British soldier stood on guard
with bayonet and bullets to prevent the priests of rival creeds
from murdering one another.  The sun shone and so did the stars.
General Bols reopened Pontius Pilate's water-works.  The learned
monks in convents argued about facts and theories denied by
archaeologists.  Old-fashioned Jews wailed at the Wailing Wall.
Tommy Atkins blasphemously dug corpses of donkeys and dogs from
the Citadel moat.

I arrived in the midst of all that, and spent a couple of months
trying to make head or tail of it, and wondering, if that was
peace, what war is?  They say that wherever a man was ever slain
in Palestine a flower grows.  So one gets a fair idea of the
country's mass-experience without much difficulty.  For three
months of the year, from end to end, the whole landscape is
carpeted with flowers so close together that, except where beasts
and men have trodden winding tracks, one can hardly walk without
crushing an anemone or wild chrysanthemum.  There are more
battle-fields in that small land than all Europe can show.  There
are streams everywhere that historians assert repeatedly "ran
blood for days."

Five thousand years of bloody terrorism, intermingling of races,
piety, plunder, politics and pilgrims, have produced a self-
consciousness as concentrated as liquid poison-gas.  The laughter
is sarcastic, the humour sardonic, and the credulity beyond
analysis.  For instance, when I got there, I heard the British
being accused of "imperialistic savagery" because they had
removed the leprous beggars from the streets into a clean place
where they could receive medical treatment.

It was difficult to find one line of observation.  Whatever
anybody told you, was reversed entirely by the next man.  The
throat-distorting obligation to study Arabic called for rather
intimate association with educated Arabs, whose main obsession
was fear of the Zionist Jews.  The things they said against
the Jews turned me pro-Zionist.  So I cautiously made the
acquaintance of some gentlemen with gold-rimmed spectacles, and
the things they said about the Arabs set me to sympathizing with
the sons of Ishmael again.

In the midst of that predicament I met Jimgrim--Major James
Schuyler Grim, to give him his full title, although hardly any
one ever called him by it.  After that, bewilderment began to
cease as, under his amused, painstaking fingers, thread after
thread of the involved gnarl of plots and politics betrayed
its course.

However, first I must tell how I met him.  There is an American
Colony in Jerusalem--a community concern that runs a one-price
store, and is even more savagely criticized than the British
Administration, as is only natural.  The story of what they did
in the war is a three-year epic.  You can't be "epic" and not
make enemies.

A Chicago Jew assured me they were swine and horse-thieves.  But
I learned that the Yemen Jews prayed for them--first prayer--
every Sabbath of the year, calling down blessings on their heads
for charitable service rendered.

One hardly goes all the way to Palestine to meet Americans;  but
a journalist can't afford to be wilfully ignorant.  A British
official assured me they were "good blokes" and an Armenian told
me they could skin fleas for their hides and tallow;  but the
Armenian was wearing a good suit, and eating good food, which he
admitted had been given to him by the American Colony.  He was
bitter with them because they had refused to cash a draft on
Mosul, drawn on a bank that had ceased to exist.

It seemed a good idea to call on the American Colony, at their
store near the Jaffa Gate, and it turned out to be a very clean
spot in a dirty city.  I taxed their generosity, and sat for
hours on a ten-thousand-dollar pile of Asian rugs behind the
store;  and, whatever I have missed and lost, or squandered, at
least I know their story and can keep it until the proper time.

Of course, you have to allow for point of view, just as the
mariner allows for variation and deviation;  but when they
inferred that most of the constructive good that has come to the
Near East in the last fifty years has been American, they spoke
with the authority of men who have lived on the spot and watched
it happen.

"You see, the Americans who have come here haven't set up
governments.  They've opened schools and colleges.  They've
poured in education, and taken nothing.  Then there are thousands
of Arabs, living in hovels because there's nothing better, who
have been to America and brought back memories with them.  All
that accounts for the desire for an American mandate--which would
be a very bad thing, though, because the moment we set up a
government we would lose our chance to be disinterested.  The
country is better off under any other mandate, provided it gives
Americans the right to teach without ruling.  America's mission
is educational.  There's an American, though, who might seem to
prove the contrary.  Do you see him?"

There were two Arabs in the room, talking in low tones over by
the window. I could imagine the smaller of the two as a peddler
of lace and filigree-silver in the States, who had taken out
papers for the sake of privilege and returned full of notions to
exploit his motherland.  But the tall one--never.  He was a
Bedouin, if ever a son of the desert breathed.  If he had visited
the States, then he had come back as unchanged as gold out of an
acid bath;  and as for being born there--

"That little beady-eyed, rat-faced fellow may be an American," I
said.  "In fact, of course he is, since you say so.  But as for
being up to any good--"

"You're mistaken.  You're looking at the wrong man.  Observe the
other one."

I was more than ever sure I was not mistaken.  Stately gesture,
dignity, complexion, attitude--to say nothing of his Bedouin
array and the steadiness with which he kept his dark eyes fixed
on the smaller man he was talking to, had laid the stamp of the
desert on the taller man from head to heel.

"That tall man is an American officer in the British army.
Doesn't look the part, eh?  They say he was the first American to
be granted a commission without any pretense of his being a
Canadian.  They accepted him as an American.  It was a case of
that or nothing.  Lived here for years, and knew the country so
well that they felt they had to have him on his own terms."


You can believe anything in Jerusalem after you have been in the
place a week or two, so, seeing who my informant was, I swallowed
the fact.  But it was a marvel.  It seemed even greater when the
man strolled out, pausing to salute my host with the solemn
politeness that warfare with the desert breeds.  You could not
imagine that at Ellis Island, or on Broadway--even on the stage.
It was too untheatrical to be acting;  too individual to be
imitation;  to unself-conscious to have been acquired.  I
hazarded a guess.

"A red man, then.  Carlisle for education.  Swallowed again by
the first desert he stayed in for more than a week."

"Wrong.  His name is Grim.  Sounds like Scandinavian ancestry, on
one side.  James Schuyler Grim--Dutch, then, on the other;  and
some English.  Ten generations in the States at any rate.  He can
tell you all about this country.  Why not call on him?"

It did not need much intelligence to agree to that suggestion;
but the British military take their code with them to the
uttermost ends of earth, behind which they wonder why so many
folks with different codes, or none, dislike them.

"Write me an introduction," I said.

"You won't need one.  Just call on him.  He lives at a place they
call the junior Staff Officers' Mess--up beyond the Russian
Convent and below the Zionist Hospital."

So I went that evening, finding the way with difficulty because
they talk at least eighteen languages in Jerusalem and, with the
exception of official residences, no names were posted anywhere.
That was not an official residence.  It was a sort of communal
boarding-house improvised by a dozen or so officers in preference
to the bug-laden inconvenience of tents--in a German-owned
(therefore enemy property) stone house at the end of an alley, in
a garden full of blooming pomegranates.

I sent my card in by a flat-footed old Russian female, who ran
down passages and round corners like a wet hen, trying to find a
man-servant.  The place seemed deserted, but presently she came
on her quarry in the back yard, and a very small boy in a
tarboosh and knickerbockers carried the card on a tray into a
room on the left.  Through the open door I could hear one quiet
question and a high-pitched disclaimer of all knowledge;  then an
order, sounding like a grumble, and the small boy returned to the
hall to invite me in, in reasonably good English, of which he
seemed prouder than I of my Arabic.

So I went into the room on the left, with that Bedouin still in
mind.  There was only one man in there, who got out of a deep
armchair as I entered, marking his place in a book with a
Damascus dagger.  He did not look much more than middle height,
nor more than medium dark complexioned, and he wore a major's
khaki uniform.

"Beg pardon," I said.  "I've disturbed the wrong man.  I came to
call on an American named Major Grim."

"I'm Grim."

"Must be a mistake, though.  The man I'm looking for is taller
than you--very dark--looks, walks, speaks and acts like a
Bedouin.  I saw him this afternoon in Bedouin costume in the
American Colony store."

"Yes, I noticed you.  Sit down, won't you?  Yes, I'm he--the
Bedouin abayi* seems to add to a man's height.  Soap and water
account for the rest of it.  These cigars are from the States."
[*Long-sleeved outer cloak.]

It was hard to believe, even on the strength of his straight
statement--he talking undisguised American, and smiling at me, no
doubt vastly pleased with my incredulity.

"Are you a case of Jekyll and Hyde?" I asked.

"No.  I'm more like both sides of a sandwich with some army mule-
meat in the middle.  But I won't be interviewed.  I hate it.
Besides, it's against the regulations."

His voice was not quite so harshly nasal as those of the Middle
West, but he had not picked up the ultra-English drawl and
clipped-off consonants that so many Americans affect abroad
and overdo.

I don't think a wise crook would have chosen him as a subject for
experiments.  He had dark eyes with noticeably long lashes;
heavy eyebrows;  what the army examination-sheets describe as a
medium chin;  rather large hands with long, straight fingers;
and feet such as an athlete stands on, fully big for his size,
but well shaped.  He was young for a major--somewhere between
thirty and thirty-five.

Once he was satisfied that I would not write him up for the
newspapers he showed no disinclination to talk, although it was
difficult to keep him on the subject of himself, and easy to let
him lose you in a maze of tribal history.  He seemed to know the
ins and outs of every blood-feud from Beersheba to Damascus, and
warmed to his subject as you listened.

"You see," he said, by way of apology when I laughed at a string
of names that to me conjured up only confusion, "my beat is all
the way from Cairo to Aleppo--both sides of the Jordan.  I'm not
on the regular strength, but attached to the Intelligence--no,
not permanent--don't know what the future has in store--that
probably depends on whether or not the Zionists get full control,
and how soon.  Meanwhile, I'm my own boss more or less--report
direct to the Administrator, and he's one of those men who allows
you lots of scope."

That was the sort of occasional glimpse he gave of himself, and
then switched off into straight statements about the Zionist
problem.  All his statements were unqualified, and given with the
air of knowing all about it right from the beginning.

"There's nothing here that really matters outside the Zionist-
Arab problem.  But that's a big one.  People don't realize it--
even on the spot--but it's a world movement with ramifications
everywhere.  All the other politics of the Near East hinge on it,
even when it doesn't appear so on the surface.  You see, the Jews
have international affiliations through banks and commerce.  They
have blood-relations everywhere.  A ripple here may mean there's
a wave in Russia, or London, or New York.  I've known at least
one Arab blood-feud over here that began with a quarrel between a
Jew and a Christian in Chicago."

"Are the Zionists as dangerous as the Arabs seem to think?" I asked.

"Yes and no.  Depends what you call danger.  They're like an
incoming tide.  All you can do is accept the fact and ride on top
of it, move away in front of it, or go under.  The Arabs want to
push it back with sword-blades.  Can't be done!"

"Speaking as a mere onlooker, I feel sorry for the Arabs," I
said.  "It has been their country for several hundred years.
They didn't even drive the Jews out of it;  the Romans attended
to that, after the Assyrians and Babylonians had cleaned up
nine-tenths of the population.  And at that, the Jews were
invaders themselves."

"Sure," Grim answered.  "But you can't argue with tides.  The
Arabs are sore, and nobody has any right to blame them.  The
English betrayed the Arabs--I don't mean the fellows out here,
but the gang at the Foreign Office."

I glanced at his uniform.  That was a strange statement coming
from a man who wore it.  He understood, and laughed.

"Oh, the men out here all admit it.  They're as sore as the Arabs
are themselves."

"Then you're on the wrong side, and you know it?" I suggested.

"The meat," he said, "is in the middle of the sandwich.  In a
small way you might say I'm a doctor, staying on after a riot to
stitch up cuts.  The quarrel was none of my making, although I
was in it and did what I could to help against the Turks.  Like
everybody else who knows them, I admire the Turks and hate what
they stand for--hate their cruelty.  I was with Lawrence across
the Jordan--went all the way to Damascus with him--saw the war
through to a finish--in case you choose to call it finished."

Vainly I tried to pin him down to personal reminiscences.  He was
not interested in his own story.

"The British promised old King Hussein of Mecca that if he'd
raise an Arab army to use against the Turks, there should be a
united Arab kingdom afterward under a ruler of their own
choosing.  The kingdom was to include Syria, Arabia and
Palestine.  The French agreed.  Well, the Arabs raised the army;
Emir Feisul, King Hussein's third son, commanded it;  Lawrence
did so well that he became a legend.  The result was, Allenby
could concentrate his army on this side of the Jordan and
clean up.  He made a good job of it.  The Arabs were naturally
cock-a-hoop."

I suggested that the Arabs with that great army could have
enforced the contract, but he laughed again.

"They were being paid in gold by the British, and had Lawrence to
hold them together.  The flow of gold stopped, and Lawrence was
sent home.  Somebody at the Foreign Office had changed his mind.
You see, they were all taken by surprise at the speed of
Allenby's campaign.  The Zionists saw their chance, and claimed
Palestine.  No doubt they had money and influence.  Perhaps it
was Jewish gold that had paid the wages of the Arab army.
Anyhow, the French laid claim to Syria.  By the time the war was
over the Zionists had a hard-and-fast guarantee, the French claim
to Syria had been admitted, and there wasn't any country left
except some Arabian desert to let the Arabs have.  That's the
situation.  Feisul is in Damascus, going through the farce of
being proclaimed king, with the French holding the sea-ports and
getting ready to oust him.  The Zionists are in Jerusalem,
working like beavers, and the British are getting ready to pull
out as much as possible and leave the Zionists to do their own
worrying.  Mesopotamia is in a state of more or less anarchy.
Egypt is like a hot-box full of explosive--may go off any minute.
The Arabs would like to challenge the world to mortal combat,
and then fight one another while the rest of the world pays
the bill--"

"And you?"

"The French, for instance.  Their army is weak at the moment.
They've neither men nor money--only a hunger to own Syria.  They
don't play what the English call 'on side.'  They play a mean
game.  The French General Staff figure that if Feisul should
attack them now he might beat them.  So they've conceived the
brilliant idea of spreading sedition and every kind of political
discontent into Palestine and across the Jordan, so that if the
Arabs make an effort they'll make it simultaneously in both
countries.  Then the British, being in the same mess with the
French, would have to take the French side and make a joint
campaign of it."

"But don't the British know this?"

"You bet they know it.  What's the Intelligence for?  The French
are hiring all the Arab newspapers to preach against the British.
A child could see it with his eyes shut."

"Then why in thunder don't the British have a showdown?"

"That's where the joker comes in.  The French know there's a sort
of diplomatic credo at the London Foreign Office to the general
effect that England and France have got to stand together or
Europe will go to pieces.  The French are realists.  They bank
on that.  They tread on British corns, out here, all they want
to, while they toss bouquets, backed by airplanes, across the
English Channel."

"Then the war didn't end the old diplomacy?"

"What a question!  But I haven't more than scratched the Near
East surface for you yet.  There's Mustapha Kemal in Anatolia,
leader of the Turkish Nationalists, no more dead or incapacitated
than a possum.  He's playing for his own hand--Kaiser Willy
stuff--studying Trotzky and Lenin, and flirting with Feisul's
party on the side.  Then there's a Bolshevist element among the
Zionists--got teeth, too.  There's an effort being made from
India to intrigue among the Sikh troops employed in Palestine.
There's a very strong party yelling for an American mandate.  The
Armenians, poor devils, are pulling any string they can get hold
of, in the hope that anything at all may happen.  The orthodox
Jews are against the Zionists;  the Arabs are against them both,
and furious with one another.  There's a pan-Islam movement on
foot, and a pan-Turanian--both different, and opposed.  About 75
per cent of the British are as pro-Arab as they dare be, but the
rest are strong for the Zionists.  And the Administrator's
neutral!--strong for law and order but taking no sides."

"And you?"

"I'm one of the men who is trying to keep the peace."

He invited me to stay to dinner.  The other members of the mess
were trooping in, all his juniors, all obviously fond of him
and boisterously irreverent of his rank.  Dinner under his
chairmanship was a sort of school for repartee.  It was utterly
unlike the usual British mess dinner.  If you shut your eyes for
a minute you couldn't believe that any one present had ever worn
a uniform.  I learned afterward that there was quite a little
competition to get into that mess.

After dinner most of them trooped out again, to dance with
Zionist ladies at an institute affair.  But he and I stayed, and
talked until midnight.  Before I left, the key of Palestine and
Syria was in my hands.

"You seem interested," he said, coming with me to the door.  "If
you don't mind rough spots now and then, I'll try to show you a
few things at first hand."





Chapter Two

"No objection;  only a stipulation."


The showmanship began much sooner than I hoped.  The following
day was Sunday, and I had an invitation to a sort of semi-public
tea given by the American Colony after their afternoon religious
service.

They received their guests in a huge, well-furnished room on the
upper floor of a stone house built around a courtyard filled with
flowers.  I think they were a little proud of the number of
fierce-looking Arabs, who had traveled long distances in order to
be present.  Ten Arab chieftains in full costume, with fifteen or
twenty of their followers, all there at great expense of trouble,
time and money, for friends sake, were, after all, something to
feel a bit chesty about.  Every member of the Colony seemed able
to talk Arabic like a native and, as they used to say in the up-
state papers, a good time was being had by all.  The Near East
adores ice-cream, and there was lots of it.

Two of the Arab chiefs were Christians;  the rest were not.  The
peace and war record of the Colony was what had brought them all
there.  Hardly an Arab in the country was not the Colony's debtor
for disinterested help, direct or indirect, at some time in some
way.  The American Colony was the one place in the country where
a man of any creed could go and be sure that whatever he might
say would not be used against him.  So they were talking their
heads off.  Hot air and Arab politics have quite a lot in common.
But there was a broad desert-breath about it all.  It wasn't like
the little gusty yaps you hear in the city coffee-shops.  A lot
of the talk was foolish, but it was all magnificent.

There was one sheikh named Mustapha ben Nasir dressed in a blue
serge suit and patent-leather boots, with nothing to show his
nationality except a striped silk head-dress with the camel-hair
band around the forehead.  He was a handsome fellow, with a black
beard trimmed to a point, and perfect manners, polished no doubt
in a dozen countries, but still Eastern in slow, deferential
dignity.  He could talk good French.  I fell in conversation
with him.

The frankness with which treason is mooted, admitted and
discussed in the Near East is one of the first things that amaze
you.  They are so open about it that nobody takes them seriously.
Apparently it is only when they don't talk treason openly that
the ruling authorities get curious and make arrests.  To me, a
total stranger, with nothing to recommend me but that for an hour
or two that afternoon I was a guest of the American Colony,
Mustapha ben Nasir made no bones whatever about the fact that the
was being paid by the French to stir up feeling over Jordan
against the British.

"I receive a monthly salary," he boasted.  "I am just from
Damascus, where the French Liaison-officer paid me and gave me
some instructions."

"Where is your home?" I asked him.

"At El-Kerak, in the mountains of Moab, across the Dead Sea.  I
start this evening.  Will you come with me?"

"Je m'en bien garderai!"

He smiled.  "Myself, I am in favor of the British.  The French
pay my expenses, that is all.  What we all want is an independent
Arab government--some say kingdom, some say republic.  If it is
not time for that yet, then we would choose an American mandate.
But America has deserted us.  Failing America, we prefer the
English for the present.  Anything except France!  We do not want
to become a new Algeria."

"What is the condition now at El-Kerak?"

"Condition?  There is none.  There is chaos.  You see, the
British say their authority ceases at the River Jordan and at a
line drawn down the middle of the Dead Sea.  That leaves us with
a choice between two other governments--King Hussein's government
of Mecca, and Feisul's in Syria.  But Hussein's arm is not long
enough to reach us from the South, and Feisul's is not nearly
strong enough to interfere from the North.  So there is
no government, and each man is keeping the peace with his
own sword."

"You mean;  each man on his own account?"

"Yes.  So there is peace.  Five--fifteen--thirty throats are cut
daily;  and if you go down to the Jordan and listen, you will
hear the shots being fired from ambush any day."

"And you invite me to make the trip with you?"

"Oh, that is nothing.  In the first place, you are American.
Nobody will interfere with an American.  They are welcome.  In
the second place, there is a good reason for bringing you;  we
all want an American school at El-Kerak."

"But I am no teacher."

"But you will be returning to America?  It is enough, then, that
you look the situation over, and tell what you know on your
return.  We will provide a building, a proper salary, and
guarantee the teacher's life.  We would prefer a woman, but it
would be wisest to send a man."

"How so?  The woman might not shoot straight?  I've some of our
Western women do tricks with a gun that would--"

"There would be no need.  She would have our word of honour.  But
every sheikh who has only three wives would want to make her his
fourth.  A man would be best.  Will you come with me?"

"On your single undertaking to protect me?  Are you king of all
that countryside?"

"If you will come, you shall have an escort, every man of whom
will die before he would let you be killed.  And if they, and
you, should all be killed, their sons and grandsons would avenge
you to the third generation of your murderers."

"That's undoubtedly handsome, but--"

"Believe me, effendi," he urged, "many a soul has been consoled
in hell-fire by the knowledge that his adversaries would be cut
off in their prime by friends who are true to their given word."

Meaning to back out politely, I assured him I would think the
offer over.

"Well and good," he answered.  "You have my promise.  Should you
decide to come, leave word here with the American Colony.  They
will get word to me.  Then I will send for you, and the escort
shall meet you at the Dead Sea."

I talked it over with two or three members of the Colony, and
they assured me the promise could be depended on.  One of
them added:

"Besides, you ought to see El-Kerak.  It's an old crusader city,
rather ruined, but more or less the way the crusaders left it.
And that craving of theirs for a school is worth doing something
about, if you ever have an opportunity.  They say they have too
much religion already, and no enlightenment at all.  A teacher
who knew Arabic would have a first-class time, and would be well
paid and protected, if he could keep his hands off politics.  Why
not talk with Major Grim?"

It was a half-hour's walk to Grim's place, but I had the good
fortune to catch him in again.  He was sitting in the same chair,
studying the same book, and this time I saw the title of it--
Walter Pater's Marius the Epicurean--a strange book for a soldier
to be reading, and cutting its pages with an inlaid dagger, in a
Jerusalem semi-military boarding-house.  But he was a man of
unexpectedly assorted moods.

He laughed when I told of ben Nasir.  He looked serious when I
mooted El-Kerak--serious, then interested, them speculative.
From where I sat I could watch the changes in his eyes.

"What would the escort amount to?" I asked him.

"Absolute security."

"And what's this bunk about Americans being welcome anywhere?"

"Perfectly true.  All the way from Aleppo down to Beersheba.  Men
like Dr. Bliss* have made such an impression that an occasional
rotter might easily take advantage of it.  Americans in this
country--so far--stand for altruism without ulterior motive.
If we'd accepted the mandate they might have found us out!
Meanwhile, an American is safe."  [*President of the American
College at Beirut.  Died 1920, probably more respected throughout
the Near East than any ten men of any other nationality.]

"Then I think I'll go to El-Kerak."

Again his eyes grew speculative.  I could not tell whether he was
considering me or some problem of his own.

"Speaking unofficially," he said, "there are two possibilities.
You might go without permission--easy enough, provided you don't
talk beforehand.  In that case, you'd get there and back;  after
which, the Administration would label and index you.  The
remainder of your stay in Palestine would be about as exciting
as pushing a perambulator in Prospect Park, Brooklyn.  You'd
be canned."

"I'd rather be killed.  What's the alternative?"

"Get permission.  I shall be at El-Kerak myself within the next
few days.  I think it can be arranged."

"D'you mean I can go with you?" I asked, as eager as a schoolboy
for the circus.

"Not on your life!  I don't go as an American."

Recalling the first time I had seen him, I sat still and tried to
look like a person who was not thrilled in the least by seeing
secrets from the inside.

"Well," I said, "I'm in your hands."

I think he rather liked that.  As I came to know him more
intimately later on he revealed an iron delight in being trusted.
But he did not say another word for several minutes, as if there
were maps in his mind that he was conning before reaching a
decision.  Then he spoke suddenly.

"Are you busy?" he asked.  "Then come with me."

He phoned to some place or other for a staff automobile, and the
man was there with it within three minutes.  We piled in and
drove at totally unholy speed down narrow streets between walls,
around blind right-angle turns where Arab policemen stood waving
unintelligible signals, and up the Mount of Olives, past the
British military grave-yard, to the place they call OETA.*  The
Kaiser had it built to command every view of the countryside and
be seen from everywhere, as a monument to his own greatness--the
biggest, lordliest, most expensive hospice that his architects
could fashion, with pictures in mosaic on the walls and ceilings
of the Kaiser and his ancestors in league with the Almighty.  But
the British had adopted it as Administration Headquarters.
[*Headquarters:  Occupied Enemy Territory Administration.]

All the way up, behind and in front and on either hand, there
were views that millions* would give years of their lives to see;
and they would get good value for their bargain.  Behind us, the
sky-line was a panorama of the Holy City, domes, minarets and
curved stone roofs rising irregularly above gray battlemented
walls.  Down on the right was the ghastly valley of Jehoshaphat,
treeless, dry, and crowded with white tombs--"dry bones in the
valley of death."  To the left were everlasting limestone hills,
one of them topped by the ruined reputed tomb of Samuel--all
trenched, cross-trenched and war-scarred, but covered now in a
Joseph's coat of flowers, blue, blood-red, yellow and white. [*
This is no exaggeration.  There are actually millions, and on
more than one continent, whose dearest wish, could they have it,
would be to see Jerusalem before they die.]

There were lines of camels sauntering majestically along three
hill-tops, making time, and the speed of the car we rode in, seem
utterly unreal.  And as we topped the hill the Dead Sea lay below
us, like a polished turquoise set in the yellow gold of the
barren Moab Mountains.  That view made you gasp.  Even Grim, who
was used to it, could not turn his eyes away.

We whirled past saluting Sikhs at the pompous Kaiserish entrance
gate, and got out on to front steps that brought to mind one of
those glittering hotels at German cure-resorts--bad art, bad
taste, bad amusements and a big bill.

But inside, in the echoing stone corridors that opened through
Gothic windows on a courtyard, in which statues of German super-
people stared with blind eyes, there was nothing now but bald
military neatness and economy.  Hurrying up an uncarpeted stone
stairway (Grim seemed to be a speed-demon once his mind was set)
we followed a corridor around two sides of the square, past
dozens of closed doors bearing department names, to the
Administrator's quarters at the far end.  There, on a bare bench
in a barren ante-room, Grim left me to cool my heels.  He
knocked, and entered a door marked "private."

It was fully half an hour before the door opened again and I was
beckoned in.  Grim was alone in the room with the Administrator,
a rather small, lean, rigidly set up man, with merry fire in his
eye, and an instantly obvious gift for being obeyed.  He sat at
an enormous desk, but would have looked more at ease in a tent,
or on horseback.  The three long rows of campaign ribbons looked
incongruous beside the bunch of flowers that somebody had crammed
into a Damascus vase on the desk, with the estimable military
notion of making the utmost use of space.

Sir Louis was certainly in an excellent temper.  He offered me a
chair, and looked at me with a sort of practical good-humour that
seemed to say, "Well, here he is;  now how shall we handle him?"
I was minded to ask outright for what I wanted, but something in
his attitude revealed that he knew all that already and would
prefer to come at the problem in his own way.  It was clear,
without a word being said, that he proposed to make some sort of
use of me without being so indiscreet as to admit it.  He
reminded me rather of Julius Caesar, who was also a little man,
considering the probable qualifications of some minor spoke in a
prodigious wheel of plans.

"I understand you want to go to El-Kerak?" he said, smiling as if
all life were an amusing game.

I admitted the impeachment.  Grim was standing, some little way
behind me and to one side;  I did not turn my head to look at
him, for that might have given a false impression that he and I
were in league together, but I was somehow aware that with folded
arms he was studying me minutely.

"Well," said Sir Louis, "there's no objection;  only a
stipulation:  We wouldn't let an Englishman go, because of the
risk--not to him, but to us.  Any fool has a right to get killed,
but not to obligate his government.  All the missionaries were
called in from those outlying districts long ago.  We don't want
to be held liable for damages for failure to protect.  Such
things have happened.  You see, the idea is, we assume no
responsibility for what takes place beyond the Jordan and the
Dead Sea.  Now, if you'd like to sign a letter waiving any claim
against us for protection, that would remove any obstacle to your
going.  But, if you think that unreasonable, the alternative is
safe.  You can, stay in Jerusalem.  Quite simple."

That had the merit of frankness.  It sounded fair enough.
Nevertheless, he was certainly not being perfectly frank.  The
merriment in his eyes meant something more than mere amusement.
It occurred to me that his frankness took the extreme form of not
concealing that he had something important in reserve.  I rather
liked him for it.  His attitude seemed to be that if I wanted to
take a chance, I might on my own responsibility, but that if my
doing so should happen to suit his plans, that was his affair.
Grim was still watching me the way a cat watches a mouse.

"I'll sign such a letter," said I.

"Good.  Here are pen and paper.  Let's have it all in your
handwriting.  I'll call a clerk to witness the signature."

I wrote down the simple statement that I wished to go to El-Kerak
for personal reasons, and that I waived all claim against the
British Administration for personal protection, whether there or
en route.  A clerk, who looked as if he could not have been hired
to know, or understand, or remember anything without permission,
came in answer to the bell.  I signed.  He witnessed.

Sir Louis put the letter in a drawer, and the clerk went
out again.

"How soon will you go?"

I told about the promised escort, and that a day or two would be
needed to get word to ben Nasir.  I forgot that ben Nasir would
not start before moonrise.  It appeared that Sir Louis knew more
than he cared to admit.

"Can't we get word to ben Nasir for him, Grim?"

Grim nodded.  So did Sir Louis:

"Good.  There'll be no need, then, for you to take any one into
confidence," he said, turning to me again.  "As a rule it isn't
well to talk about these things, because people get wrong ideas.
There are others in Jerusalem who would like permission to go
to El-Kerak."

"I'll tell nobody."

He nodded again.  He was still considering things in the back
of his mind, while those intelligent, bright eyes smiled so
disarmingly.

"How do you propose to reach the Dead Sea?" he asked.  "Ben
Nasir's escort will probably meet you on the shore on this side."

"Oh, hire some sort of conveyance, I suppose."

"Couldn't we lend him one of our cars, Grim?"

Grim nodded again.

"We'll do that.  Grim, can you get word to ben Nasir so that when
the escort is ready he may send a messenger straight to the hotel
with the information?  D'you get my meaning?"

"Sure," said Grim, "nobody else need know then."

"Very well," said Sir Louis.  He rose from his chair to intimate
that the precise moment had arrived when I might leave without
indiscretion.  It was not until I was outside the door that I
realized that my permission was simply verbal, and that the only
document that had changed hands had been signed by me.  Grim
followed me into the ante-room after a minute.

"Hadn't I better go back and ask for something in writing from
him?" I suggested.

"You wouldn't get it.  Anyhow, you're dealing with a gentleman.
You needn't worry.  I was afraid once or twice you might be going
to ask him questions.  He'd have canned you if you had.  Why
didn't you?"

I was not going to help Grim dissect my mental processes.

"There's a delightful air of mystery," I said, "I'd hate to
spoil it!"

"Come up on the tower," he said. "There's just time before
sunset.  If you've good eyes, I'll show you El-Kerak."

It is an enormous tower.  The wireless apparatus connected with
it can talk with Paris and Calcutta.  From the top you feel as if
you were seeing "all the kingdoms of the world in a moment of
time."  There are no other buildings to cut off the view or
tamper with perspective.  The Dead Sea was growing dark.  The
Moab Hills beyond it looked lonely and savage in silhouette.

"Down there on your left is Jericho," said Grim.  "That winding
creek beyond it is the Jordan.  As far eastward as that there's
some peace.  Beyond that, there is hardly a rock that isn't used
for ambush regularly.  Let your eye travel along the top of the
hills--nearly as far as the end of the Dead Sea.  Now--d'you see
where a touch of sunlight glints on something?  That's the top of
the castle-wall of El-Kerak.  Judge what strategists those old
crusaders were.  That site commands the ancient high road from
Egypt.  They could sit up there and take toll to their hearts'
content.  The Turks quartered troops in the castle and did the
same thing.  But the Turks overdid it, like everything else.
They ruined the trade.  No road there nowadays that amounts
to anything."

"It looks about ten miles away."

"More than eighty."

The sun went down behind us while we watched, and here and there
the little scattered lights came out among the silent hills in
proof that there were humans who thought of them in terms of
home.

Venus and Mars shone forth, yellow and red jewels;  then the
moon, rising like a stage effect, too big, too strongly lighted
to seem real, peering inch by inch above the hills and ushering
in silence.  We could hear one muezzin in Jerusalem wailing that
God is God.

"That over yonder is savage country," Grim remarked.  "I think
maybe you'll like it. Time to go now."

He said nothing more until we were scooting downhill in the car
in the midst of a cloud of dust.

"You won't see me again," he said then, "until you get to El-
Kerak.  There are just one or two points to bear in mind.  D'you
care if I lecture?"

"I wish you would."

"When the messenger comes from ben Nasir, go to the Governorate,
just outside the Damascus Gate, phone OETA, say who you are, and
ask for the car.  Travel light.  The less you take with you, the
less temptation there'll be to steal and that much less danger
for your escort.  I always take nothing,  and get shaved by a
murderer at the nearest village.  If you wash too much, or change
your shirt too often, they suspect you of putting on airs.  Can't
travel too light.  Use the car as far as Jericho, or thereabouts,
and send it back when the messenger says he's through with it.
After that, do whatever the leader of the escort tells you, and
you'll be all right."

"How do I cross the Dead Sea?"

"That's ben Nasir's business.  There's another point I'll ask you
to bear in mind.  When you see me at El-Kerak, be sure not to
make the slightest sign of recognition, unless and until you
get word from me.  Act as if you'd never seen me in your
life before."

I felt like an arch-conspirator, and there is no other sensation
half so thrilling.  The flattery of being let in, as it were,
through a secret door was like strong wine.

"Is your memory good?" Grim asked me.  "If you make notes, be
sure you let everybody see them;  you'll find more than one of
them can read English.  If you should see or overhear anything
that you'd particularly like to remember because it might prove
useful to me, note it down by making faint dots under the letters
of words you've already written;  or--better yet--take along a
pocket Bible;  they're all religious and respect the Bible.  Make
faint pencil lines underneath words or letters, and they'll think
you're more than extra devout.  There's nothing special to watch
out for;  just keep your ears and eyes open.  Well, here's your
hotel.  See you again soon.  So long."

I got out of the car and went to get ready for a Christian dinner
served by Moslems, feeling like a person out of the Arabian
Nights, who had just met the owner of a magic carpet on which one
only had to sit in order to be wafted by invisible forces into
unimaginable realms of mystery.





Chapter Three

"Do whatever the leader of the escort tells you."


I never learned exactly how Jim Grim got word to ben Nasir.  My
suspicion is that he took the simple course of getting the
American Colony to send one of their men;  but as they never
referred to it afterwards, and might have their own reasons for
keeping silence, I took care not to ask them.  We have most of us
seen harm done by noisy gratitude for kindness, better covered up.

I kept close to the hotel for three days, studying Arabic.  By
the fourth afternoon discouragement set in.  I began to believe
that the whole affair had petered out;  perhaps on reflection the
Administrator had decided I was not a proper person to be turned
loose out of bounds, and nobody could have blamed him for that,
for he knew next to nothing about me.  Or Grim might have been
called off for some other important business.  The chances seemed
all against my going after all.

But on the fourth evening, just at sunset, when the sandwiches I
had ordered in advance were all thoroughly stale and I had almost
decided to unpack the small hand-grip and try to forget the whole
affair, I noticed an Arab standing in the door of the hotel
scrutinizing every one who passed him.  I watched him for five
minutes.  He paid no attention to officers in uniform.  I left my
chair in the lobby and walked past him twice.

He had one eye, like a gimlet on a universal joint;  he turned
it this and that way without any corresponding movement of his
head.  It penetrated.  You felt he could have seen you with it
in the dark.

I started to pass him a third time.  He held his hand out and
thrust a small, soiled piece of paper into mine.  The writing on
it was in Arabic, so I went back to the seat in the far corner,
to puzzle it out, he standing meanwhile in the doorway and
continuing to quiz people as if I had meant nothing in his life.
The message was short enough:


Bearer will accompany you to a place where the escort will
be in readiness.  God give your honour a good journey.  Mustapha
Ben Nasir.


I went to the Governorate and phoned for the car to come and pick
me up outside the Jaffa Gate.  The Arab followed me, and he and I
were both searched at the gate for weapons, by a Sikh who knew
nothing and cared less about Near East politics.  His orders were
to search thoroughly.  He did it.  The man whose turn was next
ahead of mine was a Russian priest, whose long black cloak did
not save him from painstaking suspicion.  He was still
indignantly refusing to take down his pants and prove that the
hard lump on his thigh was really an amulet against sciatica,
when the car came for me.

It was an ordinary Ford car, and the driver was not in uniform.
He, too, had only one eye in full commission, for the other was
bruised and father swollen.  I got in beside him and let the Arab
have the rear seat to himself, reflecting that I would be able to
smell all the Arab sweat I cared to in the days to come.

We are governed much more by our noses than we are often aware
of, and I believe that many people--in the East especially--use
scent because intuition warns them that their true smell would
arouse unconscious antagonism.  Dogs, as well as most wild
animals, fight at the suggestion of a smell.  Humans only differ
from the animals, much, when they are being self-consciously
human.  Then they forget what they really know and tumble
headlong into trouble.

The driver seemed to know which road to take, and to be in no
particular hurry, perhaps on account of his injured eye.  He was
an ex-soldier, of course:  one of those under-sized Cockneys with
the Whitechapel pallor overlying a pugnacious instinct, who make
such astonishing fighting-men in the intervals between sulking
and a sort of half-affectionate abuse of everything in sight.
Being impatient to begin the adventure, I suggested more speed.

"Oh!" he answered.  "So you're another o' these people in an
'urry to get to Jericho!  It's strynge.  The last one was a
Harab.  Tyke it from me, gov'nor, I've driven the very last
Harab as gets more than twenty-five miles an hour out o' me,
so 'elp me--"

He tooled the car out on to the road toward Bethany, and down the
steep hill that passes under the Garden of Gethsemane, before
vouchsafing another word.  Then, as we started to climb the hill
ahead, he jerked his chin in the direction of the sharp turn we
had just passed in the bottom of the valley.  "Took that corner
las' time on one wheel!"

"For the Arab?"

"Aye.  Taught me a lesson.  Never agayn!  I ain't no Arabian
Night.  Nor yet no self-immolatin' 'Indoo invitin' no juggernauts
to make no pancykes out o' me.  'Enceforth, I drives reasonable.
All Harabs may go to 'ell for all o' me."

He was itching to tell his story.  He was likely to tell it
quicker for not being questioned;  your Cockney dislikes anything
he can construe into inquisition.  I remarked that the road
didn't seem made for speed--too narrow and too rough--and let it
go at that.

He said no more until we reached the village of Bethany, and drew
abreast of Lazarus' reputed tomb, where a pack of scavenger-dogs
awoke and yelped around the wheels.  He did his best to run
over one of them, but missed.  Then he could not hold his story
any longer.

"Two nights ago," he said, "they gives me orders to take a Harab
to a point near Jericho.  After dark, I starts off, 'im on the
back seat;  engine ain't warm yet, so we goes slow.  He leans
forward after a couple o' minutes, an says 'Yalla kawam'!" *  So
I thinks to myself I'll show the blighter a thing or two, me not
bein' used to takin' orders from no Harabs.  Soon as the engine's
'ot I lets rip, an' you know now what the road's like.  When we
gets to the top o' that 'ill above Gethsemane I lets extry
special rip.  Thinks I, if you can stand what I can, my son,
you've guts. [*Hurry up.]

"Well, we 'its all the 'igh places, and lands on a bit o' level
road just often enough to pick up more speed--comes round that
sharp bend on 'alf a wheel, syme as I told you--kills three pye-
dogs for sure, an' maybe others, but I don't dare look round--
misses a camel in the dark that close that the 'air on my arms
an' legs fair crawled up an' down me--'it's a lump o' rock that
comes near tippin' us into the ditch--an' carries on faster an'
ever.  By the time we gets 'ere to Bethany, thinks I, it's time
to take a look an' see if my passenger's still in the bloomin'
car.  So I slows down.

"The minute I turns my 'ead to 'ave a peer at 'im.  'Kawam!' 'e
says. 'Quick!  Quick!'

"So it strikes me I weren't in no such 'urry after all.  Why
'urry for a Harab?  The car's been rattlin' worse 'n a tinker's
basket.  I gets down to lave a look--lights a gasper*--an' takes
my bloomin' time about it.  You seen them yellow curs there by
Lazarus' tomb?  Well, they come for me, yappin' an' snarlin' to
beat 'ell.  I'm pickin' up stones to break their 'eads with--good
stones ain't such easy findin' in the dark, an' every time I
stoops 'alf a dozen curs makes a rush for me--when what d'you
suppose?  That bloomin' Harab passenger o' mine vaults over into
my seat, an' afore I could say ''ell's bells' 'e's off.  I'd left
the engine runnin'.  By the luck o' the Lord I 'angs on, an'
scrambles in--back seat. [*Anglice--canteen cigarette.]

"I thought at first I'd reach over an' get a half-nelson on 'im
from behind.  But, strike me blind!  I didn't dare!

"Look where we are now.  Can you see the 'air-pin turn at the
bottom of this 'ill, with a ditch, beyond it?  Well, we takes
that turn in pitch-dark shadow with all four wheels in the air,
an' you'd 'a thought we was a blinkin' airplane a doin' stunts.
But 'e's a hexpert, 'e is, an' we 'olds the road.  From there on
we goes in one 'oly murderin' streak to a point about 'alf-way up
the 'ill where the Inn of the Good Samaritan stands on top.
There we 'as two blow-outs simultaneous, an' thinks I, now, my
son, I've got you!  I gets out.

"'You can drive,' I says, 'like Jehu son o' Nimshi what made
Israel to sin.  Let's see you make bricks now without no bleedin'
straw'!  I knew there weren't no tools under the seat--there
never are in this 'ere country if you've left your car out o'
your sight for five minutes.  'You take off them two back tires,'
I says, 'while I sit 'ere an meditate on the ways of Harabs!
Maybe you're Moses,' I says, 'an know 'ow to work a miracle.'

"But the only miracle about that bloke's 'is nerve.  'E gets out,
'an begins to walk straight on up'ill without as much as a by-
your-leave.  I shouts to 'im to come back.  But 'e walks on.  So
I picks up a stone off the pile I was sittin' on, an' I plugs 'im
good--'its 'im fair between the shoulder-blades.  You'd think, if
'e was a Harab, that'ud bring 'im to 'is senses, wouldn't you?
But what d'you suppose the blighter did?

"Did you notice my left eye when you got in the car?  'E turns
back, an' thinks I, 'e's goin' to knife me.  But that sport could
use 'is fists, an' believe me, 'e done it!  I can use 'em a bit
myself, an' I starts in to knock 'is block off, but 'e puts it
all over me--weight, reach an' science.  Mind you, science!
First Arab ever I see what 'ad science;  an' I don't more than
'alf believe it now!

"Got to 'and it to 'im.  'E was merciful.  'E let up on me the
minute 'e see I'd 'ad enough.  'E starts off up'ill again.  I
sits where 'e'd knocked me on to a stone pile, wishin' like 'ell
for a drink.  It was full moonlight, an' you could see for miles.
After about fifteen minutes, me still meditatin' murder an'
considerin' my thirst I seen 'em fetch a camel out o' the khan at
the Inn o' the Good Samaritan;  an' next thing you know, 'e's out
o' sight.  Thinks I, that's the last of 'im, an' good riddance!
But not a bit of it!

"The men what fetched the camel for 'im comes down to me an' says
the sheikh 'as left word I'm to be fed an' looked after.  They
fixes me up at the inn with a cot an' blankets an' a supper o'
sorts, an' I lies awake listenin' to 'em talkin' Arabic,
understandin' maybe one word out of six or seven.  From what I
can make o' their conjecturin', they think 'e ain't no sheikh at
all, but a bloomin' British officer in disguise!

"Soon as morning comes I jump a passing commissariat lorry.  As
soon as I gets to Jerusalem I reports that sheikh for arson,
theft, felo de se, busting a gov'ment car, usin' 'is fists when
by right 'e should ha' knifed me, an' every other crime I could
think of.  An' all I gets is laughed at!  What d'you make of it?
Think 'e was a Harab?"

I wondered whether he was Jimgrim, but did not say so.  Grim had
not appeared to me like a man who would use his fists at all
readily;  but he was such an unusual individual that it was
useless trying to outline what he might or might not do.  It was
also quite likely that the chauffeur had omitted mention of, say,
nine-tenths of the provocation he gave his passenger.  What
interested me most was the thought that, if that really was
Jimgrim, he must have been in a prodigious hurry about something;
and that most likely meant excitement, if not danger across the
Dead Sea.

We caught sight of the Dead Sea presently, bowling past the Inn
of the Good Samaritan and beginning to descend into the valley,
twelve hundred feet below sea level, that separates Palestine
from Moab.  The moon shone full on the water, and it looked more
wan and wild than an illustration out of Dante's Inferno.  There
was no doubt how the legends sprang up about birds falling dead
as they flew across it.  It was difficult to believe that
anything could be there and not die.  It was a vision of the land
of death made beautiful.

But the one-eyed Arab on the rear seat began to sing.  To him
that view meant "home, sweet home."  His song was all about his
village and how he loved it--what a pearl it was--how sweeter
than all cities.

"'Ark at 'im!" The driver stopped the car to fill his pipe.
"You'd think 'e lived in 'eaven!  I've fought over every hinch o'
this perishin' country, an' tyke it from me, guv'nor, there ain't
a village in it but what's composed of 'ovels wi' thatched roofs,
an' 'eaps o' dung so you can't walk between 'em!  Any one as
wants my share o' Palestine can 'ave it!"

We bumped on again down a road so lonely that it would have felt
good to see a wild beast, or an armed man lurking in wait for us.
But the British had accomplished the impossible:  They had so
laid the fear of law along those roads that, though there might
be murders to the right and left of them, the passer-by who kept
to the road was safe, for the first time since the Romans now and
then imposed a temporary peace.

At last, like two yellow streams glistening in moonlight, the
road forked--one way toward Jericho.  The other way appeared
to run more or less parallel with the Dead Sea.  At that point
the one-eyed Arab left off singing at last and clutched the
driver's shoulder.

"All right!  All right!" he answered impatiently, and stopped.
"Out you get, then!"

He did not expect the tip I gave him.  He seemed to think it
placed him under obligation to wait there and talk for a few
minutes.  But my one-eyed guide waved him away disgustedly with
the hand that did not hold my bag, and we stood in the road
watching until he vanished up-hill out of sight.  Then the guide
plucked my sleeve and I followed him along the righthand road.
We walked half a mile as fast as he could set foot to the ground.

At last we reached a pretense of a village--a little cluster of
half-a-dozen thatched stone huts enclosed within one fence of
thorn and cactus.  Everything showed up as clearly in the
moonlight as if painted with phosphorus.  The heavy shadows only
made the high lights seem more luminous.  A man and two donkeys
were waiting for us outside the thorn hedge.  The man made no
remark.  My guide and I mounted and rode on.

Presently we turned down a track toward the Dead Sea, riding
among huge shadows cast by the hills on our right hand.  The
little jackals they call foxes crossed our path at intervals.
Owls the size of a robin, only vastly fluffier, screamed from the
rocks as we passed them.  Otherwise, it was like a soul's last
journey, eerie, lonely and awful, down toward River Styx.

Long before we caught sight of the water again, through a ragged
gap between high limestone rocks, I could smell a village.  The
guide approached it cautiously, stopping every minute or so to
listen.  When we came on it at last it was down below us in
abysmal darkness, one light shining through a window two feet
square in proof we were not hesitating on the verge of the
infinite pit.

The donkeys knew the way.  They trod daintily, like little
ladies, along a circling track that goats made and men had
certainly done nothing to improve.  We made an almost complete
ellipse around and down, and rode at last over dry dung at the
bottom, into which the donkeys' feet sank as into a three-pile
carpet.  You could see the stars overhead, but nothing, where we
were, except that window and a shaft of yellow light with
hundreds of moths dazzled in it.

We must have made some noise in spite of the donkeys' vetvet
foot-fall.  As we crossed the shaft of light a door opened within
six feet of the window.  A man in Arab deshabille with a red
tarboosh awry, thrust out his head and drew it in again quickly.

"Is that the American?" he asked.  He held the door so that he
could slam it in our faces if required.

The guide made no answer.  I gave my name.  The man opened the
door wider.

"Lailtak sa'idi, effendi!  Hishkur Allah!  Come in, mister!"  The
guide led the donkeys away to some invisible place.  I crossed
the threshold, my host holding his tin lantern carefully to show
the two steps leading down to a flag-stone floor.  He bolted the
door the moment I was inside.  He seemed in a great state of
excitement, and afraid to make any noise.  Even when he shot the
bolt he did it silently.

It was a square room, moderately clean, furnished only with a
table and two chairs.  There were other rooms leading off it, but
the stone partitions did not reach as high as the thatch and I
could hear rustling, and some one snoring.  I sat on one of the
chairs at his invitation, and rather hoped for supper, having had
none.  But supper was not in his mind;  it seemed he had too much
else to worry him.  He looked like a man who worried easily, and
likely enough with good reason, for his long nose and narrow eyes
did not suggest honesty.

"There was to be an escort to meet me here," I said.

"Yes, yes.  Thank God, mister, you have come at last.  If you had
only come at sunset!  Ali has gone to bring them now."

"Who is Ali?"

"He with one eye.  He who brought you.  Your escort came at
sunset.  Because I am Christian they would not listen to me or
wait for you in my house.  There are twenty of them, led by
Anazeh, who is a bad rascal.  They have gone to raid the
villages.  There has been trouble.  I have heard two shots fired.
Now they will come back to my house, and if the Sikh patrol is
after them they will be caught here, and I shall be accused of
helping them.  May the fires of their lying Prophet's Eblis
burn Anazeh and his men forever and ever, Amen!  May God curse
their religion!"

That was a nice state of affairs.  I did not want to be caught
there by a lot of truculent Sikhs under one of those jocularly
incredulous young British subalterns that Sikhs adore.  In the
first place, I had nothing whatever in writing to prove my
innocence.  The least that was likely to happen would be an
ignominious return to Jerusalem, after a night in a guard-house,
should there be a guard-house;  failing that, a night in the open
within easy reach of Sikh's bayonets.  In Jerusalem, no doubt,
Sir Louis would order me released immediately.  But it began to
look as if the whole mystery after all was nothing but a well-
staged decoy, using me for bait.  Not even tadpoles enjoy being
used for live-bait without being consulted first.  I began to
spear about for remedies.

"If you're an honest man," I said, "you'd better simply deny all
connection with the raid."

"Hah?"

He shrugged his shoulders.  He did not look like an honest man.
He wasn't one.  He knew it.  He retorted gloomily:

"Anazeh's scoundrels will have raided sheep, and perhaps cattle.
If any one has resisted them, there will be wailing widows crying
out for vengeance.  They will put the sheep and cattle in their
boats in which they came over the sea this afternoon.  The boats
will be found by the Sikhs, hauled up on the sand-pit just below
my house, with my motor-boat beside them.  I am ruined!"

Well, my own predicament was better than that.  Nobody was likely
to accuse me of having stolen sheep.  But I could not feel sorry
for my host, because he was so sorry for himself.  He was one of
those unfortunates who carry the conviction of their own guilt in
their faces.  I gave up all idea of relying on him in case the
Sikhs should come.

My next idea was to ask for the loan of one of the donkeys, and
to start back toward Jerusalem.  But I had not more than thought
of it when men's footsteps pattered on the yard dung, and an
indubitable rifle-butt beat on the wooden door.

"For God's sake!" hissed the owner of the place.  He ran to the
door to open it as the thumping grew louder.  As he drew the bolt
somebody kicked the door open, sending him reeling backwards.
For a second I thought the Sikhs had come.

But he was nothing like a Sikh who strode in, with a dozen
ruffians at his tail and one-eyed Ali bringing up the rear.  He
was one of the finest-looking Arabs I had ever seen, although
considerably past fifty and wrinkled so that his face was a net-
work of fine lines, out of which his big, dark eyes shone with
unaged intelligence.  He was magnificently dressed, perhaps in
order to do me honour.  Except for the fact that he carried a
modern military rifle on his elbow, in place of a shepherd's
crook or a spear, he looked like one of those historic worthies
who stalk through the pages of the Pentateuch.  The dignity and
charm with which he bowed to me were inimitable--unconveyable.
But he turned on my Christian host like a prophet of old
rebuking blasphemy.

Arabic when the right man uses it sounds like tooth-for-a-tooth
law being laid down.  Hebrew is all music and soft vowels;
Arabic all guttural consonants.  The Sheikh Anazeh (there was no
doubt of his identity;  they all kept calling him by name)
fulminated.  The other bleated at him.  I learned his name at
last.  Ali of the one eye pressed forward, took him by the
sleeve, and called him Ahmed.  Ali seemed to be adding persuasion
to Anazeh's threats.  Whatever it was they were driving at, Ahmed
began to look like yielding.  So, as I could not untangle more
than one brief sentence at a time from all those galloping
arguments, I pulled Ahmed away into a corner.

"What do they all want?" I asked him.  "Tell me in ten words."
But he was not a brief man.

"They say the Sikhs are after them.  They have put the stolen
sheep into their boats, as I told you they would, mister.  Now
they order me to tow them with my motor-boat.  But it cannot be
done, mister, it cannot be done!  I tell them there is government
launch near Jericho that the Sikh patrol can use to overtake us.
I have a swift boat, but if I take in tow two other loaded boats
we shall be caught;  and then who will save everything I have
from confiscation?"

"How close are the Sikhs?" I asked.

"God knows, mister!  They can come fast.  Unless I consent to let
them use my boat, Anazeh will order his men to kill me, and then
they will take the boat in any case!  There is only one thing:
they must leave the sheep behind and all crowd into my boat, but
I cannot persuade them!"

At that moment another of Anazeh's party burst in through the
door.  He evidently bore bad news.  Catching sight of me, he
lowered his voice to a whisper, and, whatever he said, Anazeh
nodded gravely.  Then the old sheikh gave an order, and four of
his men came without further ado to seize Ahmed.

"Bear me witness!" the wretched man called back to me as they
dragged him off.  "I go under protest--most unwillingly!"

Somebody struck him with a butt-end.  A woman's head appeared
over the top of the partition, and began to jabber noisily.
Several of Anazeh's men hurled jests:  the highest compliment
they paid her was to call her Um-Kulsum, the mother of sin.
Anazeh beckoned to me.  He did not seem to doubt for an instant
that I would follow him.

I was in no mind to wait there and be arrested by the Sikh
patrol.  I wondered whether they were coming in open order,
combing the countryside, or heading all together straight for a
known objective;  and whether in either case I could give them
the slip and head back toward Jerusalem.  In that minute I
recalled Grim's advice:

"Do whatever the leader of the escort tells you and you'll be all
right.  You needn't be afraid to trust him."

That settled it.  I did not suppose for a minute that Grim had
contemplated any such contingency as this;  but he had
volunteered the advice, so the consequences would be his affair.
I followed Anazeh into outer darkness, and one of his men pulled
the door to after me.

There was something very like a panic down by the waterside,
three hundred yards away from the house.  It needed all Anazeh's
authority to straighten matters out.  There were divided
counsels;  and the raiders were working at a disadvantage in
total darkness;  the shadow of the hills fell just beyond the
stern of the boats as they lay with their bows ashore.

They had already forced Ahmed into his own motor-boat, where he
was struggling vainly to crank a cold engine.  Some of the others
were trying to push off a boat full of bleating sheep.  One man
was carrying a fat sheep in his arms toward the motor-boat,
splashing knee-deep in the water and shouting advice to everybody
else, and in the end that was the only piece of plunder they got
away with.  Suddenly one man, who had been left behind to keep a
look-out, came leaping like a ghost among the shadows, shouting
the one word "askeri!" (Soldiers!)  He jumped straight into the
motor-boat.  Anazeh bullied all the rest in after him.  I climbed
in over the bow.  By that time you could not have crowded in one
more passenger with the aid of a battering ram.

"Yalla!" barked Anazeh.  But the engine would not start.  Blood-
curdling threats were hurled at the unhappy Ahmed.  Some e of the
men got into the water and began to shove off, as if the engine
could be encouraged by collaboration.

I was just as keen to escape as any one.  I could not imagine a
Sikh or subaltern stupid enough to believe me innocent.  It was a
military government.  Soldiers have a drum-head method of leaving
nothing to discuss except where the corpse is to be buried.

I forced my way aft--got some gasoline out of the tank into a tin
cup--thrust aside Ahmed and two other men--and primed the engine
liberally.  The engine coughed next time they moved the wheel,
and in thirty seconds more we had it going.  Ahmed came in for a
volley of mockery for having to be shown the way to start his
engine;  but from the sour way he looked at me I was nearly sure
he had stalled deliberately.

We backed away from shore, and Anazeh steered the boat's nose
eastward.  Then somebody at the reversing lever threw it forward
too suddenly, and the still chilled engine stopped.  It took
about another minute to restart it.  We were just beginning to
gain speed when some one shouted.  All eyes turned toward the
shore, the overloaded boat rocking dangerously as the crowd bent
their bodies all in one direction together.

Down near the shore-line an electric torch flashed on the
uniforms of half-a-dozen Sikhs, and we could hear an unmistakably
British voice shouting an order.

We were out in the moonlight now, a perfect target.  Bullets
chanced at us could hardly fail to hit somebody.  Two or three
well-placed shots might sink us.  But Anazeh had presence of
mind.  He changed helm, so as to present us end-on to the shore.
Low in the water though the boat was, we were beginning to make
good headway.

The Sikhs lost no time.  Shots began to whizz overhead and to
splash the water around us.  But the boat was painted gray;  as
we increased the distance we must have looked like a moving patch
of darker water with a puzzling wake behind us.  The sea was
still.  The stars were reflected in it in unsteady dots and
streaks.  The moon cast a silver patch of light that shimmered,
and confused the eye.  Sikhs are not by any means all marksmen.
At any rate, the shots all missed.  Though some of our party,
Anazeh included, returned the fire, none boasted of having hit
any one.  And an Arab boasts at the least excuse.

In a few minutes we were out of range and, since there was no
pursuing launch in sight, could afford to jeer at the Sikhs in
chorus.  There were things said about their habits and their
ancestry that it is to be hoped they did not hear, or at any rate
understand, for the sake of any Arab prisoners they might take in
future.  It always struck me as a fool game to mock your enemy.
If you fall in his power at any time he would be almost more than
human if he did not remember it.  It seemed to me unlikely that
those Sikhs would forget to avenge the Arab compliments that must
have sizzled in ears across that star-lit sea.  After that the
only immediate danger was from the wind that sometimes blows down
in sudden gusts from between the mountain-tops.  It would have
needed only half a sea to swamp us.  But the Dead Sea was living
up to its reputation, quiet, inert, like a mercury mirror for the
stars--a brooding place of silence.

The Arabs' spirits rose as we chugged toward their savage hills.
They began to sing glorious songs about women and mares and
camels.  Presently Anazeh improvised an epic about the night's
raid, abortive though it had been.  He left out all the
disappointing part.  He sang first of the three shore-dwelling
fools whose boats they had stolen.  Then of the baffled rage of
those same fools when they should learn their property was lost
forever.  Presently, as he warmed to the spirit of the thing, he
sang about the wails of the frightened villagers from whom they
had plundered sheep and goats;  and of the skill and
resourcefulness with which the party had escaped pursuit under
his leadership, Allah favoring, "and blessed be His Prophet!"

Last, he sang about me, the honoured stranger, for whom they had
dared everything and conquered, and whom they were taking to El-
Kerak.  He described me as a prince from a far country, the son
of a hundred kings.

It was a good song.  I got Ahmed to translate it to me
afterwards.  But I suspect that Ahmed toned it down in deference
to what he may have thought might be my modesty and moralistic
scruples.





Chapter Four

"I am willing to use all means--all methods."


Ahmed knew the Dead Sea.  He knew its moods and a few of its
tricks, so he was suitably scared.  He was more of raid of the
treacherous sea than of his captors.  They weren't treacherous in
the least.  They were frankly disobedient of any law except their
own;  respectful of nothing but bullets, brains and their own
interpretation of the Will of Allah.  They showed sublime
indifference to danger that always comes of ignorance.  Ahmed was
for running straight across to cut the voyage short, because of
the wind that sometimes blows from the south at dawn.  He said it
might kick up a sea that would roll us over, for the weight of
the Dead Sea waves in a blow is prodigious.

They overruled his protest with loud-lunged unanimity and lots of
abuse.  Anazeh continued to steer a diagonal course for a notch
in the Moab Hills that look, until you get quite close to them,
as if they rose sheer out of the sea.  The old chief was pretty
amateurish at the helm, whatever his other attainments.  Our wake
was like a drunkard's.

What with the danger in that overcrowded boat, and the manifestly
compromising fact that I had now become one of a gang who boasted
of the murder they had done that night, I did some speculation
that seems ridiculous now, at this distance, after a lapse of
time.  It occurred to me that Grim might be disguised as a member
of Anazeh's party.  As far as possible in the dark I thoroughly
scrutinized each individual.  It is easy to laugh about it now,
but I actually made my way to Anazeh's side and tried to discover
whether the old Sheikh's wrinkles and gray-shot beard were not a
very skillfully done make-up.  At any rate, I got from that
absurd investigation the sure knowledge that Grim was not in the
boat with us.

I could not talk with Anazeh very well, because when he tried to
understand my amateurish Arabic and to modify his flow of stately
speech to meet my needs, he always put his head down, and the
helm with it.  It seemed wisest to let him do one unaccustomed
thing at a time.  I did not care to try to talk with any of his
men, because that might possibly have been a breach of etiquette.
Arab jealousy is about as quick as fulminate of mercury:  as
unreasonable, from a western viewpoint, as a love-sick woman's.

But there did not seem any objection to talking with Ahmed.  He
was at least in theory my co-religionist, and not a person any
Moslem in that boat was likely to be jealous of.  He jumped
at the notion of making friends with me.  He made no secret of
the reason.

"You are safe, effendi.  They will neither rob you, nor kill you,
nor let you get killed.  You are their guest.  But as for me,
they would cut my throat as readily as that sheep's, more
especially since they have discovered that you know how to start
the engine.  My best chance was to make them believe that the
engine is difficult to understand.  Because of your knowledge
they now feel independent of me.  So I must yield to them in
everything.  And if they force me to swear on a Bible, and on my
father's honour, and in the name of God, that I will not give
evidence against them, I shall have to swear."

"An oath given under compulsion--" I began.  But he laughed
cynically.

"Ah!  You do not know this land--these folk, effendi.  If I were
to break such an oath as that, they would burn my house, steal my
cattle, ravish my wife, and hunt me to the death.  If I ran away
to America, Arabs in Chicago and New York would continue the
hunt.  This is a land where an oath is binding, unless you are
the stronger.  I am weak--an unimportant person."

"What is your business?" I asked.

"There is no business for a man like me.  The regulations forbid
commerce in the only goods for which there is a real demand
among Bedouins."

"So you're a smuggler, eh?"

He laughed, between pride and caution, and changed the subject.

"I shall do what they order me, effendi.  I think they will keep
my boat over there to bring you back again.  But when I get back
the Sikhs will arrest me.  So I ask you to bear me witness that I
was compelled by threats and force to go with these people.  In
that way, with a little ingenuity--that is to say, the ingenious
use of piastras--perhaps I can contrive to get out of the
difficulty without being punished by both Arabs and British."

I promised to tell no more than I had seen and heard.  On the
strength of that we became as fast friends as suspicion
permitted.  We trusted each other, because we more or less had
to, like a couple of thieves "on the lam."  It suited me.  He was
a very good interpreter and slavishly anxious to please.  But I
lived to regret it later.  When my evidence had cleared him of
collusion in the raid, he chose on the strength of that to claim
me as his friend for life.  He turned up in the United States and
tried to live on his wits.  I had to pay a lawyer to defend him
in Federal Court.  He writes me piously pathetic letters from
Leavenworth Penitentiary.  And when he gets out I suppose I
shall have to befriend him again.  However, at the moment, he
was useful.

It was just dawn when old Anazeh ran the launch into a cove
between high rocks.  Ahmed let out a shriek of anguish at the
violence done the hull.  They pitched the sheep overboard to
wade ashore without remembering to untie its legs;  it was
almost drowned before it occurred to any one to rescue it.
Perhaps it was dead.  I don't know.  Anyhow, one fellow prayed
in a hurry while his companion cut the sheep's throat to make
it lawful meat.

"God is good," old Anazeh remarked to me, "and blessed be His
Prophet, who forbade us faithful, even though we hunger, to
defile ourselves with the flesh of creatures whose blood did not
flow from the knife of the slayer."

After that they all prayed, going first into the oily-feeling,
asphaltic water for the ceremonial washing.  They were quite
particular about it.  Then they spread prayer-mats, facing Mecca.
Every single cut-throat had brought along his prayer-mat, and had
treasured it as carefully as his rifle.

Ahmed and I sat on a rock and watched them.  Ahmed pretended he
wanted to pray, too.  To impress me, he said he was a very devout
Christian and that nothing should prevent the practice of his
religion.  But he was very quick to take my advice not to start
anything that might bring on a breach of the peace.  Old Anazeh's
short preliminary sermon to his followers, about the need of
always keeping God in mind, was not addressed to us.

Prayers finished, they proceeded to cut up and cook the sheep.
Ahmed and I subdued the voice of conscience without noticeable
effort and ate our share of the stolen goods.  Ahmed said that,
seeing how little was left for him when the rest had all been
served, he sinned only in small degree, but that my share, as an
honoured guest, was huge, and the sin proportionate.  So I gave
him some of my meat, and he ate it, and we were equally sinful--
one more bond cementing an "eternal friendship!"

We had hardly finished eating when an Arab on a gray horse came
riding furiously down a ravine that looked like a dry water-
course.  He was brought up all-standing fifty yards away.  Every
man in the party leveled a rifle at him.  Anazeh beckoned me to
come and get behind him for protection.  He was very angry when I
refused.  He cursed the language and religion of whatever fool
had taught me manners in a land where pigs are lawful food.
However, after they had all had a good look at the horseman they
let him draw near, and there followed a noisy conference, the man
on the horse calling on Allah repeatedly with emphasis, and
Anazeh and his followers all doing the same thing, but from an
opposing viewpoint.  I persuaded Ahmed to go up close and listen.

"The man is from El-Kerak," he said presently, while they all
still fought with words, using tremendous oaths by way of
artillery.  "A council of the tribes has been summoned, to meet
at El-Kerak, but each sheikh is only to take two men with him,
because of the risk of fighting among themselves.  Anazeh says
there can be no proper council without his being present, and
that he will attend the council;  but as for taking only two men,
he has pledged his word to escort you with twenty men to El-
Kerak.  He swears that he will carry out that pledge, even should
he have to fight the whole way there and back again!"

Anazeh suddenly cut short the war of words.  His gesture
suggested that of Joshua who made the sun stand still.  He tossed
a curt order to one of his men, who went off at a run toward a
village, whose morning smoke rose blue over a spur of the range a
mile away.  Then Anazeh sat down to await events, and took no
more notice of the horseman's arguments.  That did not worry the
horseman much.  He kept on arguing.  Every few minutes one of
Anazeh's men would go to him and repeat some tid-bit, as if the
old sheikh had not heard it;  but all he got for his pains was a
gesture of contemptuous dismissal.

Ahmed kept growing more and more uncomfortable all the time.  He
had attended to his boat, making it properly fast and covering
the engine, under the eyes of four men who were at pains to see
that he did not crank up and desert.  Now he was back beside me,
trying to bolster up his own courage by making me afraid.

"They have determined to take me along with them to prevent me
from escaping," he complained.  "That man on the horse is saying
that if more men go with Anazeh than you and two others, there
will certainly be fighting.  And Anazeh answers, he has pledged
his word.  Can you not say something to persuade Anazeh?"

I would rather have tried to persuade a tiger.  Short of knocking
the old raider on the head and standing off his twenty ruffians,
I could not imagine a way of turning him from his set purpose.
And at that, I had not a weapon of any kind.  I was the goods,
and the game old sportsman intended to deliver me, right side up,
perhaps, but all in one piece and to the proper consignee.


"I don't see anything to worry about," said I.

"Wait till you hear the bullets!" Ahmed answered.  Nevertheless,
bullets or no bullets, I did not see what I could do about it.
Again I remembered Grim's advice:  "Do what the leader of the
escort tells you."  I had begun to feel sorry for Ahmed in spite
of his self-pity, but his fear wasn't contagious and his advice
wasn't worth listening to.

"Effendi, you are Anazeh's guest.  He must do as you demand, if
you ask in the Name of the Most High.  Tell him, therefore, that
you have an urgent business in El-Kudz.  Demand that he send you
back, with me, in my boat!"

"You are not his guest.  He would simply shoot you and destroy
the boat," I answered.

It was not more than half-an-hour before I saw horses coming in
our direction from the village.  At sight of them the man on the
gray horse lost heart.  With a final burst of eloquence, in which
he spread his breast to heaven and shook both fists in witness
that he was absolved and no blood-guilt could rest on his head,
he rode away at top speed straight up the ravine down which he
originally came.

The horses proved to be a very mixed lot--some good, some very
bad, and some indifferent.  But again they treated me as honoured
guest and provided me a mare with four sound legs and nothing
much the matter except vice.  She came at me with open teeth
when I tried to mount, but four men held her and I climbed
aboard, somehow or other.  As a horseman, I am a pretty good
sack of potatoes.

That was the worst saddle I ever sat in--and Anazeh's second-
best!  The stirrups swung amidships, so to speak, and whenever
you tried to rest your weight on them for a moment they described
an arc toward the rear.  Moreover, you could not sit well back on
the saddle to balance matters, because of the high cantle.  The
result, whether you did with stirrups or without them, was
torture, for anybody but an Arab, who has notions of comfort all
his own.

They put Ahmed on a wall-eyed scrub that looked unfit to walk,
but proved well able to gallop under his light weight.  One of
Anazeh's men took my bag, with a nod to reassure me, and without
a word we were off full-pelt, Anazeh leading with four stalwarts
who looked almost as hard-bitten as himself, six men crowding me
closely, and the remainder bringing up the rear.

That is the Arab way of doing things--rush and riot to begin
with.  The steepness of the stony ravine we rode up soon reduced
the horses to a walk, after which there was a good deal of
attention to rifle-bolts, and a settling down to the more serious
aspects of the adventure.  The escort began to look sullenly
ferocious, as only Arabs can.

There was a time, during the Turkish regime before the War, when
Cook's Agency took tourists in parties to El-Kerak, and all the
protection necessary was a handful of Turkish soldiers, whose
thief employment on the trip was to gather fuel and pitch tents.
Some one paid the Arabs to let tourists alone, and they normally
did.  But the War changed all that.  A post-Armistice stranger in
1920, with leather boots, was fair quarry for whoever had rifle
or knife.

We passed by a village or two, tucked into folds in the hills and
polluting the blue sky with a smell of ageing dung, but nothing
seemed disposed to happen.  A few men stood behind stone walls
and stared at us sullenly.  The women looked up from their
grindstones at the doors, covered their faces for convention's
sake, and uncovered them again at once for curiosity.  There was
nothing you could call a road between the villages, only a rocky
cattle-track that seemed to take the longest possible way between
two points;  and nobody seemed to own it, or to be there to
challenge our right of way.

But suddenly, after we had passed the third village and were
walking the horses up a shoulder of a steep hill-top, three shots
cracked out from in front of us to left and right.  Nobody fell,
but if ever there was instantaneous response it happened then.
Anazeh and his four galloped forward up-hill, firing as they rode
for the cover of a breast-high ridge.  One man on the off-side
tipped me out of the saddle, so suddenly that I had no chance to
prevent him;  another caught me, and two others flung me into a
hole behind a stone.  I heard the rear-guard scatter and run.
Two men pitched Ahmed down on top of me, for he was valuable,
seeing he could run an engine;  and thirty seconds later I peered
out around the rock to get a glimpse of what was happening.

There was not a man in sight.  I could see some of the horses
standing under cover.  The firing was so rapid that it sounded
almost like machine-gun practice.  A hairy arm reached out and
pushed my head back, and after that, whenever I made the least
movement, a man who was sniping from behind the sheltering rock
swore furiously, and threatened to brain me with his butt-end.
Beyond all doubt they regarded me as perishable freight;  so I
hardly saw any of the fighting.

Judging by the sound, I should say they fought their way up-hill
in skirmish order, and when they got to the top the enemy--
whoever they were--took to flight.  But that is guesswork.  There
were two casualties on our side.  One man shot through the arm,
which did not matter much;  he was well able to lie about what
had happened and to boast of how many men he had slain before the
bullet hit him.  The other was wounded pretty seriously in the
jaw.  They came to me for first aid, taking it for granted that I
knew something about surgery.  I don't.  I had a bad time
bandaging both of them, using two of my handkerchiefs and strips
from the protesting Ahmed's shirt.  However, I enjoyed it more
than they did.

When Anazeh shouted at last and we all rode to the hilltop there
was a dead man lying there, stripped naked, with his throat cut
across from ear to ear.  One of our men was wiping a long knife
by stabbing it into the dirt.  There was also a led horse added
to the escort.  Anazeh looked very cool and dignified;  he had an
extra rifle now, slung by a strap across his shoulders.  He was
examining a bandolier that had blood on it.

We rode on at once, and for the next hour Ahmed was kept busy
interpreting to me the lies invented by every member of the
escort for my especial benefit.  If they were true, each man had
slain his dozen;  but nobody would say who the opposing faction
were.  When I put that question they all dried up and nobody
would speak again for several minutes.

It turned out afterward that there had been a sort of armistice
proclaimed, and all the local chiefs had undertaken to observe it
and cease from blood-feuds for three days, provided that each
chief should prove peaceful intention by bringing with him only
two men.  Three men in a party, and not more than three, had
right of way.  The engagement may have been a simple protest
against breach of the terms of the armistice, but I suspect there
was more than that in it.

At any rate, we were not attacked again on the road, although there
were men who showed themselves now and then on inaccessible-looking
crags, who eyed us suspiciously and made no answer to the shouted
challenge of Anazeh's men.  When the track passed over a spur, or
swung round the shoulder of a cliff, we could sometimes catch
sight of other parties--always, though of three, before and behind
us, proceeding in the same direction.

We sighted the stone walls of El-Kerak at about midafternoon, and
rode up to the place through a savage gorge that must have been
impregnable in the old days of bows and arrows.  It would take a
determined army today to force itself through the wadys and
winding water-courses that guard that old citadel of Romans
and crusaders.

We approached from the Northwest corner, where a tower stands
that they call Burj-ez-Zahir.  There were lions carved on it.  It
looked as if the battlements had been magnificent at one time;
but whatever the Turks become possessed of always falls into
decay, and the Arabs seem no better.

Beside the Burj-ez-Zahir is a tunnel, faced by an unquestionable
Roman arch.  Outside it there were more than a dozen armed men
lounging, and a lot of others looked down at us through the
ruined loop-holes of the wall above.  Their leader challenged
our numbers at once, and refused admission.  Judging by Anazeh's
magnificently insolent reply it looked at first as if he
intended fighting his way in.  But that turned out to be
only his diplomatic manner--establishing himself, as it were,
on an eminence from which he could make concessions without
losing dignity.

The arrangement finally agreed to was Anazeh's suggestion, but
showed diplomatic genius on both sides.  The old man divided up
his party into sets of three, and asserted that every set of
three was independent.  There were twenty-two of us all told,
including Ahmed, but he described Ahmed as a prisoner, and
offered to have him shot if that would simplify matters.

There was a great deal of windy discussion about Ahmed's fate,
during which his face grew the color of raw liver and he joined
in several times tearfully.  Once he was actually seized and
half-a-dozen of the castle guards aimed at him;  but they
compromised finally by letting him go in with hands tied.  Nobody
really wanted the responsibility of shooting a man who had
smuggled stolen cartridges across the Dead Sea, and might do it
again if allowed to live.

We rode for eighty or a hundred paces through an echoing tunnel
into a city of shacks and ruined houses that swarmed with armed
men, and it was evident that we were not the only ones who had
ignored the rule about numbers.  Anazeh explained in an aside
to me that only those would obey that rule who did not dare
break it.

"Whoever makes laws should be strong enough to enforce them," he
said sagely.  "And whoever obeys such a law is at the mercy of
those who break it," he added presently, by way of afterthought.
To make sure that I understood him he repeated that remark
three times.

Every house had its quota of visitors, who lounged in the
doorways and eyed us with mixed insolence and curiosity.  There
were coffee-booths all over the place that seemed to have been
erected for the occasion, where, under awnings made of stick and
straw, men sat with rifles on their knees.  Those who had
provender to sell for horses were doing a roaring trade--short
measure and high price;  and the noise of grinding was incessant.
The women in the back streets were toiling to produce enough to
eat for all that host of notables.

To have had to hunt for quarters in that town just then would
have been no joke.  There was the mosque, of course, where any
Moslem who finds himself stranded may theoretically go and sleep
on a mat on the floor.  But we rode past the mosque.  It was
full.  I would not have liked a contract to crowd one more in
there.  Perhaps a New York Subway guard could have managed it.
The babel coming through the open door was like the buzzing of
flies on a garbage heap.

I was trying to sit upright in that abominable saddle and look
dignified, as became the honoured guest with a twenty-man escort,
when a courteous-looking cut-throat wearing an amber necklace
worth a wheat-field, forced his way through a crowd and greeted
Anazeh like a long lost brother.  I examined him narrowly to make
sure he was not Grim in disguise, but he had two fingers missing,
and holes in his ears, which decided that question.

After he had welcomed me effusively he led us through a rat-run
maze of streets to a good-sized house with snub-nosed lions
carved on the stone doorposts and a lot of other marks of both
Roman and crusader.  No part of the walls was less than three
feet thick, although the upper story had been rebuilt rather
recently on a more economical and much less dignified scale.
Nevertheless, there was a sort of semi-European air about the
place, helped out by two casemented projections overhanging the
narrow street.

There was no need to announce ourselves.  The clatter of hoofs
and shouts to ordinary folk on foot to get out of the way had
done that already.  Sheikh ben Nazir opened the door in person.
His welcome to me was the sort that comes to mind when you read
the Bible story of the prodigal son returning from a far-off
country.  I might have been his blood-relation.  But perhaps I am
wrong about that;  bloodfeuds among blood-relations are
notoriously savage.  He was the host, and I the guest.  Among
genuine Arabs that is the most binding relation there is.

He was no longer in blue serge and patent-leather boots, but
magnificent in Arab finery, and he was tricked out in a  puzzling
snowy-white head-dress that suggested politics without your
knowing why.  He had told me, when I met him at the American
Colony, that he had made the pilgrimage to Mecca more than once;
but that white linen thing had nothing to do with his being a
haji, any more than the expensive rings on the fingers of both
hands had anything to do with his Arab nationality.

After he had flattered and questioned me sufficiently about the
journey to comply with etiquette I asked him whether Ahmed might
not be untied.  The thong cutting the man's wrists. Sheikh hen
Nazir gave the necessary order and it was obeyed at once.  The
liquid-eyed rascal with the priceless amber necklace then led
away the escort, Ahmed included, to some place where they could
stall the horses, and--side-by-side, lest any question of
precedence should be involved, Anazeh and I followed ben Nazir
into the house.

We were not the only guests there.  He ushered us into a square
room, in which outrageous imported furniture, with gilt and
tassels on it, stood out like loathsome sores against rugs and
cushions fit for the great Haroun-al-Raschid's throne room.  Any
good museum in the world would have competed to possess the rugs,
but the furniture was the sort that France sends eastward in the
name of "culture"--stuff for "savages" to sit on and be civilized
while the white man bears the burden and collects the money.

There were half-a-dozen Arabs reclining on two bastard Louis-
something-or-other settees, who rose to their feet as we entered.
There was another man, sitting on a cushion in a corner by
himself, who did not get up.  He wore a white head-dress exactly
like our host's, and seemed to consider himself somebody very
important indeed.  After one swift searching glance at us he went
into a brown study, as if a mere sheikh and a Christian alien
were beneath his notice.

We were introduced first of all to the men who had stood up to
greet us, and that ceremony took about five minutes.  The Arab
believes he ought to know all about how you feel physically, and
expects you to reciprocate.  When that was over ben Nazir took us
to the corner and presented, first me, then Anazeh to the
solitary man in the white head-dress, who seemed to think himself
too important to trouble about manners.

Anazeh did not quite like my receiving attention first, and he
liked still less the off-handed way in which the solitary man
received us.  We were told his name was Suliman ben Saoud.  He
acknowledged my greeting.  He and old Anazeh glared at each
other, barely moving their heads in what might have been an
unspoken threat and retort or a nod of natural recognition.
Anazeh turned on his heel and joined the other guests.

In some vague way I knew that Saoud was a name to conjure
with, although memory refused to place it.  The man's air of
indifference and apparently unstudied insolence suggested he was
some one well used to authority.  Presuming on the one thing that
I felt quite sure of by that time--my privileged position as a
guest--I stayed, to try to draw him out.  I tried to open up
conversation with him with English, French, and finally lame
Arabic.  He took no apparent notice of the French and English,
but he smiled sarcastically at my efforts with his own tongue.
Except that he moved his lips he made no answer but went on
clicking the beads of a splendid amber rosary.

Ben Nazir, seeming to think that Anazeh's ruffled feelings called
for smoothing, crossed the room to engage him in conversation, so
I was left practically alone with the strange individual.  More
or less in a spirit of defiance of his claim to such distinction,
I sat down on a cushion beside him.

He was a peculiar-looking man.  The lower part of his cheek--that
side on which I sat--was sunk in, as if he had no teeth there.
The effect was to give his whole face a twisted appearance.  The
greater part of his head, of course, was concealed by the flowing
white kaffiyi, but his skin was considerably darker than that of
the   Palestine Arab.  He had no eyebrows at all, having shaved
them off--for a vow I supposed.  Instead of making him look
comical, as you might expect, it gave him a very sinister
appearance, which was increased by his generally surly attitude.

Once again, as when I had entered the room, he turned his head to
give me one swift, minutely searching glance, and then turned his
eyes away as if he had no further interest.  They were quite
extraordinary eyes, brimful of alert intelligence;  and whereas
from his general appearance I should have set him down at
somewhere between forty and fifty, his eyes suggested youth, or
else that keen, unpeaceful spirit that never ages.

I tried him again in Arabic, but he answered without looking at
me, in a dialect I had never heard before.  So I offered him a
gold-tipped cigarette, that being a universal language.  He
waived the offer aside with something between astonishment and
disdain.  He had lean, long-fingered hands, entirely unlike
those of the desert fraternity, who live too hard and fight
too frequently to have soft, uncalloused skin and unbroken
finger-nails.

He did not exactly fascinate me.  His self-containment was
annoying.  It seemed intended to convey an intellectual and moral
importance that I was not disposed to concede without knowing
more about him.  I suppose an Arab feels the same sensation when
a Westerner lords it over him on highly moral grounds.  At any
rate, something or other in the way of pique urged me to stir him
out of his self-complacency, just as one feels urged to prod a
bull-frog to watch him jump.

He seemed to understand my remarks, for he took no trouble to
hide his amusement at my efforts with the language.  But he
only answered in monosyllables, and I could not understand
those.  So after about five minutes I gave it up, and crossed
the room to ben Nazir, who seized the opportunity to show me
my sleeping-quarters.

It proved to be a room like a monastery cell, up one flight of
stone steps, with two other rooms of about the same size on
either side of it.  At the end of the passage was a very heavy
wooden door, with an iron lock and an enormous keyhole, which I
suppose shut off the harem from the rest of the house;  but as I
never trespassed beyond it I don't know.  I only do know that a
woman's eye was watching me through that key-hole, and ben Nazir
frowned impatiently at the sound of female giggling.

"The Sheikh Anazeh will have the room on this side of you," he
said, "and the Sheikh Suliman ben Saoud the room on the other.
So you will be between friends."

"Suliman ben Saoud seems a difficult person to make friends
with," I answered.

Ben Nazir smiled like a prince out of a picture-book--beautiful
white teeth and exquisite benignance.

"Oh, you mustn't mind him.  These celebrities from the centre of
Arabia give themselves great airs.  To do that is considered
evidence of piety and wisdom."

I sat on the bed--quite a civilized affair, spotlessly clean.
Ben Nazir took the chair, I suppose, like the considerate host he
was, to give me the sensation of receiving in my own room.

"He wears the same sort of head-dress you do.  What does it
mean?" I asked.

"I wear mine out of compliment to him--not that I have not
always the right to wear it.  It is the Ichwan head-dress.
It is highly significant."

"Of what?"

He hesitated for a moment, and then seemed to make up his mind
that it did not much matter what he might divulge to an ignorant
stranger soon to return to the United States.

"It is difficult to explain.  You Americans know so little of our
politics.  It is significant, I might say, of the New Arabia--
Arabia for the Arabs.  The great ben Saoud, who is a relative of
this man, is an Arabian chieftain who has welded most of Arabia
into one, and now challenges King Hussein of Mecca for the
caliphate.  Hussein is only kept on his throne by British gold,
paid to him from India.  Ben Saoud also receives a subsidy from
the British, who must continue to pay it, because otherwise ben
Saoud will attack Hussein and overwhelm him.  That, it is
believed, would mean a rising of all the Moslem world against
their rulers--in Africa--Asia--India--Java--everywhere.  It began
as a religious movement.  It is now political--although it is
held together by religious zeal.  You might say that the Ichwans
are the modern Protestants of Islam.  They are fanatical.  The
world has never seen such fanaticism, and the movement spreads
day by day."

"You don't look like a fanatic," I said, and he laughed again.

"I?  God forbid!  But I am a politician;  and to succeed a
politician must have friends among all parties.  My one ambition
is to see all Arabs united in an independent state reaching from
this coast to the Persian Gulf.  To that end I devote my energy.
I use all means available--including money paid me by the French,
who have no intention of permitting any such development if they
can help it."

"And the British?"

"For the present we must make use of them also.  But their yoke
must go, eventually."

"Then if America had accepted the Near East mandate, you would
have used us in the same way?"

"Certainly.  That would have been the easiest way, because
America understands little or nothing of our politics.  America's
money--America's schools and hospitals--America's war munitions--
and then good-bye.  I am willing to use all means--all methods to
the one end--Arabia for the Arabs.  After that I am willing to
retire into oblivion."

Nevertheless, ben Nazir did not convince me that he was an
altruist who had no private ends to serve.  There was an
avaricious gleam in ben Nazir's eyes.




Chapter Five

"D'you mind if I use You?"

For all his care to seem hospitable before any other
consideration, ben Nazir looked ill at ease.  He led me down
again to a dining-room hung with spears, shields, scimitars and
ancient pistols, but furnished otherwise like an instalment-plan
apartment.  He watched while a man set food before me.  It seemed
that Anazeh had gone away somewhere to eat with his men.

Ben Nazir's restlessness became so obvious that I asked at last
whether I was not detaining him.  He jumped at the opening.  With
profound apologies he asked me to excuse him for the remainder of
the afternoon.

"You see," he explained, "I came from Damascus to Jerusalem, so I
was rather out of touch with what was going on here.  This
conference of notables was rather a surprise to me.  It will not
really take place until tomorrow, but there are important details
to attend to in advance.  If you could amuse yourself--"

The man who could not do that in a crusader city, crammed with
sons of Ishmael who looked as if they had stepped out of the
pages of the Old Testament, would be difficult to please.  I
asked for Ahmed, to act as interpreter.  Ben Nazir volunteered to
provide me with two men in addition as a sort of bodyguard.

"Because Ahmed is a person who is not respected."

It did not take ten minutes to produce Ahmed and the two men.
The latter were six-foot, solemn veterans armed with rifles
and long knives.  With them at my heels I set out to explore
El-Kerak.

"There is nothing to see," said Ahmed, who did not want to come.
But Ahmed was a liar.  There was everything to see.  The only
definite purpose I had in mind was to find Grim.  It was possible
I might recognize him even through his disguise.  Failing that,
he could not help but notice me if I walked about enough;  if so,
he would find his own means of establishing communication.

But you might as well have hunted for one particular pebble on a
beach as for a single individual in all that throng.  Remembering
Grim's disguise when I first saw him, I naturally had that
picture of him in mind.  But all the Bedouins looked about as
much alike as peas in a pod.  They stared at me as if I were a
curio on exhibition, but they did not like being stared back at.

There was no hint of violence or interference, and no apparent
resentment of an alien's presence in their midst.  The loud-
lunged bodyguard shouted out to all and sundry to make way for
the "Amerikani," and way was made forthwith, although several
times the bodyguard was stopped and questioned after I had
passed, to make sure I was really American and not English.
Ahmed assured me that if I had been English they would have
"massacred" me.  In view of what transpired he may have been
right, though I doubt it.  They might have held me as hostage.

Not that they were in any kind of over-tolerant mood.  There was
a man's dead body hanging by one foot from a great hook on a high
wall, and the wall was splattered with blood and chipped by
bullets.  I asked Ahmed what kind of criminal he might be.

"He did not agree with them.  They are for war.  He was in favor
of peace, and he made a speech two hours ago.  So they accused
him of being a traitor, and he was tried and condemned."

"Who tried him?"

"Everybody did."

"War with whom?" I asked.

"The British."

"Why?"

"Because they favor the Zionists."

"And that is what the conference is all about?"

"Yes.  There is a man here from Damascus, who urges them to raid
across the Jordan into Palestine.  He says that the Palestinian
Arabs will rise then, and cut the throats of all the  Zionists.
He says that Emir Feisul is going to attack the French in Syria,
and that the British will have to go and help the French, so now
is the time for a raid."

"Is my host, ben Nazir, the man who is talking that way?  He has
been to Damascus."

"No.  Another, named Abdul Ali--a very rich sheikh, who comes
here often with caravans of merchandise, and gives rich presents
to notables."

"Has ben Nazir anything to do with it?"

"Who knows?  Mashallah!  The world is full of mysteries.  That
Nazir is a knowing one.  They say of him:  whichever option is
uppermost, that is always his opinion.  He is a safe man to
follow for that reason.  Yet it is easier to follow water through
a channel underground."

We made our way toward the castle at the south side of the town,
but were prevented from entering by a guard of feudal retainers,
who looked as if they had been well drilled.  They were as solemn
as the vultures that sat perched along the rampart overlooking a
great artificial moat dividing the town from the high hill just
beyond it.

Nobody interfered when I climbed on the broken town wall and
looked over.  The castle wall sloped down steeply into the moat,
suggesting ample space within for dungeons and underground
passages;  but there was nothing else there of much interest to
see, only dead donkeys, a dying camel with the vultures already
beginning on him, some dead dogs, heaps of refuse, and a lot more
vultures too gorged to fly--the usual Arab scheme of sanitation.
I asked one of my bodyguard to shoot the camel and he obliged me,
with the air of a keeper making concessions to a lunatic.  Nobody
took any notice of the rifle going off.

It was when we turned back into the town again that the first
inkling of Grim's presence in the place turned up.  A bulky-
looking Arab in a sheepskin coat that stank of sweat so vilely
that you could hardly bear the man near you, came up and stood in
my way.  Barring the smell, he was a winning-looking rascal--
truculent, swaggering, but possessed of a good-natured smile that
seemed to say:  "Sure, I'm a rogue and a liar, but what else did
you expect!"

He spoke perfectly good English.  He said he wished to speak to
me alone.  That was easy enough;  Ahmed and the bodyguard
withdrew about ten paces, and he and I stepped into a doorway.

"I am Mahommed ben Hamza," he said, with his head on one side, as
if that explanation ought to make everything clear to me at once.
"From Hebron," he added, when I did not seem to see the light.

The wiser one looks, and the less one says, in Arab lands, the
less trouble there's likely to be.  I tried to look extremely
wise, and said nothing.

"Where is Jimgrim?" he demanded.

"If you can tell me that I'll give you ten piastres," I answered.

"I will give you fifty if you tell me!"

"Why do you want to know?"

"He is my friend.  He said I should see him here.  But I have not
seen him.  He said also I should see you.  You are the Amerikani?
And you don't know where he is?  Truly?  Then, when you see him,
will you say to him, 'Mahommed ben Hamza is here with nine men at
the house of Abu Shamah?'  Jimgrim will understand."

I nodded, and the man from Hebron walked away without another word.

"Did he steal your watch?" asked Ahmed.  They are as jealous as
children, those Arabs.

There was a second execution while I walked back through the
city.  A wide-eyed, panic-stricken poor devil with slobber on his
jaws came tearing down-street with a mob at his heels.  We
stepped into an alley to let the race go by, but he doubled down
the alley opposite.  Before he had run twenty yards along it some
one hit the back of his head with a piece of rock.  A second
later they had pounced on him, and in less than a minute after
that he was kicking in the noose of a hide rope slung over a
house-beam.  I don't know what they hanged him for.  No one
apparently knew.  But they used his carcase for a target and shot
it almost to pieces.

I kept on looking for Grim, although the task seemed hopeless.
Of course, I could not give a hint of my real purpose.  But as
Grim knew that the talk about a school-teacher was my passport
to the place, it seemed possible that he might use that as an
excuse for getting in touch with me.  So I told Ahmed to show
me the schools.

They weren't worth looking at--mere tumble-down sheds in which
Moslem boys were taught to say the Koran by heart.  The places
where Christian missionaries once had been were all turned into
stores, and even into stables for the horses of the notables.

So I returned to ben Nazir's house, and found old Sheikh Anazeh
sitting outside on the step, as motionless as a tobacco-store
Indian but twice as picturesque.  He still had his own rifle over
his knees, and the plundered one slung over his shoulder by a
strap;  he never stirred abroad unarmed.

I asked him what the conference of notables was going to be
about, and he told me to mind my own business.  That struck me as
an excellent idea, so, not having slept at all the previous
night, I went upstairs and lay on the bed.  There was no lock on
the door, so I set the chair against it.

Ben Nazir was a man who had traveled a great deal, and picked up
western notions of hospitality to add to the inborn eastern sense
of sacredness in the relation between host and guest.  It seems
that an hour or two later he came to take me down to a Gargantuan
meal, but, feeling the chair against the door, and hearing
snores, he decided it was better manners to let me lie in peace.

So I did not wake up again until after midnight.  The moonlight
was streaming through a little high-perched window, and fell on
the white-robed, ghostly-looking figure of a man, who sat with
crossed legs on the end of the bed.  I thought I was dead and
in hell.

That is no picturesque exaggeration about a man's hair standing
when he is terrified.  It really does.  I would have yelled
aloud, if the breath would have come, but there is a trick of
sudden fear that seems to grip your lungs and hold them impotent.
The thing on the end of the bed had no eye-brows.  It grinned as
if it knew all about evil, and were hungry, and living men were
its food.

I don't know how long I stared at the thing, but it seemed
like a week.  At last it spoke, and I burst into a sweat with
the reaction.

"Good job you don't know how to fasten a door with a chair.  I'll
have to show you that trick, or you'll be dying before your time.
Sh-h-h!  Don't make a noise!"

I sat up and looked more closely at him.  It was the Ichwan of
the afternoon--Sheikh Suliman ben Saoud.  And he was speaking
unmistakable American.  I began again to believe I was dreaming.
He chuckled quietly and lit a cigarette.

"Aren't you wise to me yet?"

"Grim?"

"Who else?"

"But what's happened to your face?  You're all one-sided."

"Oh, that's easy.  I just take out my false teeth.  The rest is
done with a razor and some brown stain.  I thought you were going
to spot me when you first came.  Did you?  I didn't think so.
Did you act as well as all that?"

"No.  Looked all over town for you afterward."

"Uh-huh.  I thought that was too natural to be acting.  Pick up
any news in town?"

"Saw a hanging, and met a man who calls himself Mahommed ben
Hamza.  He's waiting at the house of Abu Shamah."

"Any men with him?"

"Nine."

"Three more than he promised.  Ben Hamza is the most honest thief
and dependable liar in Palestine--a cheerful murderer who sticks
closer than a brother.  I saved him once from being hung, because
he smiles so nicely.  Any more news?"

"I expect none that you don't know.  There's a sheikh named Abdul
Ali from Damascus, preaching a raid into Palestine."

Grim nodded.

"I'm here to bag that bird."

"Where do I come in?" I asked.

"You are the plausible excuse, that's all.  Thanks to you old
Anazeh got into El-Kerak with twenty men.  Two might not have
been enough, even with ben Hamza and his nine."

"Then our host ben Nazir is in on your game?"

"Not he!  Up at headquarters in Jerusalem we knew all about this
coming conference.  These folk are ready to explode.  The only
way to stop it is to pull the plug--The plug is Abdul Ali.  We
knew we could count on old Anazeh.  But the puzzle was how to get
him and his men into El-Kerak.  When you told me ben Nazir had
invited you, I saw the way to do it.  There wasn't anybody else
except Anazeh that ben Nazir could have sent to fetch you, and
the old boy is a dependable friend of ours."

"That did not stop him from raiding two villages on the British
side of the Dead Sea," I answered.

"Did he?"

"Sure.  I had part of a raided sheep for breakfast."

"Um-m-m!  Well of all the--damn his impudence!  The shrewd old
devil must have figured that we can't get after him for it,
seeing how he's playing our game.  Bloody old horse-thief!  Well,
he gets away with it, this time.  You'll have to be mighty
careful not to seem to recognize me.  One slip and we're done
for.  You're safe enough.  If they once get wise to me they'll
pull me in pieces between four horses."

"What's your plan?"

"It's vague yet.  Got to be an opportunist.  I'm supposed to
be a member of the ben Saoud family, recruiting members for
the new sect--biggest thing in Arabia.  I'm invited to the
conference on the strength of my supposed connection with the
big Ichwan movement."

"D'you propose to murder this Abdul Ali person, then, or have him
murdered?" I asked.

"Uh-uh!  Murder's out of my line.  Besides, that'ud do no good.
Worse than useless.  They'd all cut loose.  Abdul Ali has got
them together.  What with bribes and a lot of promises he has
them keen on this raid.  If he were killed they'd say one of our
spies did it.  They'd add vengeance to their other motives, which
at present are mainly a desire for loot.  No, no.  Abdul Ali has
got to disappear.  Then they'll believe he has betrayed them.
Then, instead of raiding Palestine they'll confiscate his
property and curse his ancestors.  D'you see the point?"

"More or less.  But what good can I do?"

"Do you mind if I use you?"

I laughed.  "That's a hell of a silly question.  Any use my
minding?  You've already used me.  You will do it again without
consulting me.  I like it, as it happens.  But a fat lot you
care whether I like it or not.  Isn't it a bit late in the day
to ask permission?"

"Oh, well.  You know the hangmen always used to beg the victim's
pardon.  Will you obey orders?"

"Yes.  But it might be easier if I know what I'm doing."

"As soon as I know I'll explain," he answered.  "Where you can
fit into the puzzle at the moment is by rooting for the school
idea.  The worst robber chieftain from the farthest cluster of
huts he calls his home town would like to see an American school
here in El-Kerak.  If there were one he'd send his sons to it."

"Okay.  I'll root like a dog for a buried bone."

"Go to it.  That gives you the right to ask questions.  That will
oblige ben Nazir to introduce you to any one you want to
interview.  That will explain without any further argument
whatever weakness you seem to have for talking to men in the
street like Mahommed ben Hamza.  It would even explain away any
politeness that I might show you in my capacity of Ichwan.  For
safety's sake, and to create an impression, I take the line of
being rude to every one;  but I might reasonably toss a few
crumbs of condescension to an altruist from foreign parts.  At
any rate, I'll have to take that chance.  D'you get me?"

"You mean, you'll use me as intermediary? Messages to and from
ben Hamza and that sort of thing?"

"That's the idea, but there's more to it.  Did you bring that
Bible along?  Are you superstitious?  Any notions like Long John
Silver's about its being bad luck to spoil a Bible?  All right.
Keep it in your pocket to make notes in.  If you can't get the
whole book to me, tear a page out and send that, or give it to
me, with the message spelled in dots under the words.  Make the
dots faint, I've good eyes."

"What sort of notes do you want from me?"

"You mustn't mistake me for the prophet Ezekiel," he answered,
grinning.  "'Thus saith the Lord' is all right when you know what
you're talking about.  All I know for certain is that I've got
to bag Abdul Ali.  If you get information that looks important
to you, get it to me in the way I've told you, that's all.
Don't be caught talking to me.  Don't look friendly.  Don't
seem interested."

"What else?"

"If you can, keep old Anazeh sober."

"Oh!"

Grim nodded meaningly:  "I've known easier jobs!"

"The old sport thinks no more of me than of an express package
he'd been hired to deliver," I answered.  "Drunk or sober, he'd
brush me aside like a fly."

"Well--wits were given us to use.  I guess you'll have to use
yours.  Have you any?"

"How the hell should I know?" I retorted.

"If you find I haven't any, don't blame me."

"I won't," he answered, and I believed him.

"What else besides being dry-nurse to the king of the
Amalekites?" I asked.

"Don't trust Ahmed."

"He's a good interpreter."

"Yeh--and a poor peg.  You'll have to use him--some.  But don't
trust him."

"Does old Anazeh know you in that disguise?" I asked.

"No, and he mustn't.  I'll tell you why.  All these people are
religious fanatics.  A horrible death is the only fate they would
consider for a man caught masquerading as a holy personage the
way I'm doing.  But their fanaticism has a way of petering out
when the gang's not there to see.  In his own village I think
Anazeh would laugh if I talked this ruse over with him--
afterwards.  But if he knew about it here, with all these other
fanatics alert and fanning, he wouldn't dare not to expose me.
It's a good job you asked that.  If I send any message to Anazeh
through you, be sure you don't give me away."

"How shall I make him believe the message is from you, then?"

"Begin with 'Jimgrim says.'  He'll recognize the formula.  But if
he questions that, say 'A lion knows a lion in the dark.'
That'll serve a double purpose--convince him and jog his memory.
He ignored a request of mine--once, and I was able to get back at
him.  Tell you the story some day.  Nowadays he's more or less
dependable, unless he gets a skin-full of redeye.  Well, make the
most of your chance to sleep;  you may have to go short later.
I'm going to saw off a cord or two myself."

He left the room as silently as a ghost.  I don't doubt that he
slept peacefully.  Subsequent acquaintance with him convinced me
that he can go to sleep almost anywhere in any circumstances.
And that is a very great gift, for it enables its owner to wear
down any dozen who must sleep for stated hours at fixed
intervals.  Grim snatches his whenever the chance comes, and goes
without with apparent indifference.  He told me once that he
dreams nearly all the time he is asleep.  But the dreams don't
seem to trouble him.  I believe he dreams out the key to whatever
problem puzzles him at the moment.

My own sleep was done for that night, his advice notwithstanding.
I lay listening to Anazeh's thunderous snores and naturally
enough imagining every possible contingency and dozens that were
totally impossible.  Nothing turned out in the least like any of
my forecasts;  but that was not for want of trying to foresee it
all.  I don't seem to possess any of that quiet gift of waiting
to deal with each development on its merits, as and when it
comes.  I have to speculate, and speculation is the ene my
of peace.

Looking back, I don't think I felt a bit afraid of the immediate
future;  but that was due to ignorance of nearly all that the
present held.  I think that was part of Grim's reason for helping
me to reach El-Kerak in the first place;  he counted on my
ignorance of danger to keep me cool-headed.  It is true, it did
dawn on me that if my host were to suspect me of intriguing under
cover of his protection, the protection might cease with
disconcerting abruptness.  I realized to some extent what a
predicament that would be.  But on the whole, I think the only
real worry was the definite task Grim had given me--the
thankless, and very likely desperate, inglorious one of trying to
keep old Anazeh sober.

Of course, the Koran forbids wine.  But whiskey is not wine.  And
if you mix whiskey and wine together they cease to be either;
they become a commodity of which the Prophet knew nothing and
which he therefore did not forbid.  But if you introduce such a
mixture into the stomach, and thence into the brain of an already
fiery Bedouin;  and then introduce the Bedouin to trouble;  and
if, in addition to the trouble, you provide impertinent, alien,
and what he calls infidel restraint, it is fair to presume that
the mixture might explode.

It seemed to me I had been given too much to do.  In order to get
introductions to the notables I must first get ben Nazir into a
proper frame of mind.  Then, stammering in an alien tongue, I
must make friends with chieftains who had never even heard of me;
and that, when their minds were busy with another matter.  I must
keep in touch with ben Hamza, and convey his messages to Grim
without being seen or arousing suspicion.  In addition to all
that I must keep sober by some means an old savage armed with
two rifles and a knife, who had twenty cut-throats at his beck
and call!

While I pondered the problem in all its impossible bearings, loud
snores to right and left of me, tenor and bass by turns,
announced that Jimgrim and Anazeh were as blissfully oblivious to
my worries as the bedbugs were that had come out of hiding and
discovered me.  I began to feel homesick.





Chapter Six

"That man will repay study."


I got my first shot at Anazeh at dawn, when the muezzin began
wailing over the city;  and I missed badly with both barrels.
The old sheikh looked into my room, presumably to see if I was
still alive, since he had guaranteed to see me safely back again
across the Jordan, before rounding up his rascals for morning
prayer.  They prayed together whenever possible, Anazeh keeping
count of their genuflections.

You could tell he had been drinking the night before the minute
he thrust his head into the room.  He smelt like the lees of a
rum barrel, and the rims of his eyes were red.

Seeing I was awake he gave me the courteous, full-sounding "Allah
ysabbhak bilkhair," and I asked him where he had dined the night
before.  He mumbled something into his beard that I could not
catch, but he could not have told me much more plainly to go to
hell, even in plain English.  However, I had to get a foothold
somewhere, so I said that I had heard that the liquor in El-Kerak
was poisonous.

As far as I understood his answer, he implied that it likely
would be poisonous in the sort of place where I would buy it, but
that he, Anazeh, need not be told how to suck eggs by any such a
greenhorn as me.

I tried him again.  I said that liquor taken in quantity would
kill a man.

"So will one bullet!" he answered.  "But, whereas a bullet in the
belly causes pain before death, moiyit ilfadda (aqua fortis)
causes pleasure;  and a man dies either way."

He turned to go, rattling two rifle-butts against the door, but I
had one last try to get on terms and said I hoped to see him at
breakfast, or shortly afterward.

"God is the giver both of eyesight and the things to see," he
answered.  "I go to pray.  God will guide my footsteps afterward."

I did not feel I had really made much headway, but I fared rather
better with my host downstairs, who either did not pray with such
enthusiasm or else had forestalled the muezzin.  At any rate, he
was waiting for me near a table spread with sweet cakes and good
French coffee.  After the usual string of pleasantries he became
suddenly confidential, over-acting the part a little, as a man
does who has something rather disagreeable up his sleeve that
he means to spring on you presently.

"I have been busy since an hour before dawn.  I have been
consulting with my friend Suliman ben Saoud.  The situation here
is very serious.  As long as you are my guest you are perfectly
safe;  but if I were to send you away, the assembled notables
might suspect you of being a spy, and might accuse me of
harbouring a spy.  Do you see?  They would suppose you were
returning to Jerusalem with information for the British.  That
would have most unpleasant consequences--for both of us!"

Clearly, Grim in the guise of ben Saoud had been busy, and it was
up to me to seize my cue alertly.  I was at pains to look
alarmed.  Ben Nazir grew solicitous.

"Rest assured, you are safe as my guest.  But Suliman ben Saoud
was annoyed to think a stranger should be here at such a time as
this.  He took me to task about you.  He is also my guest, as I
reminded him, but he is a truculent fellow.  He insisted that the
assembled notables have the right to satisfaction regarding your
bona fides.  It was no use my saying, as I did repeatedly, that I
personally guarantee you.  He asked me how much I know about you.
I had to confess that what I actually know amounts to very
little."

"Well?" I said.  "What does the old grouch want?"

"He thinks that you should be presented to the assembled notables
at noon today.  In fact, he demands that they should catechize
you regarding your ideas about a school."

"I have no objection."

"But, I am sorry to have to add this:  it is probable the
notables will insist on your remaining in El-Kerak until after
that shall have taken place which they have been summoned to
decide on.  They will not risk your returning before the--"


"Before what?"

"The--ah--they contemplate a raid!"

"So I'm a prisoner?"

"No, no!  Mon dieu, what do you think of me!  Even the fanatical
Suliman ben Saoud saw the force of the argument when I spoke of
the sanctity of any guest here on my invitation.  But he thinks--
and I agree with him, that as a precaution you should first call
on Sheikh Abdul Ali.  You will find him a very agreeable man, who
will receive you with proper courtesy.  He is here from Damascus,
and exercises a great influence.  Once his mind is at ease about
you, he will satisfy all the others.  Are you agreeable?"

"Why not?"

So we smoked a cigarette together after the coffee, and then set
forth on foot, for the distance was not great, preceded and
surrounded by armed retainers.  I imagine the armed men were more
for the sake of appearance than protection.  Ben Nazir seemed
popular.  But the escort drove other pedestrians out of the way
as roughly as they did the unspeakable dogs that infested every
offal-heap.  The street that we followed was, of course, the open
sewer for the houses on either hand, and its condition was a
credit to the mangy curs that so resented our intrusion.

Abdul Ali's house, if his it was, was a fairly big square
building near the middle of the town.  It did not look unlike one
of the old-time New York precinct stations, with its big windows
protected by iron grilles, and a flight of stone steps leading up
to a door exactly in the middle of the front wall.

There were thirty or forty capable-looking men hanging about the
place.  Abdul Ali owned more than one camel caravan, and every
man connected with the business looked on himself as a member of
one big feudal family.  They were all armed.  Most of them had
modern rifles.

We were admitted into a room that faced on the street, furnished
entirely in the eastern style, except for two gilt chairs against
the wall.  The walls were hung with carpets and the floor was
covered with Bokhara rugs three deep.

No doubt in order to emphasize his own importance, Abdul Ali kept
us waiting in that room for ten minutes before he condescended to
enter.  But when he did come at last he was at pains to seem
agreeable, which was not quite his natural attitude.

I had never seen a more offensive personality, although at the
first glance he did not arouse actual dislike.  Distaste for him
dawned, and grew.  He was certainly not physically attractive,
although the Syrian Arab costume made him picturesque.  The first
thing I noticed was the fatness of his hands--those of a giver of
dishonest gifts.  When he shook hands you felt in some subtle way
that he was sure your conscience was for sale, that he would
purchase it for any reasonable figure, and that he believed he
had plenty of money with which to buy you and all your relatives.

He was a little puffy under the eyes, had a firm mouth, rather
thick lips, and his small black moustache was turned up like the
Kaiser's, which gave him a cockily self-assured appearance.  For
the rest, he was a rather military-looking person, although his
flowing robe partly concealed that;  stockily rather than heavily
built;  and of rather more than middle height.  He wore one ring--a
sapphire of extraordinary brilliance, of which he was immensely
proud.  When I noticed it he said at once that it had been given
him by the late Sultan Abdul Hamid.

He spoke German from choice, so we conversed in German, which
annoyed ben Nazir, who could not understand a word of it.  And
from first to last throughout that interview, and subsequently to
the point where Jimgrim out-maneuvered and out-played him, he
relied on the German philosophy of self-assertion that teaches
how to get and keep the upper hand by making yourself believe in
your own super-intelligence and then speaking, acting, making
plans in logical accord with that belief.  It works finely until
somebody spoils the whole thing by pricking the super-intelligence
bladder and letting out all the wind.

Although he spoke German, he was not by any means pro-German in
his motives.  He was at pains to make that clear.  Evidently he
had been pro-German once, until he saw the writing on the wall.
He was conscious of the need to offset past prejudices before
suggesting his enormous ability along advanced lines.

"You come at an interesting time," he said.  "You find us in
transition.  Before the War, and almost until the end of it, most
Arabs believed in the German destiny.  English gold commanded the
allegiance of an Arab army, but every last man in that army was
ready to follow the German standard at the proper time.  That
only shows how ignorant these people are.  As soon as it became
evident that the Arab destiny lies in the hands of Arabs
themselves most of them immediately began to clamour for an
American mandate, because that would give them temporary masters
who could protect them, yet at the same time who would be too
ignorant of real conditions to prevent secret preparations for a
pan-Arabian revolt.  All very absurd, of course."

He had no idea how absurd he himself appeared.  He launched into
a tirade designed to make him seem a super-statesman in the eyes
of a stranger who did not care what he was.  The more he talked
himself into a delirium of self-esteem the less his character
impressed me.  I even ran into the danger of under-estimating him
because he liked himself so much.

"I'm here to look into the prospects for a school," I said.

"Yes, yes.  Very estimable.  You shall have my support."  He
paused for me to fawn on him, and my neglect to do it spurred him
to further self-revelation.

"You must look to me for support if you hope for success.  There
is no cohesion here without me.  I am the only man in El-Kerak to
whom they all listen, and even I have difficulty in uniting them
at times.  But a school is a good idea, and under my auspices you
will succeed."

For the moment I thought he suspected me of wanting to teach
school myself.  I hastened to correct the impression:

"All I promise to do is to tell people in the States who might be
interested."

"Exactly."  He had been coming at this point all along in his own
way.  "So there is no hurry.  It makes no difference that you
must stay in El-Kerak a little longer than you intended.  You
shall be presented to the council of notables under my auspices.
In my judgment it is important that you remain here for some
little time."

I suppose the men who can analyze their thoughts, and separate
the wise impulses from the rash ones, are the people whom the
world calls men of destiny and whom history later assigns to its
halls of fame.  The rest of us simply act from pique, prejudice,
passion or whatever other emotion is in charge.  I know I did.
It was resentment.  It was so immensely disagreeable to be
patronized by this puffy-eyed sensualist that I could not resist
the impulse to argue with him.

"I don't see the force of that," said I.  "My plans are made to
return to Jerusalem tomorrow."

I could not have done better as it happened.  I suppose there is
some theory that has been written down in books to explain how
these things work, at any rate to the satisfaction of the fellow
who wrote the book.  But Grim, referring to it afterward, called
it naked luck.  I would rather agree with Grim than argue with
any inky theorist on earth, having seen too many theories upset.
Luck looks to me like a sweeter lady, and more worshipful than
any of the goddesses they rename nowadays and then dissect in
clinics.  At any rate, by naked luck I prodded Abdul Ali where he
kept his supply of mistakes.  Instead of calling my bluff, as he
doubtless should have done, he set out to win me over to his
point of view.  Whichever way you analyze it in the light of
subsequent events, the only possible conclusion is that it was my
turn to be lucky and Abdul Ali's to make a fool of himself.
Nobody could have made a fool of him better than he did.

"I must dissuade you," he said, trying to hide wilfulness under
an unpleasant smile.  "I will offer inducements."

"They'll have to be heavy," I said, "to weigh against what I have
in mind."

He had kept ben Nazir and me standing all this time.  Now he
offered me one of the chairs, took the other himself, and
motioned ben Nazir to a cushion near the window.  A servant
brought in the inevitable coffee and cigarettes.  Then he laid a
hand on my knee for special emphasis--a fat, pale, unprincipled
hand, with that great sapphire gleaming on the middle finger.

"It happens that this idea of a school comes just at the right
moment.  I have been searching my mind for just some such idea to
lay before the notables.  As we are talking a language that none
else here understands, I can safely take you into confidence.  A
raid is being planned into British territory."

He paused to let that sink in, and tapped my knee with his
disgusting fingers until I could have struck him from irritation.

"There is, however, an element of disagreement.  There is
uncertainty as to the outcome, in the minds of some of the chiefs
who live nearest to the border.  The feeling among them is that
perhaps I am urging them on in order to serve my own ambition at
their expense.  They appreciate the opportunity to loot;  but
they say that the British will hit back afterwards, and they,
being nearest to the border, will suffer most;  whereas I stand
to gain all and to lose nothing.  Very absurd, of course, but
that is their argument."

"Surely," I said, "you don't expect me to take my coat off and
preach a jihad against the British?"

"Im Gotteswillen!  No, no, no!  This is my meaning:  if I can go
before them with the offer of a school for El-Kerak, which the
very worst scoundrel among them desires with all his ignorant
heart;  and if I can produce a distinguished gentleman from
America, present among them on my invitation for the sole purpose
of making the arrangements for such a school, that will convince
them that I have their interests really at heart.  Do you see?"

Again the irritating fingers drumming on my knee.  I did not
answer for fear of betraying ill-temper.

"I am a statesman, sir.  I understand the arguments with which
whole nations may deceive themselves.  I have made it my
profession to detect the trends of thought and the tides of
unrest.  Psychological moments are for me a fascinating study.  I
can recognize them."

He laid the fat hand on my shoulder for a change, and tried to
look into my eyes;  but I was watching the edge of a curtain at
the far end of the room.

"Now, to you, an American, our local dispute means nothing.  This
raid is no affair of yours.  You wash your hands of it.  You, an
altruist, are interested only in a school.  I offer you
opportunity, building, subsidy, guarantees.  You reciprocate by
giving me a talking point.  I shall make use of the opportunity.
That is settled.  And, let me see, I promised you inducements,
didn't I?"

He looked, at me and I looked at him.  He waited for a hint of
some sort, but I made no move to help him out.

"What shall we say?"

I was as interested in the result of his appraisal as he was in
making it.  Whether complimentary or not, another's calculated
judgment of your character is a fascinating thing to wait for.

"I think you will be getting full value.  I shall introduce you
to all the notables," he said at last.    "To a man of your
temperament it will be a privilege to attend the council, and to
know in advance all that is going to happen.  There will be no
objection to that, because it is already decided you will remain
in El-Kerak until after the--er--raid.  The notables will
understand from me that your mouth is sealed until after the
event.  You shall be let into our secrets.  There--is that
not equitable?"

It was shrewd.  I did not believe for a minute that he would let
me into all their secrets, but he could not have imagined a
greater temptation for me.  Since I would not have taken his word
that black was not white, I did not hesitate to pretend to agree
to his terms.

"I must have an interpreter," I said.  "Otherwise I shall
understand very little."

"I will supply you an interpreter--a good one."

"No, thank you.  Any man of yours might only tell me what he
thought correct for me to hear.  If I'm to get a price for my
services, I want the full price.  I want to hear everything.  I
must be allowed to bring my own interpreter."

"Who would he be?"

"I don't know yet."

"That man Ahmed, for instance?  I have been told he is one of
your party.  Ahmed would do very well."

"No, not Ahmed."

"Who then?"

"I will find a man."

He hesitated.  If ever a man was reviewing all the possible
contingencies, murder of me included, behind a mask of superficial
courtesy, that man was he.

"He should be a man acceptable to the notables," he said at last.
"I ought to know his name in advance."

"I must have unfettered choice, or I won't attend the
mejlis."  [Council]

"Oh, very well. Only the interpreter, too, will have to remain
afterward in El-Kerak."

I looked at that curtain again, for it was moving in a way that
no draft from the open window could account for.  But at last the
movement was explained.  Before Abdul Ali could speak again a man
stepped out from behind it, crossed the room, and went out
through the door, closing it silently behind him.  He was a man I
knew, and the last man I had expected to see in that place.  I
suppose Abdul Ali noticed my look of surprise.

"You know him?" he asked.

"By sight.  He was at Sheikh ben Nazir's house yesterday."

"That is Suliman ben Saoud, a stranger from Arabia, but a man
of great influence because of his connection with the Ichwan
movement.  If you are interested in our types that man will
repay study."

"Good.  I'll try to study him," said I.

It was all I could do to keep a straight face.  So Jimgrim was
the source of Abdul Ali's inspirations!  I wondered what subtle
argument he could have used to make the sheikh so keen on baiting
his hook with the school proposal.  His nerve, in waiting behind
that curtain until he knew his scheme had succeeded, and then
walking out bold as brass to let me know that he had overheard
everything, was what amused me.  But I managed not to smile.

"What time is the mejlis?"  I asked.

"At noon."

"Then I'll go and hunt up my interpreter."

Ben Nazir came out with me, in a blazing bad temper.  He was as
jealous as a pet dog, and inclined to visit the result on me.

"Very polite, I am sure!  Most refined!  Most courteous!  In your
country, sir, does a guest reward his host for hospitality by
talking in a language that his host can't understand?  Perhaps
you would rather transfer your presence to Abdul Ali's house?
Pray do not consider yourself beholden to me, in case you would
prefer his hospitality!"

I tried in vain to pacify him.  I explained that the choice of
language had been Abdul Ali's, and offered to tell him now in
French every word that had passed.  But he would not listen.

"It would not be difficult for a man of your intelligence to make
up a story," he said rudely.

"Abdul Ali can talk French.  If it had been intended that I
should know the truth that conversation would have been in
French.  Shall I send your bag to Abdul Ali's house?"

"No," I said.  "Give it to Anazeh.  He is answerable for
my safety until I reach Palestine again.  Thank you for a
night's lodging."

He walked away in a great huff, and I set out for the house of
Abu Shamah, using my scant store of Arabic to ask the way.
Mahommed ben Hamza was lolling on the stone veranda, gossiping
with half-a-dozen men.  He came the minute I beckoned him.

"I've seen Jimgrim," I said.  "You're to come with me at noon to
the mejlis as my interpreter."

He grinned delightedly.

"And see here, you smelly devil:  Here's money.  Buy yourself a
clean shirt, a new coat, and some soap.  Wash yourself from head
to foot, and put the new clothes on, before you meet me at the
castle gate ten minutes before noon.  Those are Jimgrim's orders,
do you understand?"

"Taht il-amr! (Yours to command)" he answered laughing.

I went and bought myself an awful meal at the house of a man who
rolled Kabobs between his filthy fingers.




Chapter Seven

"Who gives orders to me?"


The wonderful thing about Moab is that everything happens in a
story-book setting, with illustrations by Maxfield Parrish and
Wyeth and Joe Coll, and all the rest of them, whichever way
you look.


Imagine a blue sky--so clear-blue and pure that you can see
against it the very feathers in the tails of wheeling kites, and
know that they are brown, not black.  Imagine all the houses, and
the shacks between them, and the poles on which the burlap
awnings hang, painted on flat canvas and stood up against that
infinite blue.  Stick some vultures in a row along a roof-top--
purplish--bronze they'll look between the tiles and sky.  Add
yellow camels, gray horses, striped robes, long rifles, and a
searching sun-dried smell.  And there you have El-Kerak, from
the inside.

From any point along the broken walls or the castle roof you can
see for fifty miles over scenery invented by the Master-Artist,
with the Jordan like a blue worm in the midst of yellow-and-green
hills twiggling into a turquoise sea.

The villains stalk on-stage and off again sublimely aware of
their setting.  The horses prance, the camels saunter, the very
street-dogs compose themselves for a nap in the golden sun, all
in perfect harmony with the piece.  A woman walking with a stone
jar on her head (or, just as likely, a kerosene can) looks as if
she had just stepped out of eternity for the sake of the picture.
And not all the kings and kaisers, cardinals and courtezans
rolled into one great swaggering splurge of majesty could hold a
candle to a ragged Bedouin chief on a flea-bitten pony, on the
way to a small-town mejlis.

So it was worth a little inconvenience, and quite a little risk
to see those chiefs arrive at the castle gate, toss their reins
to a brother cut-throat, and swagger in, the poorest and least
important timing their arrival, when they could, just in advance
of an important man so as to take precedence of him and delay
his entrance.

Mindful of my charge to keep Anazeh sober, and more deadly afraid
of it than of all the other risks, I hung about waiting for him,
hoping he would arrive before Abdul Ali or ben Nazir.  I wanted
to go inside and be seated before either of those gentry came.
But not a bit of it.  I saw Anazeh ride up at the head of his
twenty men, halt at a corner, and ask a question.  His men were in
military order, and looked not only ready but anxious to charge
the crowd and establish their old chief's importance.

Mahommed ben Hamza, not quite so smelly in his new clothes, was
standing at my elbow.

"Sheikh Anazeh beckons you," he said.

So the two of us worked our way leisurely through the crowd
toward the side-street down which Anazeh had led his party.  We
found them looking very spruce and savage, four abreast, drawn up
in the throat of an alley, old Anazeh sitting his horse at their
head like a symbol of the ancient order waiting to assault the
new.  My horse was close beside him, held by Ahmed, acting
servitor on foot.

The old man let loose the vials of his wrath on me the minute I
drew near, and Mahommed ben Hamza took delicious pleasure in
translating word for word.

"Is that the way an effendi in my care should be seen at such a
time--on foot?  Am I a maskin* that you do not ride?  Is the
horse not good enough?" [*Poor devil]

I made ben Hamza explain that I was to attend the mejlis as
Sheikh Abdul Ali's guest.  But that only increased his wrath.

"So said ben Nazir!  Shall a lousy Damascene trick me out of
keeping my oath?  You are in my safekeeping until you tread on
British soil again, and my honour is concerned in it!  No doubt
that effeminate schemer of schemes would like to display you at
the mejlis as his booty, but you are mine!  Did you think you are
not under obligation to me?"

I answered pretty tactfully.  I said that Allah had undoubtedly
created him to be a protector of helpless wayfarers and the very
guardian of honour.  Mahommed ben Hamza added to the compliments
while rendering mine into Arabic.  But though Anazeh's wrath was
somewhat mollified, he was not satisfied by any means.

"Am I a dog," he demanded, "that I should be slighted for the
sake of that Damascene?"

It looked to me like the proper moment to try out Grim's
magic formula.

"You are the father of lions.  And a lion knows a lion in the
dark!" said I.

The effect was instantaneous.  He puffed his cheeks out in
astonishment, and sucked them in again.  The overbearing anger
vanished as he leaned forward in the saddle to scrutinize my
face.  It was clear that he thought my use of that phrase might
just possibly have been an accident.

"Jimgrim says--"

"Ah!  What says Jimgrim?  Who are you that know where he is?"

"A lion knows a lion in the dark!" I said again, that there might
be no mistake about my having used the words deliberately.

He nodded.

"Praised be Allah!  Blessings upon His Prophet!  What
says Jimgrim?"

"Jimgrim says I am to keep by Anazeh and watch him, lest he drink
strong drink and lose his honour by becoming like a beast without
decency or understanding!"

"Mount your horse, effendi.  Sit beside me."

I complied.  Ben Hamza took the place of Ahmed, who went to the
rear looking rather pleased to get out of the limelight.

"What else says Jimgrim?" asked Anazeh.

"There will be a message presently, providing Sheikh Anazeh
keeps sober!"

To say that I was enjoying the game by this time is like trying
to paint heaven with a tar-brush.  You've got to be on the inside
of an intrigue before you can appreciate the thrill of it.
Nobody who has not had the chance to mystify a leader of cheerful
murderers in a city packed with conspirators, with the shadow of
a vulture on the road in front, and fanged death waiting to be
let loose, need talk to me of excitement.

"Well and good," said Anazeh.  "When Jimgrim speaks, I listen!"

Can you beat that?  Have you ever dreamed you were possessed of
some magic formula like "Open Sesame," and free to work with it
any miracle you choose?  Was the dream good?  I was awake--on a
horse--in a real eastern alley--with twenty thieves as picturesque
as Ali Baba's, itching for action behind me!

"Abdul Ali of Damascus thinks he will enter the mejlis last and
create a great sensation," said Anazeh.  "That son of infamies
deceives himself.  I shall enter last.  I shall bring you.  There
will be no doubt who is important!"

Just as he spoke there clattered down the street at right angles
to us a regular cavalcade of horsemen led by no less than Abdul
Ali with a sycophant on either hand.  Cardinal Wolsey, or some
other wisehead, once remarked that a king is known by the
splendour of his servants.  Abdul Ali's parasites were dressed
for their part in rose-coloured silk and mounted on beautiful
white Arab horses so severely bitted that they could not help
but prance.

Abdul Ali, on the other hand, played more a king-maker's role,
dark and sinister in contrast to their finery, on a dark brown
horse that trotted in a business-like, hurry-up-and-get-it-done-
with manner.  He rode in the German military style, and if you
can imagine the Kaiser in Arab military head-dress, with high
black riding boots showing under a brown cloak, you have his
description fairly closely.  The upturned moustaches and the
scowl increased the suggestion, and I think that was deliberate.

"A dog--offspring of dogs!  Curse his religion and his bed!"
growled Anazeh in my ear.

The old sheikh allowed his enemy plenty of time.  To judge by the
way the men behind us gathered up their reins and closed in knee-
to-knee, they would have liked to spoil Abdul Ali's afternoon by
riding through his procession and breaking its formation.  But
Anazeh had his mind set, and they seemed to know better than to
try to change it for him.  We waited until noises in the street
died down, and then Ahmed was sent to report on developments.

"Abdul Ali has gone into the mejlis and the doors are closed," he
announced five minutes later.  That seemed to suit Anazeh
perfectly, for his eyes lit up with satisfaction.  Evidently
being excluded from the council was his meat and drink.  He gave
no order, but rode forward and his men followed as a snake's tail
follows its head, four abreast, each man holding his rifle as
best suited him;  that gave them a much more warlike appearance
than if they had imitated the western model of exact conformity.

We rode down-street toward the castle at a walk, between very
interested spectators who knew enough to make way without being
told.  And at the castle gate we were challenged by a man on
foot, who commanded about twice our number of armed guards.

"The hour is passed," he announced.  "The order is to admit no
late-comers."

"Who gives orders to me?" Anazeh retorted.

"It was agreed by all the notables."

"I did not agree.  Wallah!  Thou dog of a devil's dung-heap, say
you I am not a notable?"

"Nevertheless--"

"Open that gate!"

They opened it.  Two of the men began to do it even before their
chief gave the reluctant order.  Anazeh started to ride through
with his men crowding behind.  But that, it seemed, was
altogether too much liberty to take with the arrangements.
Shouting all together, the gate-guards surged in to take hold of
bridles and force Anazeh's dependents back.  Teeth and eyes
flashed.  It looked like the makings of a red-hot fight.

"No retainers allowed within the gate!  Principals only!" roared
the captain of the guard, in Arabic that sounded like explosions
of boiling oil.

Anazeh, Mahommed ben Hamza and I were already within the
courtyard.  Four of Anazeh's followers made their way, through
after us before any one could prevent them.  At that moment there
came a tremendous clattering of hoofs and the crowd outside the
gate scattered this and that way in front of about a hundred of
the other chiefs' dependents, who had dutifully stayed outside
and had sought shade some little distance off.

Whether the sudden disturbance rattled him, or whether he
supposed that all the other truculent ruffians were going to try
to follow our example, at any rate the man on duty lost his head
and shouted to his men to shut the gate again.  Before they could
do it every one of Anazeh's gang had forced his way through.
There we all were on forbidden ground, with a great iron-studded
gate slammed and bolted behind us.  To judge by the row outside
the keepers of the gate had got their hands full.

In front of us was a short flight of stone steps, and another
great wooden door set in stone posts under a Roman arch.  There
were only two armed men leaning against it.  They eyed Anazeh and
our numbers nervously.

"Open!"

Anazeh could use his voice like a whip-crack.  They fumbled with
the great bolt and obeyed, swinging the door wide.  I thought for
a minute that my arrogant old protector meant to ride up the
steps and through the door into the mejlis hall with all his men;
but he was not quite so high-handed as that.

After a good long look through the door, I suppose to make sure
there was no ambush inside waiting for him, he dismounted, and
ordered his men to occupy a stable-building across the courtyard,
from which it would have been impossible to dislodge them without
a siege.  Then, when he had seen the last man disappear into it,
he led me and Mahommed ben Hamza up the steps.

Ben Hamza was grinning like a schoolboy, beside himself with
delight at the prospect of elbowing among notables, as well as
inordinately proud of his new clothes and the smell of imported
soap that hung about him like an aura.  But Anazeh looked like an
ancient king entering into his own.  Surely there was never
another man who could stride so majestically and seem so
conscious of his own ability to override all law.

We passed under the shadowy arch and down a cool stone passage to
yet another heavy door that barred our way.  Anazeh thundered on
it with his rifle-butt, for there were no attendants there to do
his bidding.  There was no answer.  Only a murmur of voices
within.  So he thundered again, and this time the door opened
about six inches.  A face peered through the opening cautiously,
and asked what was wanted.

"What is this?" asked Anazeh.  "Is a mejlis held without my
presence?  Since when?"

"You are too late!"

The face disappeared.  Some one tried to close the door.
Anazeh's foot prevented.

"Open!" he demanded.  The butt of his rifle thundered again on
the wood.

There was a babel of voices inside, followed by sudden silence.
Anazeh made a sign to Mahommed ben Hamza and me.  We all three
laid our shoulders against the door and shoved hard.  Evidently
that was not expected;  it swung back so suddenly that we were
hard put to it to keep our feet.  The man who had opened the door
lay prone on the floor in front of us with his legs in the air,
and Anazeh laughed at him--the bitterest sign of disrespect one
Arab can pay to another.

"Since when does the word of a Damascene exclude an honourable
sheikh from a mejlis in El-Kerak?" asked Anazeh, standing in
the doorway.

He was in no hurry to enter.  The dramatic old ruffian understood
too well the value of the impression he made standing there.  The
room was crowded with about eighty men, seated on mats and
cushions, with a piece of carpeted floor left unoccupied all down
the centre--a high-walled room with beautifully vaulted ceiling,
and a mullioned window from which most of the glass was gone.
The walls were partly covered with Persian and other mats, but
there was almost no furniture other than water-pipes and little
inlaid tables on which to rest coffee-cups and matches.  The air
was thick with smoke already, and the draft from the broken
windows wafted it about in streaky clouds.

Every face in the room was turned toward Anazeh.  I kept as much
as possible behind him, for you can't look dignified in that
setting if all you have on is a stained golf suit, that you have
slept in.  It seemed all right to me to let the old sheikh have
all the limelight.

But he knew better.  Perhaps my erstwhile host ben Nazir had
understood a little German after all.  More likely he had divined
Abdul Ali's purpose to make use of me.  Certainly he had poured
the proper poison in Anazeh's ear, and the old man understood my
value to a nicety.

He took me by the arm and led me in, Mahommed ben Hamza following
like a dog that was too busy wagging its tail to walk straight.
You would have thought Anazeh and I were father and son by
the way he leaned toward me and found a way for me among the
crowded cushions.

He had no meek notions about choosing a low place.  Expecting to
be taken at his own valuation, he chose a high place to begin
with.  There were several unoccupied cushions near the door, and
there were half-a-dozen servants busy in a corner with coffee-
pots and cakes.  He prodded one of the servants and ordered him
to take two cushions to a place he pointed out, up near the
window close to Abdul Ali.  There was no room there.  That
was the seat of the mighty.  You could not have dropped a
handkerchief between the men who wanted to be nearest the throne
of influence.  But Anazeh solved that riddle.  He strode, stately
and magnificent, up the middle of the carpet amid a mutter of
imprecations.  And when one more than ordinarily indignant sheikh
demanded to know what he meant by it, he paused in front of him
and laid his right hand on my shoulder.  (There was a loaded
rifle in his left.)

"Who offers indignity to a distinguished guest?" he demanded.

The question was addressed to everybody in the room.  He took
care they were all aware of it.  His stern eyes traveled from
face to face.

"My men, who escorted him here, are outside the door.  They can
enter and escort him away, if there are none here who understand
how to treat the stranger in our midst!"

There was goose-flesh all over me, and I did not even try to look
unembarrassed.  A man's wits, if he has any, work swiftly when he
looks like being torn to pieces at a moment's notice.  It seemed
to me that the less insolent I appeared, the less likely they
were to vent their wrath on me.  I tried to look as if I didn't
understand I was intruding--as if I expected a welcome.

"Good!" Anazeh whispered in my ear.  "You do well."

There was a murmur of remonstrance.  The sheikh who had dared to
rebuke Anazeh found the resentment turned against himself.
Somebody told him sharply to mend his manners.  Anazeh, shrewd
old opportunist, promptly directed the servant to place cushions
on the edge of the carpet, in front of the first row of those
who wished to appear important.  That obliged the front rank
to force the men behind them backward, closer to the wall, so
that room could be made for us without our trespassing on the
forbidden gangway.

So I sat down in the front row, five cushions from Abdul Ali.
Anazeh squatted beside me with his rifle across his knees.  Then
Mahommed ben Hamza forced himself down between me and the man on
my left, using his left elbow pretty generously and making the
best of the edges of two cushions.  As far as I could see there
were not more than half-a-dozen other men in the room who had
rifles with them, although all had daggers, and some wore curved
scimitars with gold-inlaid hilts.

As soon as I could summon sufficient nerve to look about me and
meet the brown, conjecturing eyes that did not seem to know
whether to resent my presence or be simply curious, I caught the
eye of Suliman ben Saoud in the front row opposite, ten or twelve
cushions nearer the door than where I sat.  He did not seem to
notice me.  The absence of eyebrows made his face expressionless.
He didn't even vaguely resemble the Major James Grim whom I knew
him to be.  When his eyes met mine there was no symptom of
recognition.  If he felt as nervous as I did he certainly did not
show it behind his mask of insolent indifference.

There was still a good deal of muttered abuse being directed at
Anazeh.  The atmosphere was electric.  It felt as if violence
might break out any minute.  Abdul Ali seemed more nervous than
any one else;  he rocked himself gently on his cushion, as if
churning the milk of desire into the butter of wise words.
Suddenly he turned to the sheikh on his left, a handsome man of
middle age, who wore a scimitar tucked into a gold-embroidered
sash, and whispered to him.

Ben Hamza whispered to me:  "That sheikh to whom Abdul Ali speaks
is Ali Shah al Khassib, the most powerful sheikh in these parts.
A great prince.  A man with many followers."

Ali Shah al Khassib called for prayer to bring the mejlis to
order.  He was immensely dignified.  The few words he pronounced
about asking God to bless the assembled notables with wisdom, in
order that they might reach a right decision, would have been
perfectly in place in the Capitol at Washington, or anywhere else
where men foregather to decide on peace or war.

At once a muballir* on his left opened a copy of the Koran on a
cushion on his lap and began to read from it in a nasal singsong.
There were various degrees of devoutness, and even of inattention
shown by those who listened.  Some knelt and prostrated
themselves.  Others, including Anazeh, sat bolt upright, closing
their eyes dreamily at intervals.  Over the way, Jim Suliman ben
Saoud Grim was especially formally devout.  His very life
undoubtedly depended on being recognized as a fanatic of
fanatics. [*A Moslem priest who recites prayers.]

But there were three Christian sheikhs in the room.  One of them
opposite me pulled out a Bible and laid it on the carpet as a
sort of challenge to the Koran.  It was probably a dangerous
thing to do, although most Moslems respect the Bible as a very
sacred book.  The manner in which it was done suggested
deliberate effort to provoke a quarrel.

Mahommed ben Hamza, dividing his time like a schoolboy in chapel
between staring about him and attending by fits and starts,
nudged me in the ribs and whispered:

"See that Christian!  He would not dare do that, only on this
occasion they like to think that Moslems and Christians are
agreeing together."

The man who was reading to himself from the Bible looked up and
caught my eye.  He tapped the book with his finger and nodded, as
much as to ask why I did not join him.  At once I pulled my own
from my pocket.  He smiled acknowledgment as I opened it at
random.  Certainly he thought I did it to support his tactlessly
ill-timed assertion of his own religion.  Very likely my action,
since I was a guest and therefore not to be insulted, saved
him from violence.  Incipient snarls of fanatical indignation
died away.

But as a matter of fact my eye was on Jim Suliman ben Saoud Grim.
As the reading from the Koran came to an end amid a murmur of
responses from all the sheikhs, the crooked-faced Ichwan sat
upright.  In his sullen, indifferent way, he stared leisurely
along the line until his eyes rested on me.

As his eyes met mine I marked the place where the Bible was open
with a pencil, and closed the book, suspecting that he might be
glad to know where a pencil could be found in a contingency.

He did not smile.  The expression of his face barely changed.
Just for a second I thought I saw a flicker of amused approval
pass over the corners of his eyes and mouth.

So I left the book lying where it was with the pencil folded
in it.




Chapter Eight

"He will say next that it was he who set the stars in the sky
over El-Kerak, and makes the moon rise!"


Ali Shah al Khassib was the first to speak.  He was heard to the
end respectfully, none interrupting.  But it seemed obvious from
their faces that not a few sheikhs were disposed to question both
his leadership and most of what he said.  Mahommed ben Hamza kept
up a running whisper of interpretation, breathing into my ear
until it was wet with condensed breath.  I had to use a
handkerchief repeatedly.

Ali Shah al Khassib made no definite proposal.  He said that a
man whom they all knew well had brought news to the effect that
Emir Feisul was ready to make war on the French in order to drive
them out of Syria.  That in a case like that, of Moslems against
kafirs,* there could be no question on which side their hearts or
their interests lay.  That several dependable men had brought
word of great unrest in Palestine.  That in all likelihood the
British would send their army to help the French, in which case
the Arabs of Palestine were likely to rise in rebellion in the
British army's rear.  That was the situation.  They were invited
to consider it, and to decide what action, if any, seemed called
for. [*Unbelievers.]

He sat down without having risked his leadership by any statement
of his own attitude.  He had simply reported facts that he
believed to be true--facts that many of the notables plainly did
not yet believe, or believed only in part.  There followed a
perfect babel of argument, during which the servants passed the
coffee and cakes around.  After that, during every interval
between speeches there was more coffee and more cakes--wonderful
cakes made with honey and almonds, immensely filling;  but the
more full an Arab gets of stodgy food the more his tongue wags,
until at last he talks himself to sleep.

For ten minutes men were shouting their opinions to one another
to and fro across the room.  From what I could make of it there
was not a man who did not advocate putting the whole of Palestine
to the sword forthwith.  But it was noticeable that when their
turns came to stand up and address the mejlis their advocacy was
considerably toned down.  Everybody seemed to want somebody else
to father the proposal for a raid, although every man pretended
to be anxious to take part in one.

Old Anazeh on my right sat in grim silence, quizzing each talker
in turn with puckered eyes.  The only comment he made was a sort
of internal rumbling, suggestive of the preliminary notice of
an earthquake.

At the end of ten minutes Sheikh Ali Shah al Khassib brought
proceedings a step forward by calling for confirmation of the
news of unrest in Palestine.  Man after man got up, and, since he
was speaking of others, not of himself, painted the discontent of
the Palestinians in lurid terms.  Each man tried to outvie the
other.  The first man said they were anxious regarding the
Zionists and keen for a solution of the problem.  The second said
they hated the Zionists, and could see no way out of their
predicament but by rebellion.  The third said that no Arab in
Palestine could eat for thinking of the Zionist outrage, and that
the heart of every man in El-Kerak should bleed for his
distressed brethren.

To judge by what the fourth and fifth and sixth said, Palestine
was in a state of scarcely suppressed rebellion, and every living
Arab in the country was sharpening his sword in secret for the
butchering of Zionists at the first opportunity.  The seventh man
said that the Palestine Arabs had never under Turkish rule
suffered and groaned as they did under the British, and that
their cry was going up to heaven for relief from the ignominious
tyranny of Zionist pretensions.

Ali Shah al Khassib chose that ringing appeal as the cue for his
next move in the game.  He called on Sheikh Abdul Ali, "as well
known in Damascus as in this place," to address the mejlis.

There was instant silence.  Even the coffee cups ceased rattling.
Abdul Ali got to his feet with the manner of a man long used to
swaying assemblies.  He had just the right air of authority;
exactly the right suggestion of deference;  the quiet smile of
the man with secrets up his sleeve;  and he paused just long
enough before speaking to whet curiosity and fix attention.

He did not speak floridly or fast, and he indulged in none of
those flights of oratory that most Arabs love.  There was ample
time between his sentences for Mahommed ben Hamza to translate
into my wet and itching ear.  But every sentence of his speech
had measured weight in it, and every word he used was chosen for
its poison or its sting.

He began by reminding them of the war and of Emir Feisul's share
in it.  Of how they, and their fathers, and their sons had fought
behind Feisul and helped to establish him in Damascus.  Then he
spoke of the British promise that the Arabs' should have a
kingdom of their own, with Damascus for its capital and borders
to include all the peoples of Arab blood in the Near East.  He
paused for a full minute after that.  Then:

"But the French are in Syria.  The French, who also promised us
an Arab kingdom.  They have assembled at the coast an army that
already threatens Emir Feisul.  The British are in Palestine,
where they are admitting a horde of Zionist Jews to displace us
Arabs, rightful owners of the soil.  The British are also in
Mesopotamia, which they have seized for themselves for the sake
of the oil which Allah, in His wisdom, created beneath the
fertile earth.  Feisul makes ready to defend Syria against the
French.  But the British will march to the aid of the French.
Can anybody tell me how much of that promise to us Arabs has been
kept, by either nation, French or British?"

So far he was on thoroughly safe ground.  A man who preached
against the French could hardly be suspected of being hired by
the French to do it.  There was nobody there but he who could say
what Feisul's intentions actually were.  You can say what you
like against the British anywhere, at any time, and find some one
to believe what you say.  And it needed no wizardry to prove that
the Allies had broken every promise they ever made to the Arabs.

"Are you going to sit idle, and let Emir Feisul and the Syrians
fight the French alone?" he asked, and paused again.

There was a great deal of murmuring--not quite all of it, I
thought, entirely in his favour.

"What is the alternative to sitting still like camels waiting to
be doubly burdened?  If you raid Palestine, the local Arabs will
all rise to your assistance.  The throat of every Zionist from
the Lebanon to Beersheba will be cut.  There will be plunder
beyond reckoning.  And you will help Feisul by holding back the
British army from marching to the assistance of the French.  The
question is, are you men?--are you Arabs?--are you true Moslems?
--or do you like to look down from these heights of El-Kerak over
the home of your ancestors in the hands of so-called Zionists who
are nothing but Jews, under a new name?"

He sat down before any one could answer him, and whispered to Ali
Shah al Khassib, who called on another man to speak at once.  It
was a pretty obvious piece of concerted strategy, but he got by
with it for the moment.  The general feeling seemed to be in
favour of a raid if only some one would start it.  Nobody seemed
to mind much how the decision was arrived at, so long as the
responsibility was passed to some one else.

The man now called on was a smooth-tongued, tall, lean individual
with shifty eyes, and a flow of talk of the coffeeshop variety.
At the end of his first sentence any fool would have known that
he had been put up to quiz Abdul Ali, in order that Abdul Ali
might have an excuse to justify himself.  He attacked him very
mildly, with much careful hedging and apologetic gesture, on the
ground that possibly the Damascene was ignoring their interests
while urging them to take action that would suit his own.

Even with that mild criticism he set loose quite a murmur of
minority agreement.  For the first time since the speech-making
began Anazeh barked approval.  I thought for a moment the old man
was going to get to his feet.  But Abdul Ali was up again first,
and launched on the seas of self-esteem.

If I had not listened to equally childish political maneuvers in
the States, and seen them succeed for the reason that people who
want something want also to be fooled into getting it by special
arguments, it would have seemed incredible that a man, who had
recently boasted of statesmanship, should dare to make such a
public ass of himself.  Yet, for fifteen minutes he carried the
whole meeting with him, and the warmth of his self-satisfied
emotion made him ooze resplendent sweat.

"Now he speaks of you, effendi," Mahommed ben Hamza whispered;
and in confirmation of it Anazeh clutched my arm, as if to keep
the tide of eloquence from washing me away.

Had the British done anything for the country this side of
Jordan?  Anything for the people's education, for instance?  No!
Instead, they had taken away the missionaries.  Better than
nothing were those missionaries.  They had their faults.  They
undermined religion.  But they taught.  And the British had
called them in, giving some ridiculous excuse about danger.  It
had remained then for him--Abdul Ali of Damascus and of El-Kerak
--the same individual who was now urging them to strike for their
own advantage--to take the first step for the establishment in
El-Kerak of a school that should be independent of the British.
He, Abdul Ali, greatly daring because he had the interest of El-
Kerak at heart, had introduced that day into the mejlis a
distinguished guest from the United States, whose sole desire--
whose only object in life--whose altruistic and divine ambition
was to establish an American secular school in El-Kerak!

He sat down, glowing with super-virtue.  And then the fur flew.
Anazeh was first on his feet.

"Princes!" he shouted.  "That Damascene is a father of lies!  It
was I, Anazeh, who brought this man hither!  That corrupter of
honesty, who doles out other people's gold for bidden purposes,
seeks to appear as your benefactor!"  (It was fairly obvious that
Anazeh had not received any of the gold.)  "He will say next that
it was he who set the stars in the sky over El-Kerak, and makes
the moon rise!  He is a foreigner, a father of snakes, and a
born liar!"

Anazeh refused to sit down again, but stood with rifle on his
arm, daring any one to challenge his statements.  Abdul Ali
flushed angrily, but laughed aloud.  The next man on his feet was
ben Nazir, my erstwhile host, who had repudiated me.  And he
repudiated me all over again, accusing me of abusing his
hospitality by going over to Abdul Ali, who had never even heard
of me before I came to El-Kerak.

There was no making head or tail of the storm of abuse and
counter-abuse that followed, except that it did not look healthy
for me.  There seemed to be four or five different factions, all
of whom regarded me as the bone of contention.  Rather than
betray anxiety I opened the Bible and began to make dots under
letters, spelling out a message to Grim to the effect that I had
no notion where to find lodgings for the night, and that if
Anazeh elected to carry me off I should have to go with him.

I did not know how to get the message to him without arousing
suspicion and making matters worse than they were, and it seemed
best not to call attention to the fact that I was writing.  So I
made a few dots at a time, and looked about me.  I saw Abdul Ali,
laughing cynically, make a gesture with his arm as if he
consigned me to the dogs.  Then I caught Grim's eye--Suliman ben
Saoud's.  He, too, was making capital of my predicament.

He had got the attention of the men around him, and was pointing
at the Bible while he reeled off a string of an angry rhetoric
that sounded like a cat-fight.  He shouted at me, and made angry
gestures;  but I knew that if he wanted me to understand his
signals he would never make them openly, so I ignored them.

"The sheikh from Arabia demands to see the book," said Mahommed
ben Hamza in my ear.

I passed it over the carpet with the pencil folded in it at the
page I had begun to mark;  and the men opposite handed it along,
with remarks they considered appropriate.  Jim Suliman ben Saoud
Grim seized the book angrily, glared at it, denounced it, and
wrote something on the fly-leaf.  He showed it to the men beside
him, and they laughed, nodding approval.  He wrote again.  They
approved again.  He turned and talked to them.  Then, as if he
had an afterthought, he wrote a third time.  When they wanted to
look at that he ran the pencil through it and wrote something
else on the other side of the fly-leaf, at which they all
laughed uproariously.  Presently he tossed the book back to me
with all the outward signs of contempt that a fanatic can show
for another religion.

I have kept that Bible as a souvenir, with the verses from the
Koran written on the flyleaf in Arabic in Grim's fine hand.
Underneath them, in Greek characters with a pencil line scrawled
through them, is the only sentence that interested me at the
moment:

"This looks good.  Keep Anazeh quiet and sober."

Anazeh was beginning to hold forth again, shaking his fist
at Abdul Ali and making the roof echo to his mighty bellowing.
I tugged at the skirt of his cloak, and after a minute he
sat down to discover what I wanted.  He seemed to think I
needed reassurance.  He began to flood me with promises of
protection.  It was about a minute before I could get a word
in edgeways.  Then:

"Jimgrim says," said I.

"Jimgrim!  Is he here?"

"He surely is."

"How do you know?"

"We have a sign. Jimgrim says, 'Be quiet, and drink no
strong drink.'"

He leaned across to Mahommed ben Hamza, doubting his ears and my
Arabic.  I repeated the message, and ben Hamza translated.

"I don't believe Jimgrim is here!" said Anazeh.  "I would know
him among a million."

"It is true," said ben Hamza, grinning from ear to ear, "for I
myself know where he sits!"

"Where then?" Anazeh demanded excitedly.

"Don't you dare!" said I, and ben Hamza grinned again.

"He is my friend.  I say nothing," he answered.

Anazeh put in the next five minutes minutely examining every face
within range, while the din of argument rose louder and more
violent than ever, and suspicion of me seemed to be gaining.

But suddenly Suliman ben Saoud got to his feet and there was
silence.  They were all willing to listen to a member of the
Ichwan sect, for the news of its power and political designs had
spread wherever men talk Arabic.  He spoke gutturally in a
dialect that ben Hamza did not find it any too easy to follow, so
I only got the general gist of Grim's remarks.

He said that he had much experience of raids and of making
preparations for them.  A raid aimed at the Zionists--at this
moment--might be good--perhaps.  They were better judges of that
than he.  But it was all-important to know who was in favour of
the raid, and exactly why.  The words men spoke were not nearly
so impressive as the deeds they did.  Therefore, when the
illustrious Sheikh Abdul Ali of Damascus urged a raid on the one
hand, and boasted of provision for a school in El-Kerak on the
other, it would be well to examine this foreign effendi,   whom
Abdul Ali claimed to have introduced.  The claim was disputed,
but the claim was not made for nothing.  In his judgment, based
on vast experience of politics in Arabia, motives were seldom on
the surface.  All depended on the motives of the illustrious
Abdul Ali.  This stranger from America--he glared balefully at
me--should be investigated thoroughly.  As a man of vast
experience with the interests of El-Islam at heart, he offered
respectfully to examine this stranger thoroughly with the aid of
an interpreter.  He confessed to certain suspicions;  should they
prove unfounded, then it might be reasonable to credit the rest
of Abdul Ali's statements;  if not, no.  He was willing, if the
honourable mejlis saw fit, to take the stranger aside and put
many questions to him.

When he had finished you could actually physically feel the
suspicion directed at me.  It was like a cold wind.  Anazeh was
just as conscious of it, and muttered something about its being
time to go.  Abdul Ali got up and asked indignantly why the
Ichwan from so far away should have such an important voice;  he
himself stood there ready to answer all questions.  Suliman ben
Saoud retorted sourly that he proposed to question the Damascene
in public after privately interrogating me.

"They shall not interfere with you!  You are in my charge,"
Anazeh growled in my ear.  "I will summon my men at the
first excuse."

"Jimgrim says, 'Be quiet!'" I answered.

There was another uproar.  Ali Shah al Khassib openly took the
part of Abdul Ali.  A dozen men demanded to know how much he had
been paid to do it.  Finally, Suliman ben Saoud beckoned me.  I
got up, and with Mahommed ben Hamza at my heels I followed him to
a narrow door in a side wall that opened on a stone stairway
leading to the ramparts.  Anazeh' came too, growling like a
hungry bear, and after a couple of blood-curdling threats hurled
at Suliman ben Saoud's back he took up position in the open door,
facing the crowd, and dared any one to try to follow.  He seemed
to have confidence in Mahommed ben Hamza's ability to protect me,
if necessary, on the roof.

The roof and ramparts appeared deserted.  They were in the
ruinous state to which the Turks reduce everything by sheer
neglect, and in which Arabs, blaming the Turks, seemed quite
disposed to leave things.  The Ichwan led the way to the
southwest corner, peering about him to make sure no guards were
in hiding, or asleep behind projecting buttresses.  Overhead the
kites were wheeling against a pure blue sky.  The Dead Sea lay
and smiled below us, with the gorgeous, treeless Judean Hills
beyond.  Through the broken window of the hall came the clamour
of arguing men.

"O, Jimgrim!" grinned Mahommed ben Hamza when we reached
the corner.

Grim turned and faced us with folded arms, leaning his back
against the parapet.

Ben Hamza continued:  "You are a very prince of dare-devils!  One
word from me--one little word, and they would fling you down into
the moat for the vultures to feed on!"

"I remember a time," Grim answered, "when a word from me saved
you from hanging."

"True, father of good fortune!  But a man must laugh.  I
will hold my tongue in El-Kerak like a tomb that has not
been plundered!"

"You'd better!  You've work to do.  Where are your men?"

"All where I can find them."

"Good.  You'll get turned out of the mejlis presently.  Look down
into the moat now."

We all peered over.  The lower ramp of the wall sloped steeply,
but all the way up the sharp southwest corner the stones were
broken out, and a goat, or a very active man could find foothold.

"Could you climb that?"

"Surely.  Remember, Jimgrim, when I climbed the wall of El-Kudz
(Jerusalem) to escape from the police!"

"Bring your men into the moat between dark and moonrise.  Have a
long rope with you--a good one.  You and two men climb up here
and hide.  The remainder wait below.  Oh, yes;  and bring a wheat
sack--a new, strong one.  You may have to wait for several hours.
When you see me, take your cue from me;  but whatever happens, no
murder!  You understand?  Nobody's to be killed."

Ben Hamza grinned and nodded.  He seemed to be one of those good-
natured rogues who ask nothing better than the sheer sport of
lawless hero-worship.  He would have made a perfect chief of
staff for any brigand, provided the brigand took lots of chances.

"You'll be killed, if anybody finds you up here after dark!  You
realize that?"

"Trust me."

Grim nodded.  He was good at trusting people, when he had to, and
when the selection was his own.

"Affairs seem to be drifting nicely," he said, turning to me.
"It's best not to let Anazeh know who I am just yet, if that can
be helped.  But if you must, when the time comes, you'll have to
tell him.  Do keep him sober.  After the evening prayer there'll
be a banquet;  if he gets drunk we're done for.  I'm going to
make you out an awful leper, if you don't mind.  They may yell
for your hide and feathers before I've finished, but Anazeh will
protect you.  If he leaves the hall in a huff, don't make any
bones about going with him.  Let him ride out of town and wait
for me about two miles down the track, at the point where that
tomb stands above a narrow pass between two big rocks.  Do you
remember it?"

"What if he won't wait?"

"He must!  Tell him I'll have a prisoner with me;  then he'll be
curious.  But you can bet on old Anazeh when he's sober.  But
things may turn out so that it's simpler for you to stay and see
this through with me.  In that case you must persuade him to go
without you, after explaining to him just where he's to wait."

"How shall I do that?" I said. "I haven't enough Arabic."

"I'll write it," he answered.  "Give me that pencil."

"Say something, too, then about his keeping sober."

Grim nodded, and wrote quite a long letter in Arabic on a page of
my notebook.

"The next move," he said, as I pocketed the letter, "is for me to
get Abdul Ali's goat:  I think--and I hope--he'll try to bribe
me.  If he does, he's my meat!  The whole question of raid or no
raid hangs on their confidence in him.  If I throw suspicion on
him, and he disappears directly afterwards, they'll abandon the
plan, confiscate his goods and chattels, and quarrel among
themselves instead of raiding Palestine.  Get me?"

"Um-n-yes.  I've sat on a horse I was warned against--felt
safer--and gone to hospital at that."

He laughed.

"No hospitals up here!  It'll be soon over if they get wise to
us.  But I think we're all right;  and you're almost certainly
safe.  But don't be tempted to talk.  Well--we've been up here
long enough for me to have put you through the third degree.
Better look a bit uncomfortable as you go down, as if I'd got
under your skin with some awkward questions.  You, too, ben
Hamza;  don't grin;  look afraid."

"I am not at all afraid, Jimgrim.  But I will try."

Grim studied for a moment.

"Don't forget," he added, "at the first suggestion that you're
not wanted, make yourself scarce, and go and round up your men.
If you're thrown out pretty roughly, keep your temper and run."

"Taht il-amr!" (Yours to command.)

"Come on, then.  Let's go."

The sun was fairly low over the Judean Hills as we turned down
the narrow stairs and found Anazeh waiting at the bottom.





Chapter Nine

"Feet downwards, too afraid to yell!"--


Abdul Ali of Damascus was holding the floor again when we
returned.  He had abandoned the cold air of mysterious authority
and secrets in reserve.  His claim to backstairs influence having
been challenged, he had resorted to the emotional appeal that is
the simplest means of controlling any crowd of men anywhere.  The
demagog who can find a million men all responsive to the same
emotion can swing them as easily as a hundred if he knows his
business.  Loot was the tune he harped, with the old Ishmael
blood-lust by way of obbligato.

He had them by the heart-strings, and there were long-necked
bottles of liquor that smelt of aniseed being passed from hand to
hand.  We returned to our places almost unnoticed, and within the
minute some one handed a full bottle to Anazeh;  the accompanying
cup was big enough to hold any ordinary drunkard's breakfast, and
the old sheikh's eyes admired the size of it.

I laid my hand on the wrist that held the bottle.  He shook it
off angrily, and began to pour.  Grim, over the way, looked
anxious.  It was up to me to play this hand, so I led my ace
of trumps.

Suddenly, and very clumsily, I rocked sideways to reach my hip-
pocket, contriving to jog his elbow and spill what was already in
the cup.  He turned his head to curse savagely, and I showed him
the folded sheet from my notebook.  His name was on it in Arabic:

"Sheikh Anazeh ben Mahmoud, from Jimgrim."

He seized it, setting the bottle down between his feet, where it
was instantly reached for by some one else and handed down the
line.  Reading was evidently not Anazeh's favorite amusement, but
he knitted his brows over the letter and wrestled with it word by
word, while Abdul Ali's fiery declamation made the vaulted roof
resound.  I could only make out snatches of the appeal to
savagery--a word and a sentence here and there.

"Who are you, princes?  Men with swords, or slaves who must
obey?--Raid over the Jordan twenty thousand strong!--What are
Jews?  Shall Jews take the home of your ancestors?  Who says so?
--Let the Jews be buried in the land they come to steal!--You say
the Jews are cleverer than you.  Cut their heads off, then they
cannot think!"

"When did Jimgrim give you this?" Anazeh demanded, folding the
letter and stowing it in his bosom.

"That is the message that I told you would come later if
you waited."

"Do you know what is in the message?"

"No."  That was perfectly true.  I had talked with Grim, but had
not read what he had written.

"He wishes me to go and wait for him in a certain place"

"Why not do it?"

"Rubbama." (Perhaps.)

"True-believers!  Followers of the Prophet!  Sons of warrior
kings!" thundered Abdul Ali.  "Will you do nothing to help
Feisul, a lineal descendant of the Prophet?  You have helped him
to a throne.  Now strike to hold him there!"

"Jimgrim says, I may go away and leave you here," growled Anazeh.
"What say you?"

"Ala khatrak. (Please yourself.)  Jimgrim is wise."

"He is the father of wisdom.  Mashallah!  I will consider it.
There will be a banquet presently!"

"And loot!  You can help yourselves!" shouted Abdul Ali of
Damascus.  Then he sat down amid a storm of applause.  Suliman
ben Saoud--Jimgrim--was on his feet before the tumult died away,
and again they grew perfectly still to listen to him.  If an
Arab loves anything under heaven more than his own style of
fighting, it is the action and reaction of debate.  I could
not understand a word of the mid-Arabian dialect, but Abdul
Ali's retorts were plain enough;  and from the way that Grim
pointed at me and Mahommed ben Hamza it was fairly easy to
follow what was happening.

He denounced me as possibly dangerous, and wondered why they
permitted me to have an interpreter, who could whisper to me
everything that was being said.

"Put out the interpreter!" sneered Abdul Ali, and there was a
chorus of approval.   Mahommed ben Hamza got up and hurried for
the door while the hurrying was good and painless to himself,
though it was hardly that to other people;  forcing his way
between the close-packed notables he kicked more than one of them
pretty badly and grinned when they cursed him.  I saw Abdul Ali
of Damascus whisper to one of his rose-coloured parasites, who
got up at once and made his way toward the door, too.

"The fellow is from Hebron," Abdul Ali sneered in a voice loud
enough for all to hear.  "It is best that he should not go back
to Hebron to tell tales!  I have attended to it."

My blood ran cold.  I tried to catch Grim's eye, but he would not
look in my direction.  I wondered whether he had heard Abdul
Ali's threat.  It seemed to me that if Mahommed ben Hamza were
either murdered or imprisoned Grim's whole chance of success was
gone.  The danger would be multiplied tenfold.  Anazeh seemed the
only remaining hope.  The old-rose individual who followed ben
Hamza had not reached the door yet.

"How about your men?" I asked.

"They are all right." Anazeh's eyes pursued the liquor bottle.

"Why not go and see?" I suggested.

"Ilhamdul'illah, they are good men.  I know them.  If there is
trouble they will come and tell me."

The door opened softly.  The gorgeous old-rose parasite slipped
through.  I had a mental vision of Mahommed ben Hamza lying face-
downward with his new coat stained with blood.  There was nothing
for it, it seemed, but the magic formula to move Anazeh.

"Jimgrim says, 'See that ben Hamza gets safely away!"'

"Dog of a Hebron tanner's son--let him die!  What is that to me?"

"It is Jimgrim's command."

"Wallahi haida fasl! (By God, this is a strange affair!)  Wait
here!"

Old Anazeh, with the name of the Prophet of God on his lips, cast
an envious glare at the bottle of liquor and seized action by the
forelock.  There was nothing to excite comment in his getting up
to leave the room.  A dozen men had done that and come in again.
He strode out, straight down the middle of the carpet.  Suliman
ben Saoud--Jimgrim--went on talking, and to judge by Abdul Ali of
Damascus' increasingly restless retorts he was getting that
gentleman's goat as promised.  Finally Abdul Ali got to his feet
and said that if the Ichwan would see him alone he would show him
certain documents that would satisfy him, but that it would not
be policy to produce them in public.  He offered to send for the
documents, and to show them during or after the banquet.

So Jimgrim sat down, and there was a good deal of quiet nudging
and nodding.  Every one seemed to understand that the Ichwan was
going to be bribed;  they seemed to admire his ability to get for
himself a share of the funds that most of them had tapped.

A man nearly opposite me leaned over and said in fairly good
French, with the manner of a doctor assuring his patient that the
worst is yet to come:

"It has been decided that you are to be detained here in the castle
until there is no danger of your carrying away important news."

While I was turning that over in my mind Anazeh came back,
grinning.  Something outside had tickled him immensely, but he
would not say anything.  He sat down beside me and chuckled into
his beard;  and when his neighbour on the right asked what had
amused him he turned the question into a bawdy joke.

"Did ben Hamza get away?" I whispered.

He only nodded.  He continued chuckling until the man on duty by
the door announced to the "assembled lords and princes" that the
muezzin summoned them to prayer.  All except three Christian
sheikhs trooped up the narrow stairway in Ali Shah al Khassib's
wake, Anazeh going last with a half-serious joke about not caring
to be stabbed in the back.

I expected the three non-Moslems would take advantage of the
opportunity to ask me a string of questions.  But they took
exactly the opposite view of the situation.  They avoided me,
withdrawing into a corner by themselves.  I suppose they
thought that to be seen talking to me was more risky than the
amusement merited.

So I went up to the ramparts, too, to watch the folk at prayer,
minded to keep out of sight, for they don't like being regarded
as a curious spectacle;  and on the way up I did something that
may have had a lot to do with our getting away alive, although I
did not give much thought to it and could hardly have explained
my motive at the time.

The door at the foot of the stairs opened inward.  It was almost
exactly the same width as the stairway, so that when it stood
wide open you could not have put your hand between its edge and
the stairway wall.  Lying on the floor of the hall within a few
feet of the nearest corner was a length of good sound olive-wood,
about three inches in thickness, roughly squared and not
particularly squared.  Having stepped on it accidentally, I
picked it up, and discovered more by accident than intention that
it was longer than the width of the stairway.  Then I noticed a
notch in the stairway wall.  Behind the opened door there was a
deeper notch in the opposite wall.  There was no lock on the
door, no bolt.  That length of wood had been cut to fit
horizontally from notch to notch across the passage.  Once that
beam was fitted in its place, whoever wished to reach the roof
would have to burn or batter down the door.  I moved the door and
placed the length of olive-wood on end behind it.

I found the view from the ramparts much more interesting than the
soul-saving formalities of eighty or so potential cut-throats.
While they prayed I stood watching the shadows deepen in the
Jordan Valley, as no doubt Joshua once watched them from
somewhere near that same spot before he marshalled his invading
host.  You could understand why people who had wandered forty
years in a stark and howling wilderness should yearn for those
coloured, fertile acres between the Jordan and the sea:  why they
should be willing to fight for them, die for them, do anything
rather than turn back.

By the time we had filed down--Anazeh last again--the servants
had nearly finished spreading a banquet.  What looked like bed-
sheets had been laid along the strip of carpet, and, the whole
length of them was piled with all imaginable things to eat, from
cakes and fruit to whole sheep roasted and seethed in camel's
milk and honey.  There were no less than six sheep placed at
intervals along the "table," with mountains of rice, scow-loads
of apricots cooked in various ways, and a good sized flock of
chickens spitted and smeared with peppery sauce.  At a guess, I
should say there were several pounds of meat, about two chickens,
and a peck of rice per man, with apricots and raisins added;  but
they faced the prospect like heroes.

Perhaps what helped them face it was the sight of sundry bottles
bearing labels more familiar in the West.  Abdul Ali of Damascus,
licking his lips like a cat that smells canary, took his place on
a cushion up near the window again on the right of Ali Shah al
Khassib, who was only the nominal host.  Abdul Ali left no doubt
in anybody's mind as to who was paying for the feast.  It was he
who gave orders to the servants in a bullying tone of voice;  he
who begged every one be seated.

Anazeh looked at the bottles of brandy--looked at me--and prayed
under his breath;  or, at any rate, it looked and sounded like a
prayer.  He may have been swearing.  He and I were not very far
from the door;  the seats near the head of the table had all been
taken.  I sat down at once, so as not to be conspicuous, but
Anazeh remained standing so long that at last Abdul Ali called to
him to sit down and eat his fill, using the offensively
magnanimous tone of voice that some men can achieve without an
effort.  I think Anazeh had been waiting for just that opening.

"I have twenty men outside," he announced.  "Shall I eat, and
not they?"

"This is a feast for notables," said Abdul Ali.

"A little bread with my own men is better than meat and drink at
a traitor's table," Anazeh answered. "Wallahi! (By God!)  I go to
eat with honest men!"  He laid a hand on my head.  "Ye have said
this effendi must stay in the castle.  Well and good.  Whoever
harms him or offers him indignity shall answer to me and my men
for it!"  He bowed to me like a king taking leave of his court.
"Lailtak sa'idi.  Allah yifazak, effendi!" (Good night. God keep
you, effendi!)  With that he stalked out, and the door slammed
shut behind him.  Everybody, including Abdul Ali, laughed.

The banquet was a boresome business--an interminable competition
to see who could eat and drink the most.  With my interpreter
gone, and everybody else too busy guzzling to trouble to speak
distinctly for my benefit, I had to depend on my ayes for
information and naturally used them to the utmost.  I noticed
that Abdul All of Damascus, Jimgrim Suliman ben Saoud and myself
were the only men in the room, servants included, who ate and
drank within the bounds of decency and reason.  One of the
servants, walking up and down the table-cloth with brandy and
relays of vegetables, was drunk very early in the game and had to
be thrown out.

Abdul Ali kept conversation going on the subject of the raid.
The more the brandy bottles circulated the easier he found it to
keep enthusiasm burning.  He talked about me, too, several times,
and every time that subject cropped up all eyes turned in my
direction.  I think he was making the most of the school idea,
mixing up the raid with education and serving the mixture hot, as
it were, with brandy sauce.

But over the way, about half-way down the table, the Ichwan
Suliman ben Saoud, dead-cold-sober and abstemious, as befitted a
fanatic, was talking, too.  He was quite evidently talking
against Abdul Ali, so that the Damascene kept looking at him with
a troubled expression.  He glanced frequently at the door, too,
as if he expected some one who could put an end to Suliman ben
Saoud's intrigue.

But it was a long time before the door opened and the second of
his old-rose parasites came in.  I had not noticed until then
that the man was missing.  He thrust a packet of some sort into
Abdul Ali's hands.  He whispered.  The Damascene's face darkened
instantly, and he swore like a pirate.  Then, I suppose because
he had to vent his wrath on somebody, he shouted to me in German
all down the length of the table:

"Your cursed interpreter has nearly killed my secretary!  He
struck him in the mouth and knocked all his teeth out.  What
courteous servants you employ!"

"What was your secretary trying to do to him?" I retorted, but he
saw fit not to answer that.  He poured some more brandy instead
for Ali Shah al Khassib.

So that was what Anazeh had been laughing at!  The old humourist
had either seen the fracas, or had come on the injured old-rose
messenger of death nursing a damaged face.  I began to share
Grim's good opinion of ben Hamza.  But though I watched Grim's
face, and knew that he knew German, I could not detect a trace of
interest.  He kept on talking against Abdul Ali until after ten
o'clock.  By that time most of the notables were about as full as
they could hold.  Those who were not too drunk appeared ready for
anything in or out of reason.

At that stage of the proceedings they ushered in the dancing
girls.  The servants cleared away most of the food, removed the
table-cloths, and a ring was formed practically all around the
room, the notables leaning their backs against the wall to ease
overworked bellies.  I set my cushion down next to a very drunken
man just by the narrow door that opened on the stairway leading
to the ramparts.  He fell asleep with his head on my shoulder
within five minutes, and as that, for some subtle reason, seemed
to make me even more unnoticeable I let him snore away in peace.

Over in Abdul Ali's corner of the room there was a real council
of war going on in whispers.  Opposite to him, ten paces or so
distant from me, Jimgrim Suliman ben Saoud was holding a rival
show.  It seemed about an even bet which was making greater
headway.  Those who were more or less drunk, and all the younger
sheikhs had eyes and ears for nothing but the dancing girls.

They were outrageous hussies.  They wore more clothes than a
Broadway chorus lady, and rather less paint, but if they were
symbols of the Moslem paradise (as a learned Arab once assured me
that they are meant to be) then, as I answered the Arab on that
occasion, "me for hell."  But none of those sheikhs had ever seen
Broadway, so you could hardly blame them.

Abdul Ali of Damascus seemed to have his arrangements with the
men in his corner cinched at last to his satisfaction.  He walked
a little unsteadily across the room, apparently to make his peace
with Suliman ben Saoud.  He held brazenly in one hand a leather
wallet that bulged with paper money--doubtless the "documents"
that he had sent for.  He nodded to me as he passed with
more familiarity than he had any right to, since he had so
ostentatiously dismissed me to the dogs.  I suppose he felt so
sure of "convincing" Suliman ben Saoud, and was so bent on
offsetting the reaction caused by Anazeh's behavior that he had
been reviving that project about the school and therefore chose
to appear on intimate terms with me.  I met him more than
half-way;  any one who cared to might believe I loved him like
a brother.

He stood in front of Suliman ben Saoud, rocking just a trifle
from the effects of alcohol and smoke,  and there was about five
minutes' conversation of which, although I missed a lot of it, I
caught the general drift.  The men who had come under the
Ichwan's influence kept joining in and raising objections.  I
gathered that they expected a proportionate percentage of the
bribe for which Suliman ben Saoud was supposed to be maneuvering.

But even Abdul Ali, with a pouch of paper money in his hand, was
not quite so barefaced as to bribe the Ichwan publicly.  At the
end of five minutes he suggested a private talk on the parapet.
Suliman ben Saoud rose with apparent reluctance.  Abdul Ali of
Damascus took his arm.  It was Suliman ben Saoud who opened the
narrow door, and Abdul Ali who went through first.  I did not
wait for any invitation, but let my snoring neighbor fall on his
side, hurried through after them, and closed the door behind me.
Groping for the stick in the dark, I jammed it into the notches.
It fitted perfectly.  It held the door immovable and barred
that stairway against all-comers.  Then I followed them to
the parapet.

The moon was about full and bathing the whole roof, and all the
countryside in liquid light.  There was a certain amount of mist
lower down, and you could only make out the Dead Sea through it
here and there;  but up where we were, and even in the moat
eighty feet below us, it was almost like daylight without the
glare and heat.  I leaned over, but could see nobody in the moat,
and there was no sign of Mahommed ben Hamza.

Abdul Ali led the way toward the corner where Grim had given his
orders to ben Hamza that afternoon.  Abdul Ali did not seem to
realize that I was following.  When he turned at last, with his
back to the parapet and the moonlight full in his face, he
demanded in German:

"Wass machen Sie hier?"

I was about to answer him when there came a noise like
subterranean thunder from the mouth of the stairway.  They were
trying to force that door below and follow us.  The first words I
used were in English, for Grim's benefit:

"I stuck a stick in the door.  I should say it's good for ten or
fifteen minutes unless they use explosives."

That gave the whole game away at once.

"So!" said Abdul Ali.  He thrust the wallet into his bosom.  With
the other hand he pulled out a repeating pistol.  "So!"

Grim said never a word.  He closed with him.  In a second we were
all three struggling like madmen.  The pistol was not cocked;  I
managed to get hold of Abdul Ali's wrist and wrench the weapon
away before he could pull back the slide.  Then we all three went
down together on the stone roof, Abdul Ali yelling like a maniac,
and Grim trying to squeeze the wind out of him.  Even then, as we
rolled and fought, I could still hear the thundering on the door.
No doubt the noise they made prevented them from hearing Abdul
Ali's yells for help.

The man's strength was prodigious, although he was puffy and
short-winded.  It began to look as if we would have to knock him
on the head to get control of him.  But even so, there was no
rope--no sign of Mahommed ben Hamza and his men.  You can think
of a lot of things while you fight for your life eighty miles
away from help.  I wondered whether Grim would throw him over the
parapet, and whether we two would have to take our chance of
mountaineering down that ragged corner of the wall.

But suddenly about a hundred and eighty pounds of human brawn
landed feet-first on my back.  A voice said "Taib,* Jimgrim!" and
two other men jumped after him from somewhere on the ruined wall
above us.  In another second Abdul Ali was held hand and foot,
tied until he could not move, and then a wheat-sack was pulled
down over his head and made fast between his legs. [*All right.]

"You're late!" said Grim.  "Quick!  Where's the rope?  Are your
men below?"

The thundering on the door had ceased.  Either they were coming
up the steps already, or had gone to reach the parapet some other
way.  It did not occur to me, or for that matter to any of us in
the excitement of the minute, that they might be holding a
consultation below, or might even have abandoned the idea of
following, although I think now that must be the explanation, for
what we did took more time than it takes to set it down.

Ben Hamza made one end of the rope fast around Abdul Ali's feet.
He would not listen to argument.  He said he knew his business,
and certainly the knot was workmanlike.  Then he called over the
parapet (an Arab never whistles) and a voice answered from the
southern side of the moat, where some fallen stones cast a
shadow.  Then the three of them lifted Abdul Ali over, and
lowered him head-first.

It was a slow business, for otherwise he would have been stunned
against the first projection.  I thought that Grim looked almost
as nervous as I felt, but Mahommed ben Hamza was having the time
of his life, and could not keep his tongue still.

"Head upwards a man can yell," he explained to me, grinning from
ear to ear.  "Feet upwards, too afraid to yell!"  Then the
thundering on the door began again, louder than before it seemed
to me.  They were using a battering-ram.  But they were too late.
After what seemed like a long-drawn hour we saw shadowy arms
below reach up and seize our prisoner.  Then the loose rope came
up again hand over hand.

"You next!" said Grim quietly.  He pushed me forward, after
carefully examining the loop Mahommed ben Hamza tied in the end
of the rope.





Chapter Ten

"Money doesn't weigh much!"


Well--you don't stand on precedence or ceremony at times like
that.  Over I went in the bight of the rope.  They let me fall
about fifteen feet before they seemed to realize that I had let
go of the parapet.  Added to all that had gone before, that made
about the climax of sensation.  The pain of barking the skin of
knees and elbows against projecting angles of stone was a relief.

I am no man of iron.  I haven't iron nerves.  Not one second of
that descent was less than hell.  I could hear the thunder of
some kind of battering-ram on the door at the foot of the stair.
I could imagine the rope chafing against the sharp edge of the
parapet as they paid it out hand over hand.  The only thing that
made me keep my head at all was knowledge that Abdul Ali had had
to do the trip feet-upward, with his head in a bag.  When they
let go too fast it was rather like the half-way stage of taking
chloroform.  When they slowed up, there was the agonizing dread
of pursuit.  And through it all there burned the torturing
suggestion that the rope might break.

Mother Earth felt good that night, when strong hands reached up
and lifted me out of the noose that failed of reaching the bottom
by about a man's height.  Come to think of it, it wasn't mother
earth at that.  It was the stinking carcass of a camel only half
autopsied by the vultures, that my feet first rested on--brother,
perhaps, to the beast I had put out of his agony that afternoon.

The others came down the rope hand-over-hand, Grim last.  I
suppose he stayed up there with his pistol, ready for contingencies.
He had his nerve with him, for he had fastened the upper end of
the rope to a piece of broken stone laid across a gap that the
crusaders had made in the ramparts, centuries ago, for the Christian
purpose of pouring boiling oil and water on their foes.  It did not
take more than a minute's violent shaking after he got down to bring
the rope tumbling on our heads.

Then the next thing he did was to take a look at the prisoner.
Finding him not much the worse for wear, barring some bruises and
a missing inch or two of skin, he ordered the bag pulled over his
head again and gave the order for retreat.  Mahommed ben Hamza
went scouting ahead.  The others picked up Abdul Ali as the
construction gangs handle baulks of timber--horizontal--face-
downward.  When he wriggled they cuffed him into good behaviour.

You have to get down into an Arab moat before you can realize
what the Hebrews meant by their word Gehenna.  The smell of
rotting carrion was only part of it.  One stumbled into, and
through, and over things that should not be.  Heaps, that looked
solid in the moonlight, yielded to the tread.  Whatever liquid
lay there was the product of corruption.

Yet we did not dare to climb out of the moat until we reached the
shadows at the northern angle.  Though the moonlight shone almost
straight down on us it was a great deal brighter up above, and
the walls cast some shadow.  There was nothing for it but to pick
our way in the comparative gloom of that vulture's paradise,
praying we might find a stream to wade in presently.

Once, looking up behind me, I thought I saw men's heads peering
over the parapet, but that may have been imagination.  Grim vowed
he did not see them, although I suspected him of saying that to
avoid a panic.  He shepherded us along, speaking in a perfectly
normal voice whenever he had to, as if there were no such thing
as hurry in the world.  When we reached the farther corner of the
moat it was he who climbed out first to con the situation.  A
look-out in a bastion on the ruined town wall promptly fired
at him.

I expected him to fire back.  I climbed up beside him to lend a
hand with the pistol I had filched from Abdul Ali.  But Grim
shouted something about taking away for burial the corpse of a
man who had died of small-pox.  The man on the wall commanded us
to Allah's mercy and warned us to beware lest we, too, catch that
dreaded plague.

"Inshallah!" Grim answered.  Then he summoned our men from
the moat.

They passed up Abdul Ali, dragging him feet-first again with one
man keeping a clenched fist ready to strike him in the mouth in
case he should forget that corpses don't cry out.  He looked like
a corpse half-cold, as they carried him jerkily along a track
that roughly followed the line of the wall.  I don't suppose that
anything ever looked more like an Arab funeral procession than we
did.  The absence of noisy mourners, and the unusual hour of
night, were plausibly accounted for by the dreaded disease that
Grim had invented for the occasion.  My golf-suit was the only
false note, but I kept in shadow as much as I could, with the
unseemly burden between me and the ramparts.

It was a long time before we had the town wall at our backs.  A
funeral, in the circumstances, might justifiably be rapid;  but
we could hardly run and keep up the pretense.  But at last we
passed over the shoulder of a hill into shadow on the farther
side, and there was no more need of play-acting.

"Yalla bilagel!" [Run like the devil.] Grim ordered then, and we
obeyed him like sprinters attempting to lower a record.

Twelve men running through the night can make a lot of noise,
especially when they carry a heavy man between them.  Our men
were all from Hebron.  Hebron prides itself on training the
artfullest thieves in Asia.  They boast of being able to steal
the bed from under a sleeper without waking him.  But even the
stealthiest animals go crashing away from danger, and, now that
the worst of the danger lay behind, more or less panic seized all
of us.

Mahommed ben Hamza refused to follow the regular track, for fear
of ambush or a chance encounter in the dark.  Grim let him have
his way.  They dragged the wretched Abdul Ali like a sack of corn
by a winding detour, and wherever the narrow path turned sharply
to avoid great rocks they skidded him at the turn until he yelled
for mercy.  Grim pulled off the sack at last, untied his arms and
legs, and let him walk;  but whenever he lagged they frog-marched
him again.

At last we reached a brook where we all waded to get rid of the
filth and smell from that infernal moat, and Abdul Ali seized
that opportunity to play his last cards.  Considering Ben Hamza's
reputation, the obvious type of his nine ruffians, the darkness
and rough handling, it said a lot for Grim's authority that Abdul
Ali still had that wallet-full of money in his possession.
Sitting on a stone in the moonlight, he pulled it out.  His nerve
was a politician's, cynical, simple.  Its simplicity almost took
your breath away.

"How many men from Hebron?" he demanded.

"Ten.  Well and good.  I have here ten thousand piastres--one
thousand for each of you, or divide it how you like.  That is
the price I will pay you to let me go.  What can these other
two do to you?  Take the money and run.  Leave me to settle with
these others."

Ben Hamza, knee-deep in the brook, laughed aloud as he eyed the
money.  He made a gesture so good-humoured, so full of
resignation and regret and broad philosophy that you would have
liked the fellow even if he hadn't saved your life.

"Deal with those two first!" he grinned.  "I would have taken
your money long ago, but that I know Jimgrim!  He would have made
me give it up again."

"Jimgrim!" said Abdul Ali.  "Jimgrim?  Are you Major James Grim?
A good thing for you I did not know that, when I had you in my
power in the castle!"

Grim laughed.  "Are we all set? Let's go."

We hurried all the faster now because our legs were wet.  The
night air on those Moab heights is chilly at any season.
Perhaps, too, we were trying to leave behind us the moat-stench
that the water had merely reduced, not washed away.  A quarter of
a mile before we reached the place appointed we knew that Anazeh
had not failed to keep his tryst.  Away up above us, beside the
tomb, like an ancient bearded ghost, Anazeh stood motionless,
silent, conning the track we should come by--a grand old savage
keeping faith against his neighbours for the sake of friendship.

He did not challenge when he heard us.  He took aim.  He held his
aim until Grim called to him.  When our goat track joined the
main road he was there awaiting us, standing like a sentinel in
the shadow of a fanged rock.  And there, if, Abdul Ali of
Damascus could have had his way, there would have been a fresh
debate.  He did not let ten seconds pass before he had offered
Anazeh all the money he had with him to lend him a horse and let
him go.  Anazeh waived aside the offer.

"You shall have as much more money as you wish!" the Damascene
insisted.  "Let me get to my house, and a messenger shall take
the money to you.  Or come and get it."

All the answer Anazeh gave him was a curt laugh--one bark like
a Fox's.

"Where are all the horses?" Grim demanded.  I could only see five
of six.

"I wait for them."

"Man, we can't wait!"

"Jimgrim!" said the old sheikh, with a glint of something between
malice and amusement in his eyes, "I knew you in the mejlis when
you watched me read that letter!  One word from me and--"  He
made a click between his teeth suggestive of swift death.  "I let
you play your game.  But now I play my game, Allah willing.  I
have waited for you.  Wait thou for me!"

"Why?  What is it?"

Anazeh beckoned us and turned away.  We followed him, Grim and I,
across the road and up a steep track to the tomb on the
overhanging rock, where he had stood when we first saw him.

He pointed.  A cherry-red fire with golden sparks and crimson-
bellied sulphur smoke was blazing in the midst of El-Kerak.

"The home of Abdul Ali of Damascus," said Anazeh with pride in
his voice.  It was the pride of a man who shows off the behaviour
of his children.  "My men did it!"

"How can they escape?" Grim asked him.

"Wallah!  Will the gate guards stand idle?  Will they not run to
the fire--and to the looting?  But they will find not much loot.
My men already have it!"

"Loot," said Grim, "will delay them."

"Money doesn't weigh much," Anazeh answered.  "Here my men come."

Somebody was coming.  There came a burst of shooting and yelling
from somewhere between us and El-Kerak, and a moment later the
thunder of horses galloping full-pelt.  Anazeh got down to the
road with the agility of a youngster, ordered Abdul Ali of
Damascus, the shivering Ahmed and me under cover.  He placed his
remaining handful of men at points of vantage where they could
cover the retreat of the fifteen.  And it was well he did.

There were at least two score in hot pursuit, and though you
could hardly tell which was which in that dim light, Anazeh's
party opened fire on the pursuers and let the fifteen through.  I
did not get sight of Grim while that excitement lasted, but he
had two automatics.  He took from me the one that I had taken
from Abdul Ali, and with that one and his own he made a din
like a machine-gun.  He told me afterward that he had fired in
the air.

"Noise is as good as knock-outs in the dark," he explained, while
Anazeh's men boasted to one another of the straight shooting that
it may be they really believed they had done.  An Arab can
believe anything--afterward.  I don't believe one man was killed,
though several were hit.

At any rate, whether the noise accomplished it or not, the
pursuers drew off, and we went forward, carrying a cashbox now,
of which Abdul Ali was politely requested to produce the key.
That was the first intimation he had that his house had been
looted.  He threw his bunch of keys away into the shadows, in the
first exhibition of real weakness he had shown that night.  It
was a silly gesture.  It only angered his captors.  It saved him
nothing.

Four more of Anazeh's men had been wounded, all from behind, two
of them rather badly, making six in all who were now unfit for
further action.  But we did not wait to bandage them.  They
affected to make light of their injuries, saying they would go
over to the British and get attended to in hospital.  Abdul Ali
was put on Ahmed's miserable mount, with his legs lashed under
the horse's belly.  Ahmed, with Mahommed ben Hamza and his men
were sent along ahead;  being unarmed, unmounted, they were a
liability now.  But those Hebron thieves could talk like an
army;  they put up a prodigious bleat, all night long, about
that cash-box.  They maintained they had a clear right to share
its contents, since unless they had first captured Abdul Ali,
Anazeh's men could not have burned his house and seized
his money.  Anazeh's men, when they had time to be, were
suitably amused.

It was not a peaceful retreat by any means.  Time and again
before morning we were fired on from the rear.  Our party
deployed to right and left to answer--always boasting afterward
of having killed at least a dozen men.  I added up their figures
on the fly-leaf of the pocket Bible, and the total came to two
hundred and eighteen of the enemy shot dead and forever damned!
I believe Anazeh actually did kill one of our pursuers.

By the time the moon disappeared we had come too close to
Anazeh's country to make pursuit particularly safe.  Who they
were who pursued us, hauled off.  We reached the launch, secure
in its cove between the rocks, a few minutes after dawn.  Anazeh
ordered his six wounded men into it, with perfect assurance
that the British doctors would take care of them and let them
go unquestioned.

When Grim had finished talking with Anazeh I went up to thank the
old fellow for my escort, and he acknowledged the courtesy with a
bow that would have graced the court of Solomon.

"Give the old bird a present, if you've got one," Grim whispered.

So I gave him my watch and chain, and he accepted them with the
same calm dignity.

"Now he's your friend for life!" said Grim.  "Anazeh is a friend
worth having.  Let's go!"

The watch and chain was a cheap enough price to pay for that two
days' entertainment and the acquaintance of such a splendid old
king of thieves.  Anazeh watched us away until we were out of
earshot, he and Grim exchanging the interminable Arab farewell
formula of blessing and reply that have been in use unchanged for
a thousand years.

Then Abdul Ali produced his wallet again.

"Major Grim," he said, "please take this money.  Keep it for
yourself, and let me go.  Surely I have been punished enough!
Besides, you cannot--you dare not imprison me!  I am a French
subject.  I have been seized outside the British sphere.  I know
you are a poor man--the pay of a British officer is a matter of
common knowledge.  Come now, you have done what you came to do.
You have destroyed my influence at El-Kerak.  Now benefit
yourself.  Avoid an international complication.  Show mercy on
me!  Take this money.  Say that I gave you the slip in the dark!"

Grim smiled.  He looked extremely comical without any eyebrows.
The wrinkles went all the way up to the roots of his hair.

"I'm incorruptible," he said.  "The boss, I believe, isn't."

"You mean your High Commissioner?  I have not enough money
for him."

Grim laughed.  "No," he said, "he comes expensive."

"What then?"

"Don't be an ass," said Grim. "You know what."

"Information?"

"Certainly."

"What information?"

"You were sent by the French," said Grim, "to raise the devil
here in Palestine--no matter why.  You were trying to bring
off a raid on Judaea.  Who are your friends in Jerusalem who
were ready to spring surprises?  What surprises?  Who's your
Jerusalem agent?"

"If I tell you?"

"I'm not the boss.  But I'll see him about it.  Come on--who's
your agent?"

"Scharnhoff."

Grim whistled.  That he did not believe, I was almost certain,
but he whistled as if totally new trains of thought had suddenly
revealed themselves amid a maze of memories.

"You shall speak to the boss," he said after a while.

I fell asleep then, wedged uncomfortably between two men's legs,
wakened at intervals by the noisy pleading of Mahommed ben Hamza
and his men for what they called their rights in the matter of
Abdul Ali's wallet.  They were still arguing the point when we
ran on the beach near Jericho, where a patrol of incredulous
Sikhs pounced on us and wanted to arrest Ahmed and Anazeh's
wounded men.  Grim had an awful time convincing them that he was
a British officer.  In the end we only settled it by tramping
about four miles to a guard-house, where a captain in uniform
gave us breakfast and telephoned for a commisariat lorry.

It was late in the afternoon when we reached Jerusalem and got
the wounded into hospital.  By the time Grim had changed into
uniform and put courtplaster where his eyebrows should have been,
and he, Abdul Ali and I had driven in an official Ford up the
Mount of Olives to OETA, the sun was not far over the skyline.

Grim had telephoned, so the Administrator was waiting for us.
Grim went straight in.  It was twenty minutes before we two were
summoned into his private room, where he sat behind the desk
exactly as we had left him the other morning.  He looked as if he
had not moved meanwhile.  Everything was exactly in its place--
even the vase, covering the white spot on the varnish.  There was
the same arrangement of too many flowers, in a vase too small to
hold them.

"Allow me to present Sheikh Abdul Ali of Damascus," said Grim.

The Administrator bowed rather elaborately, perhaps to hide
the twinkle in his eyes.  He didn't scowl.  He didn't look
tyrannical.  So Abdul Ali opened on him, with all bow guns.

"I protest!  I am a French subject.  I have been submitted to
violence, outrage, indignity!  I have been seized on foreign
soil, and brought here by force against all international
law!  I shall claim exemplary damages!  I demand apology
and satisfaction!"

Sir Louis raised his eyebrows and looked straight at Grim without
even cracking a smile.

"Is this true, Major Grim?"

"Afraid it is, sir."

"Scandalous!  Perfectly scandalous!  And were you a witness to
all this?" he asked, looking at me as if I might well be the
cause of it all.

I admitted having seen the greater part of it.

"And you didn't protest?  What's the world coming to?  I see
you've lost a little skin yourself.  I hope you've not been
breaking bounds and fighting?"

"He is a most impertinent man!" said Abdul Ali, trying to take
his cue, and glowering at me.  "He posed as a person interested
in a school for El-Kerak, and afterward helped capture me by
a trick!"

The Administrator frowned.  It seemed I was going to be made the
scape-goat.  I did not care.  I would not have taken a year of
Sir Louis' pay for those two days and nights.  When he spoke
again I expected something drastic addressed to me, but I
was wrong.

"An official apology is due to you, Sheikh Abdul Ali.  Permit me
to offer it, together with my profound regret for any slight
personal inconvenience to which you may have been subjected in
course of this--ah--entirely unauthorized piece of--ah--
brigandage.  I notice you have been bruised, too.  You shall have
the best medical attention at our disposal."

"That is not enough!" sneered Abdul Ali, throwing quite
an attitude.

"I know it isn't.  I was coming to that.  An apology is also due
to the French--our friends the French.  I shall put it in
writing, and ask you to convey it to Beirut to the French High
Commissioner, with my compliments.  I would send you by train,
but you might be--ah--delayed at Damascus in that case.  Perhaps
Emir Feisal might detain you.  There will be a boat going from
Jaffa in two days' time.  Two days will give you a chance to
recover from the outrageous experience before we escort you to
the coast.  A first-class passage will be reserved for you by
wire, and you will be put on board with every possible courtesy.
You might ask the French High Commissioner to let me know if
there is anything further he would like us to do about it.  Now,
I'll ring for a clerk to take you to the medical officer--under
escort, so that you mayn't be subjected to further outrage or
indignity.  Good evening!"

"Anything more for me?" asked Grim, as soon as Abdul Ali had been
led away.

"Not tonight, Grim.  Come and see me in the morning." Grim
saluted.  The Administrator looked at me--smiled mischievously.

"Have a good time?" he asked.  "Don't neglect those scratches.
Good evening!"

No more.  Not another word.  He never did say another word to me
about it, although I met him afterwards a score of times.  You
couldn't help but admire and like him.

Grim led the way up the tower stairs again, and we took a last
look at El-Kerak.  The moon was beginning to rise above the rim
of the Moab Hills.  The land beyond the Dead Sea was wrapped in
utter silence.  Over to the south-east you could make out one dot
of yellow light, to prove that men lived and moved and had their
being in that stillness.  Otherwise, you couldn't believe it was
real country.  It looked like a vision of the home of dreams.

"Got anything to do tonight?" asked Grim.  "Can you stay awake?
I know where some Jews are going to play Beethoven in an upper
room in the ancient city.  Care to come?"





Chapter Eleven

"And the rest of the acts of Ahaziah--"


I have no idea what Grim did during the next few days.  I spent
the time studying Arabic, and saw nothing of him until he walked
into my room at the hotel one afternoon, sat down and came
straight to the point.

"Had enough?"

"No."

"Got the hang of it?"

"Yes, I think so," I answered.  "Allah's peace, as they call it,
depends on the French.  They intend to get Damascus and all
Syria.  So they sent down Abdul Ali of Damascus to make trouble
for the British in Palestine;  the idea being to force the
British to make common cause with them.  That would mean total
defeat for the Arabs;  and Great Britain would save France scads
of men and money.  But you pulled that plug.  I saw you do it.  I
heard Abdul Ali of Damascus tell you Scharnhoff's name.  Did you
go after Scharnhoff?"

"No, not yet," he answered.  "You're no diplomat."

I knew that.  I have never wished to be one, never having met a
professional one who did not, so to speak, play poker with a cold
deck and at least five aces.  The more frankly they seem to be
telling the truth, the more sure you may be they are lying.

"Neither are you," I answered.  "You're a sportsman.  Are you
allowing Scharnhoff weight for age, and a fair start--or what?"

He chuckled.  "You believed old Abdul-Ali of Damascus?  He's a
French secret political agent.  So whatever he told us is
certainly not true.  Or, if it is true, or partially true, then
it's the kind of truth that is deadlier deceptive than a good
clean God-damned lie.  Get this:  such men as Abdul Ali would
face torture rather than betray an associate--unless they're sure
the associate is a traitor or about to become one.  A government
can't easily punish its own spies on foreign territory.  But by
betraying them, it can sometimes get the other government to do
it.  That Abdul Ali betrayed Scharnhoff to me, proves one of two
things.  Abdul Ali was lying, and Scharnhoff harmless--or in
some way Scharnhoff has fallen foul of his French paymasters
and they want him punished.  Very likely he has drawn French
money, for their purposes, and has misused it for his own ends.
Or perhaps they have promised him money, and wish to back down.
Possibly he knows too much about their agents, and they want
him silenced.  They propose to have us silence him.  I'm going
to call on Scharnhoff."

"You suspect him of double treachery?"

"I suspect him of being a one-track-minded, damned old
visionary."

I had met Hugo Scharnhoff.  Long before the War he had been a
professor of orientology at Vienna University.  At the moment he
was technically an "enemy alien."  But he had lived so many years
in Jerusalem, and was reputed so studious and harmless, that the
British let him stay there after Allenby captured the city.  A
man of moderate private means, he owned a stone house in the
German Colony with its back to the Valley of Hinnom.

"Care to come?" Grim asked me.

"Yes."

"Know your Bible?"  He proceeded to quote from it:  "And the rest
of the acts of Ahaziah which he did are they not written in the
book of the chronicles of the Kings of Israel?"'

"What of it?"

"That was set down in Aramaic, nowadays called Hebrew, something
like three thousand years ago," said Grim.  "It's Aramaic magic.
Let's take a look at it."

We trudged together down the dusty Bethlehem Road, turned to the
east just short of the Pool of the Sultan (where they now had a
delousing station for British soldiers) and went nearly to the
end of the colony of neat stone villas that the Germans built
before the War, and called Rephaim.  It was a prosperous colony
until the Kaiser, putting two and two, made five of them and had
to guess again.

The house we sought stood back from the narrow road, at a corner,
surrounded by a low stone wall and a mass of rather dense shrubs
that obscured the view from the windows.  The front door was a
thing of solid olive-wood.  We had to hammer on it for several
minutes.  There was no bell.

A woman opened it at last--an Arab in native costume, gazelle-
eyed, as they all are, and quite good looking, although hardly in
her first youth.  Her face struck me as haunted.  She was either
ashamed when her eyes met Grim's or else afraid of him.  But she
smiled pleasantly enough and without asking our business led the
way at once to a room at the other end of a long hall that was
crowded with all sorts of curios.  They were mostly stone bric-a-
brac-fragments of Moabite pottery and that kind of thing, with a
pretty liberal covering of ordinary house dust.  In fact, the
house had the depressing "feel" of a rarely visited museum.

The room she showed us into was the library--three walls lined
with books, mostly with German titles--a big cupboard in one
corner, reaching from floor to ceiling--a big desk by the
window--three armchairs and a stool.  There were no pictures,
and the only thing that smacked of ornament was the Persian rug
on the floor.

We waited five minutes before Scharnhoff came in, looking as if
we had disturbed his nap.  He was an untidy stout man with green
goggles and a grayish beard, probably not yet sixty years of age,
and well preserved.  He kept his pants up with a belt, and his
shirt bulged untidily over the top.  When he sat down you could
see the ends of thick combinations stuffed into his socks.  He
gave you the impression of not fitting into western clothes at
all and of being out of sympathy with most of what they represent.

He was cordial enough--after one swift glance around the room.

"Brought a new acquaintance for you," said Grim, introducing
me.  "I've told him how all the subalterns come to you for
Palestinian lore--"

"Ach!  The young Lotharios!  Each man a Don Juan!  All they come
to me for is tales of Turkish harems, of which I know no more
than any one.  They are not interested in subjects of real
importance.  'How many wives had Djemal Pasha?  How many of them
were European?'  That is what they ask me.  When I discuss
ancient history it is only about King Solomon's harem that they
care to know;  or possibly about the modern dancing girls of El-
Kerak, who are all spies.  But there is no need to inform you as
to that.  Eh?  I haven't seen you for a long time, Major Grim.
What have you been doing?"

"Nothing much.  I was at the Tomb of the Kings yesterday."

Scharnhoff smiled scornfully.

"Now you must have some whiskey to take the taste of that untruth
out of your mouth!  How can a man of your attainments call that
obviously modern fraud by such a name?  The place is not nearly
two thousand years old!  It is probably the tomb of a Syrian
queen named Adiabene and her family.  Josephus mentions it.  This
land is full--every square metre of it--of false antiquities with
real names, and real antiquities that never have been discovered!
But why should a man like you, Major Grim, lend yourself to
perpetuating falsity?"

He walked over to the cupboard to get whiskey, and from where we
sat we could both of us see what he was doing.  The cupboard was
in two parts, top and bottom, without any intervening strip of
wood between the doors, which fitted tightly.  When he opened the
top part the lower door opened with it.  He kicked it shut again
at once, but I had seen inside--not that it was interesting at
the moment.

He set whiskey and tumblers on the desk, poured liberally, and
went on talking.

"Tomb of the Kings?  Hah!  Tomb of the Kings of Judah?  Hah!  If
any one can find that, he will have something more important than
Ludendorff's memoirs!  Something merkwurdig, believe me!"

He stiffened suddenly, and looked at Grim through the green
goggles as if he were judging an antiquity.

"Perhaps this is not the time to make you a little suggestion, eh?"

Grim's face wrinkled into smiles.

"This man knows enough to hang me anyhow!  Fire away!"

"Ah!  But I would not like him to hang me!"

"He's as close as a clam.  What's your notion?"

"Nothing serious, but--between us three, then--you and I are both
foreigners in this place, Major Grim, although I have made it my
home for fifteen years.  You have no more interest in this
government and its ridiculous rules than I have.  What do you
say--shall we find the Tomb of the Kings together?"

Grim wrinkled into smiles again and glanced down at his uniform.

"Yes, exactly!" agreed Scharnhoff.  "That is the whole point.
They call me an enemy alien.  I am to all intents and purposes a
prisoner.  You are a British officer--can do what you like--go
where you like.  You wear red tabs;  you are on the staff;
nobody will dare to question you.  These English have stopped all
exploration until they get their mandate.  After that they will
take good care that only English societies have the exploration
privilege.  But what if we--you and I, that is to say--between
us extract the best plum from the pudding before those miscalled
statesmen sign the mandate--eh?  It can be done!  It can be done!"

Grim chuckled:

"I suppose you already see a picture of you and me with an
ancient tomb in our trunks--say a few tons of the more artistic
parts--beating it for the frontier and hawking the stuff
afterward to second-hand furniture dealers?  Pour me another
whiskey, prof, and then we'll go steal the Mosque of Omar!"

"Ach!  You laugh at me--you jest--you mock--you sneer.  But I
know what I propose.  Do you know what will be found in that Tomb
of the Kings of Judah when we discover it?"

"Bones.  Dry bones.  A few gold ornaments perhaps.  A stale
smell certainly."

"The Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Israel!  Think of it!
A parchment roll--perhaps two or three rolls--not too big to go
into a valise--worth more than all the other ancient manuscripts
in the world all put together!  Himmel!  What a find that would
be!  What a record!  What a refutation of all the historians and
the fools who set themselves up for authorities nowadays!  What a
price it would bring!  What would your Metropolitan Museum in New
York not pay for it!  What would the Jews not pay for it!  They
would raise millions among them and pay any price we cared
to ask!  The Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Israel--
only think!"

"But why the Chronicles of the Kings of Israel in the tomb of the
Kings of Judah?" Grim asked, more by way of keeping up the
conversation, I think, than because he could not guess the
answer.  He is an omnivorous reader, and there is not much
recorded of the Near East that he does not know.

"Don't you know your history?  You know, of course, that after
King Solomon died the Jews divided into two kingdoms.  The
latter-day Jews speak of themselves as Israelites, but they are
nothing of the kind;  they are Judah-ites.  The tribe of Judah
remained in Jerusalem, forming one small kingdom;  their
descendants are the Jews of today.  Part of the tribe of Benjamin
stayed with them.  The other seceding ten tribes called
themselves the kingdom of Israel."

"Everybody knows that," said Grim.  "What of it?"

"Well, the Assyrians came down and conquered the kingdom of
Israel--marched all the Israelites away into captivity--and they
vanished out of history.  From that day to this their Book of
Chronicles, so often referred to in the Old Testament, has never
been seen nor heard of."

"Of course not," said Grim.  "The King of Assyria used it to wipe
his razor on when he was through shaving every morning."

"Ach!  You joke again;  but I tell you I am not joking.  Such
people as those Hebrews are naturally secretive and so proud that
they wrote down for posterity all the doings of their puny kings,
would never have let their records fall into the hands of the
Assyrians.  They themselves were marched away in slave-gangs, but
they left their Book behind them, safely hidden.  Be sure of it!
Ten years ago I found a manuscript in the place they now call
Nablus, which in those days was Schechem.  Schechem was the
capital of the Kingdom of Israel, just as Jerusalem was the
capital of the Kingdom of Judah, or the Jews.  I sold that
manuscript for a good price after I had photographed it.  The
idiots to whom I sold it--historians they call themselves!--value
it only as a relic of antiquity.  I made a digest of it--analyzed
it--studied it--compared it with other authentic facts in my
possession--and came to the definite conclusion that I hold the
clue to the whereabouts of that lost Book of Chronicles."

"Let's see the photograph," Grim suggested.

"It has been impounded with other so-called 'enemy property' by
your friends the British.  I suppose they thought the German
General Staff might get hold of it and conquer the Suez Canal!
But what good would the sight of it do?  You couldn't understand
a word of it.  It convinced me, after months of study, that when
the Ten Tribes were carried away into captivity by the Assyrians
they sent their records secretly to Jerusalem.  Ever since the
secession the Israelites and Jews had been jealous enemies.  But
they were relatives after all, boasting a common ancestor, proud
of the same history, more or less observing the same religion.
And Schechem was only about thirty miles from Jerusalem, which
was considered an impregnable fortress until the Babylonians took
it later on.  So they sent their records to Jerusalem, and the
Jews hid them.  Where?  Where do you suppose?"

"The likeliest place would be Solomon's Temple."

"You think so?  Then you think superficially, my young friend.
Let us return to that Tomb of the Kings again for a moment.  That
place that you visited is such an obvious fake that even the
guide-books make light of it.  The one all-important thing in
Palestine that never yet has been discovered is the real Tomb of
the Kings.  Yet Jerusalem, where it certainly must be, has been
searched and looted a hundred times from end to end.  Therefore--
you follow me?--the Jews must have concealed it very cunningly.
Answer me, then:  would the Jews, who were always a practical
people and not corpse-worshippers like the Egyptians, have taken
all that trouble to hide the tomb of their kings unless there
were important treasure in it?  Answer me!"

"So you expect to find treasure in addition to the lost Book of
Chronicles?"

"Certainly I do!  The treasure will make the whole proceeding
safe.  Let the British have it!  The fools will be so blinded by
the glamour of gold, that I shall easily extract the things of
real value--the invaluable manuscripts!  Then let the men who
call themselves historians take a back seat!"

He rubbed his hands together in anticipation.

"Were you looking for the Tomb of the Kings, then, before the
War?" Grim asked him.

"Not exactly.  Under the Turks it was difficult.  The Turks were
beautifully corrupt.  By paying for it I could get permission to
excavate on any property owned by Christians.  But the minute I
touched Moslem places the Turks became fanatical.  The Arabs,
now, are different--fanatics, too, but with a new sort of
fanaticism--new to them, I mean--the kind that made the French
revolutionists destroy everything their ancestors had set value
on.  There are plenty of Arabs so full of this disease of
Bolshevism that they would make it easy for me to desecrate what
others believe is holy ground.  But these idiots of English are
worse than the Turks!  They have stopped all excavation.  They
are so afraid of Bolshevism that, if they could, they would
imitate Joshua and make the sun stand still!"

"Well, what's the idea?" asked Grim, finishing his whiskey.

Scharnhoff shrugged his shoulders.

"You know my position.  I am helpless--here on suffrance--obliged
by idiotic regulations to sit in idleness.  But if I could find a
British officer with brains--surely there must be one somewhere!
--one with some authority, who is considered above suspicion, I
could show him, perhaps, how to get rich without committing any
crime he need feel ashamed of."

I could not see Grim's eyes from where I sat, and he did not make
any nervous movement that could have given him away.  Yet I was
conscious of a new alertness, and I think Scharnhoff detected it,
too, for he changed his tactics on the instant.

"Hah! Hah!  I was joking!  Nobody who is fool enough to be a
professional soldier would be clever enough to find the Tomb of
the Kings and keep the secret for ten minutes!  Hah! Hah!  But I
have a favour I would like to beg of you, Major Grim."

"I've no particular authority, you know."

"Ach!  The Administrator listens to you;  I am assured of that."

"He listens sometimes, yes, then usually does the other thing.
Well, what's the request?"

"A simple one.  There is a risk--not much, but just a little risk
that some fool might stumble on that secret of the Tomb of the
Kings and get away with the treasure.  Now, did you ever set a
thief to catch a thief?  Hah! Hah!  I would be a better watch-dog
than any you could find.  I know Jerusalem from end to end.  I
know all the likely places.  Why don't you get permission for me
to wander about Jerusalem undisturbed and keep my eye open for
tomb-robbers?  If I am not to have the privilege of discovering
that Book of Chronicles, at least I would like to see that no
common plunderer gets it.  Surely I am known by now to be
harmless!  Surely they don't suspect me any longer of being an
agent of the Kaiser, or any such nonsense as that!  Why not make
use of me?  Get me a permit, please, Major Grim, to go where I
please by day or night without interference.  Tomb-robbers
usually work at night, you know."

"All right," said Grim.  "I'll try to do that."

"Ah!  I always knew you were a man of good sense!  Have more
whiskey?  A cigar then?"

"Can't promise anything, of course," said Grim, "but you shall
have an answer within twenty-four hours."

Outside, as we turned our faces toward Jerusalem's gray wall,
Grim opened up a little and gave me a suggestion of something in
the wind.

"Did you see what he has in that cupboard?"

"Yes.  Two Arab costumes.  Two short crow-bars."

"Did you notice the grayish dust on the rug--three or four
footprints at the corner near the cupboard?"

"Can't say I did."

"No.  You wouldn't be looking for it.  These men who pose as
intellectuals never believe that any one else has brains.  They
fool themselves.  There's one thing no man can afford to do, East
of the sun or West of the moon.  You can steal, slay, intrigue,
burn--break all the Ten Commandments except one, and have a
chance to get away with it.  There's just one thing you can't do,
and succeed.  He's done it!"

"And the thing is?"

"Cheat a woman!"

"You mean his house keeper?  She who answered the door?"

Grim nodded.





Chapter Twelve

"You know you'll get scuppered if you're found out!"


Two days passed again without my seeing Grim, although I called
on him repeatedly at the "Junior Staff Officers' Mess" below the
Zionist Hospital.  Suliman, the eight-year-old imp of Arab
mischief, who did duty as page-boy met me on each occasion at the
door and took grinning delight in disappointing me.

He was about three and a half feet high--coal-black, with a
tarboosh worn at an angle on his kinky hair and a flashing white
grin across his snub-nosed face that would have made an archangel
count the change out of two piastres twice.  Suliman and cool
cheek were as obvious team-mates as the Gemini, and I was one of
a good number, that included every single member of that
unofficial mess, who could never quite see what Grim found so
admirable in him.  Grim never explained.

Taking the cue from his master, neither did Suliman ever
explain anything to any one but Grim, who seemed to understand
him perfectly.

"Jimgrim not here.  No, not coming back.  Much business.
Good-bye!"

Somehow you couldn't suspect that kid of telling the truth.
However, there was nothing for it but to go away, with a
conviction in the small of your back that he was grinning
mischievously after you.

Grim had found him one day starving and lousy in the archway of
the Jaffa Gate, warming his fingers at a guttering candle-end
preparatory to making a meal off the wax.  He took him home and
made Martha, the old Russian maid-of-all-work, clean him with
kerosene and soft soap--gave him a big packing-case to sleep
in along with Julius Caesar the near-bull-dog mascot--and
thereafter broke him in and taught him things seldom included
in a school curriculum.

In the result, Suliman adored Grim with all the concentrated zeal
of hero-worship of which almost any small boy is capable;  but
under the shadow of Grim's protection he feared not even "brass-
hats" nor regarded civilians, although he was dreadfully afraid
of devils.  The devil-fear was a relic of his negroid ancestry.
Some Arab Sheikh probably captured his great-grandmother on a
slave-raid.  Superstition lingers in dark veins longer than any
other human failing.

I think I called five times before he confessed at last
reluctantly that Grim was in.  That was in the morning after
breakfast, and I was shown into the room with the fireplace and
the deep armchairs.  Grim was reading but seemed to me more than
usually reserved, as if the book had been no more than a screen
to think behind, that left him in a manner unprotected when he
laid it down.  I talked at random, and he hardly seemed to
be listening.

"Say," he said, suddenly interrupting me, "you came out of that
El-Kerak affair pretty creditably.  Suppose I let you see
something else from the inside.  Will you promise not to shout it
all over Jerusalem?"

"Use your own judgment," I answered.

"You mustn't ask questions."

"All right."

"If any one in the Administration pounces on you in the course of
it, you'll have to drop out and know nothing."

"Agreed."

"It may prove a bit more risky than the El-Kerak business."

"Couldn't be," I answered.

"You can't talk enough Arabic to get away with.  But could you
act deaf and dumb?"

"Sure--in three languages."

"You understand--I've no authority to let you in on this.  I
might catch hell if I were found out doing it.  But I need help,
of a certain sort.  I want a man who isn't likely to be spotted
by the gang I'm after.  Get behind that screen--quick!"

It was a screen that hid a door leading to the pantry and the
servants' quarters.  There was a Windsor chair behind it, and it
is much easier to keep absolutely still when you are fairly
comfortable.  I had hardly sat down when a man wearing spurs,
who trod heavily, entered the room and I heard Grim get up to
greet him.

"Are we alone?" a voice asked gruffly.

Instead of answering Grim came and looked behind the screen,
opened the door leading to the pantry, closed it again, locked
it, and without as much as a glance at me returned to face
his visitor.

"Well, general, what is it?"

"This is strictly secret."

"I'll bet it isn't," said Grim.  "If it's about missing
explosives I know more than you do."

"My God!  It's out?  Two tons of TNT intended for the air force
gone without a trace?  The story's out?"

"I know it.  Catesby sent me word by messenger last night from
Ludd, after you put him under arrest."

"Damn the man!  Well, that's what's happened.  Catesby's fault.
They'll blame me.  The truck containing the stuff was run into a
siding three days ago.  Through young Catesby's negligence it was
left there without a guard.  Catesby will be broke for that as
sure as my name is Jenkins.  But, by the knell of hell's bells,
Grim, more than Catesby will lose their jobs unless we find the
stuff!  Two tons.  Half enough to blow up Palestine!"

"Too bad about Catesby," said Grim.

"Never mind, Catesby.  Damn him!  Consider my predicament!  How
can I go to the Administrator with a lame-duck story about
missing TNT and nothing done about it?"

"Nothing done?  You've passed the buck, haven't you?  Catesby is
under arrest, you say."

"What do you mean?"

"I know Catesby," Grim retorted quietly.  "He made that fine
stand at Beersheba--when the Arabs rushed the camp, and you
weren't looking.  He took the blame for your carelessness, and
never squealed.  You took the credit for his presence of mind,
and have treated him like a dog ever since.  You expect me to try
to save your bacon and forget Catesby's?"

"Nonsense, Grim!  You're talking without your book.  Here's what
happened:  the stuff arrived at Ludd in a truck attached to the
end of a mixed train.  The R.T.O.* sent me a memorandum and
stalled the truck on a siding.  I gave the memorandum to
Catesby." [*Railway Traffic Officer.]

"He tells me in the note I received last night that you did
nothing of the kind."

"Then he's a liar.  He forgot all about it and did nothing.  When
the Air Force sent to get the stuff the truck was empty."

"And you want me to find it, I suppose?"

"Yes.  The quicker the better!"

"And be a party to breaking Catesby?  I like my job, but not
that much!"

"You refuse then to hunt for the TNT?"

"I take my orders straight from the Administrator.  He expects me
in half an hour.  You want me to smooth the way for you with Sir
Louis.  I'm much more interested in Catesby, who would face a
firing party sooner than soak another fellow for his own fault.
Catesby assures me in writing that the first he ever heard of
that TNT was when you ordered him arrested after discovery of the
loss.  His word goes, as far as I'm concerned.  If you want me to
help you, find another goat than Catesby.  That's my answer."

There followed quite a long pause.  Perhaps Brigadier-General
Jenkins was wondering what chance he would stand in a show-down.
Whoever had heard the mess and canteen gossip knew that Jenkins'
career had been one long string of miracles by which he had
attained promotion without in any way deserving it, and a
parallel series of even greater ones by which he had saved
himself from ruin by contriving to blame some one else.

"You want me to white-wash Catesby?" he said at last.  "If you
pounce quickly on the TNT, no one need know it was lost."

"If you court-martial Catesby, the public shall know who lost it,
and who didn't, even if it costs me my commission!"

"Blast you!  Insubordination!"

"Is your car outside?" Grim answered.  "Why don't you drive me up
to the Administrator and charge me with it?"

"Don't be an idiot!  I came to you to avoid a scandal.  If this
news gets out there'll be a panic.  Things are touchy enough as
it is."

"Yes."

"Well--if I drop the charge against Catesby--?"

"Then I shall not have to fight for him."

"I'll see what I can do."

"Be definite!"

"Damn and blast you!  All right, I'll clear Catesby."

In that ominous minute, like the devil in an old-time drama,
Suliman knocked at the door leading from the outer hall.  Grim
opened it, and I heard the boy's voice piping up in Arabic.  The
Administrator was in his car outside, waiting to know whether
Major Grim was indoors.

"Where's your car?" I heard Grim ask.

"I sent the man to get a tire changed," Jenkins answered.

"Then Sir Louis needn't know you're here.  Do you want to
see him?"

"Of course not."

"You can get behind that screen if you like."

I thought Jenkins would explode when he found me sitting there.
He was a big, florid-faced man with a black moustache waxed into
points, and a neck the color of rare roast beef--a man not given
to self-restraint in any shape or form.  But he had to make a
quick decision.  Sir Louis' footsteps were approaching.  He
glared at me, made a sign to me to sit still, twisted his
moustache savagely, and listened, breathing through his mouth to
avoid the tell-tale whistle of his hairy nostrils.  I heard Grim
start toward the hall, but Sir Louis turned him back and came
straight in.

"It occurred to me I'd save you the time of coming up to see me
this morning, Grim, and look in on you instead before I start my
rounds.  Any new developments?"

"Not yet, sir.  I'll need forty-eight hours.  If we move too
fast they may touch the stuff off before we get the whole gang
in the net."

"You're sure you'd rather not have the police?"

"Quite.  They mean well, but they're clumsy."

"Um-m-m!  All the same, the thing's ticklish.  There are rumours
about all ready.  The Grand Mufti* came to me before breakfast
with a wild tale.  I've promised him some Sikhs for special
sentry duty.  He'd hardly gone before some Zionists came with a
story that the Arabs are planning to blow up their hospital;  I
gave them ten men and an officer."  [*The religious head of the
Moslem community.]

"Is the city quiet?" Grim asked him.

"Fair to middling.  The Jews refused to take their shutters down
this morning.  I had to issue an order about it.  I hear now that
they're doing business about as usual, but I've ordered the
number of men on duty within the city walls to be doubled.  At
the first sign of disturbance I shall have the gates closed.  Are
you quite sure you're in touch?"

"Quite. sure, sir.  I'm positive of what I told you last night.
Will you be seeing Colonel Goodenough?"

"Yes, in ten minutes."

"Please ask him to hold his Sikhs at my disposal for the next two
days.  You might add, sir, that if he cares to see sport he could
do worse than lend his own services."

"I'll do that.  You can count on Goodenough.  That's a soldier
devoid of nonsense.  Anything else?"

"That's all."

"Keep me informed.  Remember, Grim, I'm responsible for all you
do.  I've endorsed you in blank, as it were.  Don't overlook
that point."

"I won't, sir."

Sir Louis walked out.  Almost before his spurs ceased jingling in
the tiled hall, Brigadier-General Jenkins strode out in a
towering rage from behind the screen.

"'Pon my soul, a spy's trick!" he exploded.  "Had an
eavesdropper, did you?  Listening from behind a screen while you
tricked me into a promise on Catesby's account!"

"Sure," Grim answered, folding the screen back, and letting
his face wrinkle in smiles all the way up to the roots of
his hair.  Very comical he looked, for his eyebrows were
only partly sprouted again.  "Had two of you to listen in
on the Administrator!"

"Endorses you in blank, eh?  How long would he let the
endorsement stand if he knew I was behind that screen while he
was talking to you?"

"Try him!" Grim suggested.  "Shall I call him back?  He doesn't
want to break you--told me so, in fact, last night--but he could
change his mind, I daresay.  My tip to you is to get back to Ludd
as fast as your car can take you, release Catesby, and say as
little as possible to any one!"

"Damn you for a Yankee!" Jenkins answered.  "You've got me
cornered for the moment, and you make the most of it.  But wait
till my turn comes!  As for you, sir," Jenkins turned and looked
me up and down with all the arrogance that nice new crossed
swords on his shoulder can give a certain sort of man, "don't let
me catch you trying to interfere in any Administration business,
that's all!"

I offered him a cigarette, grinning.  There was no sense in
picking a quarrel.  No man likes to discover that a perfect
stranger has overheard his intimate confessions.  His annoyance
was understandable.  But he hadn't nice manners.  He knocked the
cigarette case out of my hand and kicked it across the room.  So
I got into one of the deep armchairs and laughed at him in self-
defense, to preserve my own temper from boiling up over the top.

"To hell with both of you!" Jenkins thundered, and strode out
like Mars on the war-path.

"Poor old Jinks!" said Grim, as soon as he had gone.  "As Sir
Louis said last night, he has a wife and family besides the
unofficial ladies on his string.  All they'll have to divide
between them soon, at the rate he's going, will be his half-pay.
He has fought for promotion all his days, to keep abreast of
expenses.  What that string of cormorants will do with his four
hundred pounds a year, when he oversteps at last and gets
retired, beggars imagination!  However, let's get busy."

Business consisted in dressing me up as an Arab with the aid of
Suliman, and drilling me painstakingly for half-an-hour, both of
them using every trick they knew to make me laugh or show
surprise, and Grim nodding approval each time I contrived not to.
More difficult than acting deaf and dumb was the trick of
squatting with my legs crossed, but I had learned it after a
fashion in India years ago, and only needed schooling.

"You'll get scuppered if you're caught," he warned me.  "If
Suliman wasn't so scared of devils I wouldn't risk it, but I must
have somebody to keep an eye on him when the time comes;  that'll
be tomorrow, I think."

"Suppose you tell me the object of the game," I suggested.  "I'm
sick of only studying the rules."

"Well--your part will be to sit over those two tons of TNT and
see that nobody explodes them ahead of time.  There's a
conspiracy on foot to blow up the Dome of the Rock."

"You mean the Mosque of Omar?"

"The place tourists call the Mosque of Omar.  The site of
Solomon's Temple--the Rock of Abraham--the threshing-floor of
Araunah the Jebusite.  Next after the shrine at Mecca it's the
most sacred spot in the whole Mahommedan world."

"Good lord!" I said. "Are the Zionists so reckless?".

"No, the Arabs are.  Remember what old Scharnhoff said the other
day about the new fanaticism?"

"Is Scharnhoff mixed up in it?"

"He's being watched.  If the Arabs pull it off, they'll accuse
the Jews of doing it, and set to work to butcher every Jew in the
Near East.  That will oblige the British to protect the Jews.
That in turn will set every Mohammedan in the world--'specially
Indians, but Egyptians, too--against the British.  Jihad--green
banner--holy war--all the East and Northern Africa alight while
the French snaffle Syria.  Sound good to you?"

"Sir Louis knows this?"

"He, is paid to know things."

"And he lets you play cat and mouse with it?"

"Got to be careful.  Suppose we draw the net too soon, what then?
Most of the conspirators escape.  The story leaks out.  The Jews
get the blame for the attempt, and sooner or later the massacre
begins anyhow.  What we've got to do is bag every last mother's
son of them, and suppress the whole story--return the TNT to
store, and swear it was never missing."

"The Administrator has his nerve," I said.

"You'll need yours, too, before this game's played," Grim
answered.  "D'you see now why I picked on you for an accomplice?"

"I do not."

"You're the one man in Jerusalem whom nobody will suspect, or be
on the look-out for.  The men we're up against are the shrewdest
rats in Palestine.  They've got a list of British officers, my
name included, of course.  They'll know which men are assigned to
special duty, and they'll keep every one of us shadowed."

"Won't that--I mean, how can you work if you're shadowed?"

"Me?  I shall catch my spur in the carpet, fall downstairs and
break a leg at ten-fifteen.  At ten-thirty the doctor comes, and
finds me too badly hurt to be moved.  He sends word of it to Sir
Louis by an orderly who can be trusted to talk to any one he
meets on the way.  I leave by the back way at ten forty-five.
However, here's a chance for you to practise deaf-and-dumb drill.
There's some one coming.  Squat down in that corner.  Look meek
and miserable.  That's the stuff.  Answer the door, Suliman."





Chapter Thirteen

"You may now be unsafe and an outlaw and enjoy yourself!"


The man who entered was a short, middle-aged Jew of the type that
writes political reviews for magazines--black morning coat, straw
hat, gold pince-nez--a neatly trimmed dark beard beginning to
turn gray from intense mental emotion--nearly bald--a manner of
conceding the conventions rather than argue the point, without
admitting any necessity for them--a thin-lipped smile that
apologized for smiling in a world so serious and bitter.  He wore
a U.S.A. ten-dollar gold piece on his watch chain, by way of
establishing his nationality.

"Well, Mr. Eisernstein?  Trouble again?  Sit down and let's hear
the worst," said Grim.

Eisernstein remained standing and glanced at me over in the
corner.

"I will wait until you are alone."

"Ignore him--deaf and dumb," Grim answered.  "Half a minute,
though--have you had breakfast?"

"Breakfast!  This is no time for eating, Mister--I beg your
pardon, Major Grim.  I have not slept.  I shall not break
my fast until my duty is done.  If it is true that the Emperor
Nero fiddled while Rome burned, then I find him no worse than
this Administrator!"

"Has he threatened to crucify you?" Grim asked.  "Take a
seat, do."

"He may crucify me, and I will thank him, if he will only in
return for it pay some attention to the business for which he
draws a salary!  I drove to Headquarters to see him.  He was not
there.  Nobody would tell me where he is.  I drove down again
from the Mount of Olives and luckily caught sight of his car in
the distance.  I contrived to intercept him.  I told him there is
a plot on foot to massacre every individual of my race in the
Near East--a veritable pogrom.  He was polite.  He seems to think
politeness is the Christian quality that covers the multitude of
sins.  He offered me a cigar!

"I offered him a telegram blank, with which to cable for
reenforcements!  He said that all rumours in Jerusalem become
exaggerated very quickly, and offered me a guard of one soldier
to follow me about!  I insisted on immediate military precautions
on a large scale failing which I will cable the Foreign Office in
London at my own expense.  I offered to convince him with
particulars about this contemplated pogrom but he said he had an
urgent appointment and referred me to you, just as Nero might
have referred a question regarding the amphitheatre to one of
his subordinates!"

"Pogroms mean nothing in his young life," Grim answered smiling.
"I'm here to do the dirty work.  Suppose you spill the news."

"You must have heard the news!  Yet you ignore it!  The Moslems
are saying that we Zionists have offered two million pounds, or
some such ridiculous sum, for the site of Solomon's Temple.  They
are spreading the tale broadcast.  Their purpose is to stir up
fanaticism against us.  The ignorant among them set such value on
that rock and the mosque their cut-throat ancestors erected on it
that Jews are now openly threatened as they pass through the
streets.  Yet there is not one word of truth in the story of our
having made any such offer."

"There are plenty of troops," said Grim.  "Any attempt at
violence could be handled instantly."

"Then you will do nothing?"

"What do you suggest ought to be done?"

"Here is a list.  Read it.  Those are the names of fifty Arabs
who are active in spreading anti-Zionist propaganda."

Grim read the list carefully.

"All talkers," he said.  "Not a really dangerous man among them."

"Ah!  There you are!  I might have expected it!"  Eisernstein
threw up his hands in a gesture of contempt rather than despair.
"Nobody cares what happens to Jews.  Nobody cares for our
sleepless agony of mind.  Nobody cares how or what we suffer
until afterward, when there will be polite expressions of regret,
which the survivors will assess at a true valuation!  It is the
same wherever we turn.  Last night--at half-past one in the
morning--a committee of us, every one American, Called at the
American consulate to tell our consul of our danger.  The consul
was unsympathetic in the last degree.  Yet our coreligionists in
the States are taxed to pay his salary.  He said it was not
his business.  He referred us to the Administrator.  The
Administrator refers me to you.  To whom do you refer me?  To the
devil, I suppose!"

"The best thing you can do," said. Grim, "is to go ahead and deny
that story about the offer to buy the Dome of the Rock.  You
Zionists have got the most efficient publicity bureau on earth.
You can reach the public ear any time you want to.  Deny the
story, and keep on denying it."

"Ah!  Who will believe us?  To be a Zionist is to be a person
about whom anybody will believe anything;  and the more absurd
the lie, the more readily it will be believed!  Meanwhile, the
Moslems are sharpening their swords against us from one end of
this land to the other!"

I suppose that what Eisernstein really needed more than anything
was sympathy, not good advice.  Grim's deliberate coolness only
irritated the passion of a man, whose whole genius and energy
were bent on realizing the vision of a nation of Jews firmly
established in their ancient home.  A people that has been
tortured in turn by all the governments can hardly be expected to
produce un-nervous politicians.  He was at the mercy of emotions,
obsessed by one paramount idea.  A little praise just then of his
loyalty to an ideal, to which he had sacrificed time, means,
health, energy, everything, would have soothed him and hurt
nobody.  But the acidity of his scorn had bitten beneath the
surface of Grim's good humor.

"There'll be no pogrom," Grim said, getting up and lighting a
cigarette.  "There'll be nothing resembling one.  But that won't
be the fault of you Zionists.  You accuse without rime or reason,
but you yell for help the minute you're accused yourselves.  I
don't blame the Arabs for not liking you.  Nobody expects Arabs
to enjoy having their home invaded by an organization of
foreigners.  Yet if this Administration lifts a finger to make
things easier for the Arabs you howl that it's unfair.

"If the Administrator refuses to arrest Arabs for talking a
little wildly, you call him a Nero.  I'm neither pro- nor anti-
Zionist myself.  You and the Arabs may play the game out between
you for all of me.  But I can promise you there'll be no pogrom.
It is my business to know just what precautions have been taken."

"Words! Major Grim.  Words!" sneered Eisernstein, getting up to
go.  "What do words amount to, when presently throats are to be
cut?  If your throat were in danger, I venture to say there would
be something doing, instead of mere talk about precautions!  I
hope you will enjoy your little cigarette," he added bitterly.
"Good morning!"

"Talk of fiddling while Rome burns!" Grim laughed as soon as the
Zionist had left the room.  "Has it ever occurred to you that
Nero was possibly smothering his feelings?  I wonder how long
there'd be one Zionist left out here, if we simply stood aside
and looked on.  Go and change your clothes, Suliman.  It's time I
broke a leg."

Grim disappeared upstairs himself, and returned about ten minutes
later in the uniform of a Shereefian officer--that is to say, of
Emir Feisul's Syrian army.  Nothing could be smarter, not
anything better calculated to disguise a man.  Disguise, as any
actor or detective can tell you, is not so much a matter of make-
up as suggestion.  It is little mannerisms--unstudied habits that
identify.  The suggestion that you are some one else is the thing
to strive for, not the concealment of who you really are.

Grim's skin had been sun-tanned in the Arab campaign under
Lawrence against the Turks.  The Shereefian helmet is a
compromise between the East and West, having a strip of cloth
hanging down behind it as far as the shoulders and covering the
ears on either side, to take the place of the Arab head-dress.
The khaki uniform had just enough of Oriental touch about it
to distinguish it from that of a British officer.  No man
inexperienced in disguise would dream of choosing it;  for the
simple reason that it would not seem to him disguise enough.  Yet
Grim now looked so exactly like somebody else that it was hard to
believe he was the same man who had been in the room ten minutes
before.  His mimicry of the Syrian military walk--blended of
pride and desire not to seem proud--was perfect.

"I'm now staff-captain Ali Mirza of Feisul's army," he announced.
"Ali Mirza a man notorious for his anti-British rancor, but
supposed to be down here just now on a diplomatic mission.  I've
been seen about the streets like this for the last two days.  But
say:  that doctor is a long time on the way."

He went to the telephone, but did not call the hospital;  that
would have been too direct and possibly too secret.

"Give me Headquarters--yes--who's that?--never mind who's
speaking--say: I can't get the military hospital--something wrong
with the wire--will you call Major Templeton and say that Major
Grim has had an accident--yes, Grim--compound fracture of the
thigh--very serious--ask him to go at once to Major Grim's
quarters--thanks--that's all."  He returned to the fireplace and
stood watching me meditatively for several minutes.

"If you deceive Templeton, you'll do," he said at last.  "Wait
a minute."

He went to the desk and scribbled something in Arabic on a sheet
of paper, sealed that in a blank envelope, and handed it to me.

"Hide it.  You've two separate and quite distinct tasks, each
more important and, in a way, dangerous than the other.  The
principal danger is to me, not you.  If they spot you, my
number's as good as hoisted from that minute.  You mustn't kid
yourself you're safe for one second until the last card has
been played."

"Who are 'they'?"

"I'm coming to that.  Your first job is to make it possible for
me to get the confidence of one or two of these conspirators.
You're a deaf-and-dumb man--stone deaf--with a message for staff-
captain Ali Mirza, which you will only deliver to him in person.
Suliman does the talking.  You say nothing.  You simply refuse to
hand your message over to any one but me.  They'll appreciate why
a deaf and dumb man should be chosen for treasonable business.
But perhaps you're scared--maybe you'd rather reconsider it?
It's not too late."

I snorted.

"All right.  These conspirators meet at Djemal's coffee shop on
David Street.  They talk to one another in French, because the
proprietor and the other frequenters of the place only know
Arabic.  You know French and Arabic enough to understand a
sentence here and there, so keep your ears wide open.  I shan't
show up until a Sikh named Narayan Singh tells me that a certain
Noureddin Ali is in there.  He's the bird I'm after.  He's a
dirty little murderer, and I'm going to be right pleasant to him.

"You may have to sit in the place all day waiting for me;  but
wait until after midnight if you must.  Sooner or later Noureddin
Ali is bound to show up.  I shall be hard after him.  If they
offer you food, take it.  Eat with your fingers.  Eat like a pig.
Lick the plate, if you like.  The nearer mad you seem to be, the
safer you are.  After I get there, hang around until I give you
money.  Then beat it."

"Where to?  I can't go to my room at the hotel in this disguise."

"I've thought of that.  You know Cosmopolitan Oil Davey, of
course?  He lives at the hotel.  I'll get word to him that he may
expect a messenger from me after dark tonight.  He'll leave word
with the porter downstairs, who'll take you to Davey's room.  You
can tell Davey absolutely anything.  He's white."

"Well, I think I can execute that maneuver.  What's task
number two?"

"To sit on the TNT!  But one thing at a time is enough.  Let's
attend to this one first.  Ah!  Here comes Templeton!"

"Damn you, Grim!" said a calm voice in the doorway.  A tall, lean
man in major's uniform with the blue tabs of the medical staff
strode in.  He had the dried-out look of the Sudan, added to the
self-reliance that comes of deciding life and death issues at a
moment's notice.

"The hospital is crowded with patients, and here you immobilize
me for half a morning.  I can't pretend to set a compound
fracture in ten minutes, you know!  Why couldn't you break your
neck and have me sign a death certificate?"

"Didn't occur to me," said Grim.  "But never mind, doc.  You need
a rest.  Here's tobacco, lots to read, and an armchair.  Lock
yourself in and be happy."

"Who's this?" asked Templeton, looking down at me.

"Deaf and dumb poor devil, earning a few piastres by working for
the Intelligence."

"Spy, eh?  He looks fit for honest work if he had all his
faculties.  Is he dumb as well as deaf, or because he's deaf?"

"Dunno," said Grim.  "He never speaks."

"Perhaps I can do something for him.  Suppose you leave him here
with me.  I can give him a thorough examination instead of
wasting my time here."

"He's got a job of work to do right now," said Grim.

"Does he know the sign language?  Have you any way of telling him
to come and see me at the hospital?"

"I give him written instructions in Arabic."

"That so?  I'll look at his ears--tell you in a minute whether
it's worth while to come to me."

He took my head between strong, authoritative hands and tilted
it sidewise.

"Hello!  What's this?"

The Arab head-dress I was wearing shifted and showed
non-Arab symptoms.

"Open that bag of mine, will you, Grim, and pass me that big pair
of forceps you'll find wrapped in oiled paper on top of
everything.  There's something I can attend to here at once."

It was an uncomfortable moment.  Grim never cracked a smile.  He
dug out the instrument of torture and gave it to Templeton.  But
there were two points that occurred to me, in addition to the
knowledge that nothing whatever was the matter with my ear.
Doctors in good standing, who are usually gentlemen, don't
operate without permission;  and the forceps were much too big
for any such purpose.  So I sat still.

"Um-m-m!  What he really needs is a red-hot needle run down close
to the ear-drum.  It wouldn't take five minutes, or hurt him--
much.  After that I think he'd be able to hear perfectly.
Suppose we try."

"I can wait ten minutes yet," Grim answered.

"Very well.  I've a platinum needle in the bag.  I'll get out the
spirit-lamp and we'll soon see.  To be candid with you, I don't
believe the man's any more deaf than you or I."

"If you run a hot needle through the lobe of his ear well
find out whether he can really talk or not," said Grim in
his pleasantest voice.  "If he's shamming I don't mind.
What we need in this service is a man who can endure without
betraying himself."

"Well, we'll soon see."

I began to hate Grim pretty cordially.  I hated him more when
Suliman came in, dressed for the street in a rather dirty cotton
smock, with a turban in place of his fez.  He told the boy to
hold the wooden handle of a paper-knife behind my ear to prevent
the hot needle from going too far on its sizzling journey.
It didn't seem to me the way to reciprocate volunteer secret
service.  Suliman's grin at the prospect of seeing a man
tortured was enough to provoke murder.  I brushed the boy aside,
fly-fashion, got up, crossed the room, and sat down again in
the corner.

"Good enough!" laughed Grim.  "You'll do."

"Yes, I think he'll do," agreed Templeton.

But I took no notice.  I had seen too many games lost and won
with the last card.  Templeton looked down at Suliman:

"Tell him the game's over.  He may talk now."

"Mafish mukhkh!" [No brains!] the boy answered, grinning and
tapping his own forehead.  "Magnoon!" [Mad!]

"I think I can trust them both," said Grim, smiling in my
direction.  "All right, old man;  time out!  If you'd spoken once
there'd have been nothing more between you and a life of safety
and respectability!"

"Whereas," said Templeton, "you may now be unsafe and an outlaw
and enjoy yourself!  Are you sure they haven't marked him?" he
asked Grim.

"Sure!  Why should they suspect a tourist?  But I've taken
precautions.  Word is on the way to the hotel to forward all his
mail to Jaffa until further notice."  He laughed at me again.  "I
hope you're not expecting important letters!"

Suliman had evidently been well schooled in advance, for at a nod
from Grim he came over and took my hand, as if I were blind in
addition to the other supposed infirmities.  He led me out by a
back-door, across a yard into an alley, which we followed as far
as a main road and then turned toward the Jaffa Gate.  Looking
back once I saw Grim in his Shereefian uniform striding along
behind us;  but where the road forked he took the other turning.

There is contentment in walking disguised through crowded
streets, even when you are in tow of eight-year-old iniquity that
regards you as a lump of baggage to be pushed this and that way.
Suliman plainly considered me a rank outsider, only admitted into
the game on sufferance.  Having said I was "magnoon" he lived up
to the assertion, and warned people to make way for me if they
did not want to be bitten and go mad, too;  so as a general rule
I received a pretty wide berth.  But it was fun, in spite of
Suliman.  It was like seeing the world through a peep-hole.  Men
and women you knew went by without suspecting they were
recognized, and in a puzzling sort of way the world, that had
been your world yesterday, seemed now to belong wholly to other
people, while you lived in a new sphere of your own.

We had to go slowly as we approached the Jaffa Gate, for the
crowd was dense there, and a line of Sikhs was drawn across the
gap where the street passes through the city wall.  It was the
gap the Turks once made by tearing down the wall to let the
Kaiser through, when he made that famous meek and humble
pilgrimage of his.  The Sikhs were searching all comers for
weapons, and we had to wait our turn.

Outside the gate, on the left-hand as you faced it, was the usual
line of boot-blacks--the only cheap thing left in Jerusalem--a
motley two dozen of ex-Turkish soldiers, recently fighting the
British gamely in the last ditch, and now blacking their boots
with equal gusto, for rather higher pay.  Some of them still wore
Turkish uniforms.  Two or three were redheaded and blue-eyed, and
almost certainly descended from Scotch crusaders.  (The whole
wide world bears witness that when the Scots went soldiering they
were efficient in more ways than one.)

The rest of the crowd were mainly peasantry with basket-loads of
stuff for market;  but there was a liberal sprinkling among them
of all the odds and ends of the Levant, with a Jew here and
there, the inevitable Russian priest, and a dozen odd lots,
of as many nationalities, whom it would have been difficult
to classify.

And there was Police Constable Bedreddin Shah.  You could not
have missed noticing him, although I did not learn his name until
afterwards.  He came swaggering down the Jaffa Road with all the
bullying arrogance of the newly enlisted Arab policeman.  He
shoved me aside, calling me a name that a drunken donkey-driver
would hesitate to apply to a dog in the gutter.  He was on his
way to the lock-up that stands just inside the gate, and I wished
him a year in it.

As he plunged into the crowd that checked and surged immediately
in front of the line of Sikhs, a small man in Arab costume with
the lower part of his face well covered by the kaffiyi,* rushed
out from the corner behind the bootblacks and drove a long knife
home to the hilt between the policeman's shoulder-blades.  I
wasn't shocked.  I wasn't even sorry. [*Head-dress that hangs
down over the shoulders.]

Bedreddin Shah shrieked and fell forward.  Blood gushed from the
wound.  The crowd surged in curiously, and then fell back before
the advancing Sikhs.  A British officer who had heard the
victim's cry came spurring his horse into the crowd from inside
the gate.  In his effort to get near the victim he only added to
the confusion.

The murderer, who seemed in no particular hurry, dodged quietly
in and out among the swarm of bewildered peasants, and in thirty
seconds had utterly disappeared.  A minute later I saw Grim
offering his services as interpreter and stooping over the dying
man to try to catch the one word he was struggling to repeat.





Chapter Fourteen

"Windy bellies without hearts in them."


Djemal's coffee shop is run by a Turkish gentleman whose real
name is Yussuf.  One name, and the shorter the better, had been
plenty in the days when Djemal Pasha ran Jerusalem with iron
ruthlessness, and consequent success of a certain sort.  When
Djemal was the Turkish Governor, every proprietor of every kind
of shop had to stand in the doorway at attention whenever Djemal
passed, and woe betide the laggard!

It would not have paid any one, in those days, to name any sort
of shop after Djemal Pasha.  Even the provider of the rope that
throttled the offender would have made no profit, because the
rope would simply have been looted from the nearest store.
The hangman would have been the nearest soldier, whose pay
was already two years in arrears.  So Yussuf's own name done
in Turkish characters used to stand over the door before the
British came.

It was Djemal Pasha's considered judgment that Yussuf cooked the
best coffee in Jerusalem.  So whenever the despot was in the city
he conferred on Yussuf the inestimable privilege of supplying him
with coffee at odd moments, under threat of the bastinado if the
stuff were not suitably sweet and hot.  The only money that ever
changed hands in that connection was when the tax-gatherer came
down on Yussuf for an extra levy, because of the added trade that
conceivably might be expected to accrue through the advertisement
obtained by serving such an exalted customer.  The tax-gatherer
also threatened the bastinado;  and as the man who likes that
punishment, or who could soften the heart of a Turkish tax
assessor, has yet to be discovered, Yussuf invariably paid.

But when Allenby conquered Palestine between bouts of trying to
tame his Australians, and Djemal Pasha scooted hot-foot into
exile with a two-hundred-woman harem packed in lorries at his
rear, Yussuf remembered that old adage about better late than
never.  He put Djemal's name on the stone arch of the narrow door
near the foot of David Street.  He did it partly out of the
disrespect that a small dog feels for a big one that is now on
chain;  but he was not overlooking the business value of it.

The first result was that he did quite a lot of trade with
British officers, who came primarily because they were sick of
eating sand and bully-beef, and drinking sand and tepid water in
the desert.  Later they flocked there by way of paying indirect
homage to a governor who, whatever his obvious demerits, had at
any rate never been answered back or thwarted with impunity.
(There was a time, after the capture of Jerusalem, when if the
British army could have voted on it, Djemal Pasha would have been
brought back and given a free hand.)

But the officers began to discover that Yussuf was charging them
four or five times the proper price.  The seniors objected
promptly, and deserted, to the inexpressible delight of the
subalterns;  but even the under-paid extravagant youths grew
tired of extortion after a month or two, and Yussuf had to look
elsewhere for customers.

Yussuf did some thinking behind that genial Turkish mask of his.
Competition was keen.  There are more coffee shops in Jerusalem
than hairs on a hog's back, and the situation, down near the
bottom of that narrow thoroughfare in the shadow of an ancient
arch, did not lend itself to drawing crowds.

But there were others in Jerusalem besides the British officers
who yearned for Djemal's rule again;  and, unlike the irreverent
men in khaki, they did not dare to voice their feelings in
public.  All the old political grafters, and all the would-be new
ones savagely resented a regime under which bribery was not
permitted;  and, as always happens sooner or later, they began to
show a tendency to meet in certain places, where they might talk
violence without risk of incurring it.

So Yussuf permitted a rumour to gain ground that he, too, was a
malcontent and that the British had deserted his coffee shop for
that reason.  He gave out that Djemal Pasha's name over the door
stood for reaction and political intrigue.  So his place began to
be frequented by effendis in tarboosh and semi-European clothes,
who could chew the cud of bitterness aloud between walls that the
crusaders had built four feet thick.  The only entrance was
through the narrow front door, where Yussuf inspected every
visitor before admitting him.

So Yussuf's "Cafe Djemal Pasha" was the place to go to for
politics, of the red-hot, death-and-dynamite order that would
make Lenin and Trotsky sound like small-town sports.  But first
you had to get by Yussuf at the door.

Suliman led me by the hand down David Street, through the smelly-
yelly moil of flies and barter, past the meat and vegetable
stalls, beneath the crusader arches from which Jewish women
peered through trellised windows, across three transversing lanes
of the ancient suku,* and halted at Yussuf's door.  [*Bazaar]

He rapped on it three times.  When Yussuf's wrinkled face
appeared at last Suliman demanded to see Staff-Captain Ali Mirza.
Yussuf's blood-shot eyes peered at me for a long time before he
asked a question.

"Atrash!--akras!--majnoon!!" [Deaf!--Dumb!--Mad!!] said Suliman.
Describing me as mad seemed to give him particular delight.  He never
overlooked a chance of doing it.

"Staff-Captain Ali Mirza is not here.  What should a Madman want
with him?"

"He is not very mad--only stupid.  He carries a message for
the captain."

"But the captain is not here.  He has not been here."

"He will come."

"How should a deaf-and-dumb man deliver a message?"

"It is in writing."

"Very well.  He may leave the writing with me.  If the captain
comes I will deliver it."

"No. The message is from Esh-Sham (Damascus).  He will give it
only into the captain's own hand."

"What is your name?"

"Suliman."

"What is his?"

"God knows!  He came with another man by train;  and the other
man, who is much more mad than this one, gave me five piastres to
bring this one to your kahwi!"  [Coffe-pot]

Yussuf shut the door, and discussed the proposition with his
customers.  At the end of two or three minutes his head
appeared again.

"You say Staff-Captain Ali Mirza is expected here?"

"So said the man at the station."

"What do you know of Staff-Captain Ali Mirza?"

"Nothing."

Once more the door closed and I could hear the murmur of
voices inside--but only a confused murmur, for the door was
thick.  When it opened again two other heads were peering
from behind Yussuf's.

"Has he money?" he asked.

"Kif?  Ma indi khabar!" [How should I know?]

Yussuf opened the door wide and made a sign for me to enter.  He
seemed in two minds whether to let Suliman come in with me or
not, but finally admitted him with a gruff admonition to keep
still in one place and not talk.

The place was fairly full.  It was a square room, with one window
high in the wall on David Street.  Around three sides, including
that on which was the front door, ran a wooden seat furnished
with thin cushions.  Facing the front door was another one
leading to a dark hole in the rear, where pots were washed and
rice was boiled;  beside that door, occupying most of the length
of the fourth wall, was a thing like an altar of dressed stone,
on which the coffee was prepared in dozens of little copper pots.

The benches being pretty well occupied, I was about to squat down
on the floor, but they made room for me close to the front door,
so I squatted on the corner of the bench and tucked my legs under
me.  Suliman dropped down on the floor in front of me with his
head about level with my knees.

The other occupants of the room were all Syrian Arabs--not a
Bedouin among them.  All of them wore more or less European
clothing, with the inevitable tarboosh, each set at a different
angle.  You can guess the mentality of the Syrian by the angle of
that red Islamic symbol he wears on his head.  The black tassel
normally hangs behind, and the steady-going conservatives and all
who take their religion seriously, wear the inverted flower-pot-
shaped affair as nearly straight up as the cranium permits.

But once let a Syrian take up new politics, join the Young Turk
Party, forswear religion, or grow cynical about accepted
doctrine, and the angle of his tarboosh shows it, just as surely
as the angle of the London Cockney's "bowler" betrays irreverence
and the New York gangster's "lid" expresses self-contempt
disguised as self-esteem.

The head-gears were set at every possible angle in that coffee-
shop of Yussuf's, from the backward tilt of the breezy optimist
to the far-forward thrust down over the eye of malignant
cynicism, which usually went with folded arms, legs thrust out
straight, and heels together on the floor.

Yussuf brought me coffee without waiting to be asked.  I paid him
a half-piastre for it, which is half the proper price, and
utterly ignored his expostulation.  He touched me on the
shoulder, displayed the coin in the palm of his hand and went
through a prodigious pantomime.  I did not even try to appear
interested.  He ordered Suliman to explain to me.

"Mafish mukhkh!" said the boy, touching his own forehead.

My real motive was to act as differently as possible from the
white man, who always pays twice what he should.  By establishing
the suggestion of accustomed meanness, I hoped to offset any
breaks I might make presently.  Spies, and people of that kind,
usually have plenty of money for their needs, so that by acting
the part of a man unused to spending except in minute driblets I
stood a better chance of not being detected.

But I was in luck.  I have often noticed, so that it has become
almost an article of creed with me, that luck invariably breaks
that way.  It almost never turns up blind.  You sit down and wait
for luck, and it all goes to the other fellow.  But start to use
your wits, even clumsily, and the luck comes along and squanders
itself on you.

"He is certainly from Damascus," laughed one of the customers.
"The price is a half-piastre in Damascus at the meaner shops."

I did not know anything about Damascus then--had never been
there;  but from that minute it never entered the mind of one of
those men to doubt that Damascus was my home-city, so easily
satisfied by trifling suggestions is the unscientific human.
Yussuf went back to his charcoal stove grumbling to himself
in Turkish.

But there was still one question in doubt.  They seemed satisfied
that I was really deaf and dumb, but in that land of countless
mission schools and alien speech there is always a chance that
even children know a word or two of French.  They tested Suliman
with simple questions, such as who was his mother and where was
he born;  but he did not need to act that part, he was utterly
ignorant of French.

So they proceeded to ignore the two of us and turn their
political acrimony loose in French, discussing the maddest, most
unmoral schemes with the gusto of small boys playing pirates.
There seemed to be almost as many rival political parties as men
in the room.  The only approach to unity was when they agreed to
accuse and destroy.  As for constructive agreement, they had
none, and every one's suggestion for improvement was sneered at
by all the rest.  They were not even agreed about the Zionists,
except hating them;  they quarreled about what would be the
best way to take advantage of them before wiping them out
of existence.

But they all saw exquisite humour in the item of news that
Eisernstein had taken so to heart.

"That was Noureddin Ali's idea!  He is a genius!  To accuse the
Zionists of offering two million pounds for the Dome of the
Rock--ah! who else could have thought of it!  The story has spread
all through Jerusalem, and is on its way to the villages.  In two
days it will be common gossip from Damascus to Beersheba.  In a
week it will be known from end to end of Egypt;  then Arabia;
then India!  Ho!  When the Indian Moslems get the news--the
Indian troops in Palestine will send it by mail--then what a
furor!  Then what anger!  That was finesse!  That was true
statesmanship!  Never was a shrewder genius than Noureddin Ali!"

"Don't shout his name too loud," said somebody.  "The
Administration suspects him already."

"Bah!  Who in this room is a friend of the Administration?  The
Administrator is a broken shard;  the British will summon him
home for inefficiency.  Besides, there is only one man in
Jerusalem of whom Noureddin is in the least afraid--that Major
Grim, the American.  And whoever would give the price of a cup of
coffee for a lease of the life of Major Grim in the circumstances
would do better to toss the money to the first beggar he meets!"

"Hssh!"

"Hah!  All the same, I would not choose to be Noureddin's enemy."

"There is another one who will share that opinion--or so I have
heard.  I was told that Bedreddin Shah, a recent recruit in the
police, stumbled by accident on certain evidence and demanded a
huge sum for silence.  Hee-hee!  How much will anybody give
Bedreddin Shah for his prospect?"

"Hssh!"

"What did Bedreddin Shah discover?"

"Nobody knows."

"You mean nobody will tell."

"The same thing."

"How long could a secret be kept in Jerusalem, if you people were
informed of what is going on?  You are good for propaganda, that
is all!  You can talk--Allah! how you all talk!  But as for doing
anything, or keeping a secret until a thing is done, you are no
better than magpies."

The last speaker was a rather fat man, over in the corner by the
scullery door.  He had a nose like Sultan Abdul Hamid's and
large, elongated eyes that looked capable of seeing things on
either side of him while he stared straight forward.  Even in
that dark corner you could see they had the alligator-hue that
one associates with cruelty.  He had the massive shoulders and
forward-stooping position as he sat cross-legged on the seat that
suggest deliberate purpose devoid of hurry.

They all resented what he said, but none seemed disposed to
quarrel with him.  One or two remonstrated mildly, but he ignored
their remarks, busying himself with digging out a cigarette from
a gold case set with jewels;  after he had lighted it very
thoughtfully and examined the end once or twice to make sure that
it burned just right, he let it hang between his lips in a way
that accentuated the angle of his bulbous nose.  You wondered
whether he owned a harem, and what the ladies thought of him.

"Will you sit and brag in here all day?" he asked after a few
minutes.  "Yussuf must be getting rich, you sip so much coffee.
It is not particularly good for Yussuf to get rich;  it will make
him lazy, as most of you are."

The chattering had ceased, although there were several attempts
to break that uncomfortable silence with inane remarks.  His
ravenish, unpleasant voice seemed to act on the company like a
chill wind, depriving treason of its warm sociableness but
leaving in the sting.

"I said you are good for propaganda," he resumed, tossing away
ash with a reflective air.  "But even that has no value within
four walls.  If Noureddin Ali should come and learn from me how
much talking has been done in here, and how little done outside,
I can imagine he will not be pleased.  Are there no other
kahawi?*  Why is that story about the Zionists and their offer to
buy the Dome of Rock not being spread diligently?  You like the
safety of this place with its four thick walls.  But I tell you
the jackal has to leave his hole to hunt." [*Coffee-shops]

They did not like taking orders, even when they were expressed
more or less indirectly;  no follower of the new political
freedom does like it, for it rather upsets the new conceit.  But
he evidently knew his politicians, and they him.  They got up one
by one and made for the door, each offering a different excuse
designed to cover up obedience under a cloak of snappy independence.
Not one of them drew a retort from him, or as much as a farewell nod.

When the last one was gone, and the process took up all of half-
an-hour, he sat and looked down his nose at me for several
minutes without speaking.  You could have guessed just as easily
what an alligator was thinking about, and I tried to emulate him,
pretending to go off into the brown study that the Turks call
kaif, out of which it is considered bad manners to disturb your
best friend, let alone a stranger.  But manners proved to be no
barrier in his case.

He began talking to me in Arabic--directly at me, slowly and
deliberately, but I did not understand very much of it and it was
not difficult to pretend I did not hear.  However, Suliman was in
different case;  the boy began to get very restless under the
monolog, and I tugged at his back hair more than once to remind
him of the part he had to play.

Discovering that the Arabic took no effect on me, the alligator
person changed to French.

"They speak French in Damascus.  I know you are not deaf.  You
are a spy.  I know your name.  I know what your business was
before you came here.  I know why you want to see the staff-
captain.  You have a letter for him;  I know what is in it.   No
use trying to deceive me;  I have ways of my own of discovering
things.  Do you know what happens to spies who refuse to answer
my questions?  They are attended to.  Quite simple.  They receive
attention.  Nobody hears of them again.

"There are drains in Jerusalem--big, dark, smelly, ancient, full
of rats--very useful drains.  You think the Staff-Captain Ali
Mirza will protect you.  At a word from me he will make the
request that you receive immediate attention.  You will disappear
down a drain, where even Allah will forget that you ever existed.
Staff-Captain Ali Mirza is my old friend.  Better let me see
that letter."

I felt like laughing at the drain threats although Suliman was
still shivering from the effect of the earlier Arabic version.
But the statement that he knew the real Ali Mirza might be true,
in which case Grim's disguise was not going to last long.
However, the fact that he had not yet seen through my disguise
was some comfort.  The wish being father of the thought, I
decided he was bluffing first and last.  But he had not finished
yet.  He tried me in English.

"The captain will give that letter to me in any case.  It is
intended for me.  I have other business now, and wish to save
time, so give it to me at once.  Here, I will give you ten
piastres for it."

He pulled out a purse and unfolded a ten-piastre note.  I took no
notice.  He shook it for me to see, and I awoke like a pelican at
the sight of fish.

"Yours for that letter," he said, shaking it again.

I nudged Suliman and nodded to him.  He crossed the room, seized
the ten-piastre note, and brought it back to me.  I stowed it
away under my shirt.

"Come, now give me the letter."

I took utterly no notice, so he turned his attention to Suliman
again, and resumed in Arabic.

"Feel in his pocket and find the letter."

"I'm afraid," the boy answered.

"Of what?  Of him?  I will protect you.  Take the letter from
him."

Suliman chose to play the small boy, as he could very well indeed
when nothing could be gained by being devilish and ultra-grown-
up.  He shook his head and grinned sheepishly.

"Has he any weapons?" was the next question.

"Ma indi khabar." [I don't know.]

Evidently assault and battery was to be the next item on the
program.  He had not the eyes or the general air of a man who
will part with ten piastres for nothing.  He called to Yussuf,
who came hurrying out of the scullery place.  They held a
whispered conference, and Yussuf nodded;  then he came over to
the front door and locked it, removing the key.

"Tell him to hand over that letter!" he ordered Suliman.

"Mafish mukhkh!" said the boy, tapping his forehead once more.

Suliman's notion was the right one after all--at any rate the
only one available.  Old alligator rolled off his perch and
started for me.  Yussuf timed his own assault to correspond.
They would have landed on me simultaneously, if Suliman had not
reminded me that madness is a safe passport nearly anywhere in
the East.

So I went stark, raving mad that minute.  I once spent a night in
the room of an epileptic who had delirium tremens, and learned a
lot from him;  some of it came to mind just when I needed it.  If
ever a man got ten piastres' worth of unexpected side-show it was
that old Syrian with the alligator eyes.  By the time I was quite
out of breath there wasn't a cushion or a coffee-pot fit for
business.  Suliman was standing out of reach on the bench in a
corner yelling with laughter, while the two men struggled to get
through the scullery door, which was too narrow to admit them
both at once.  I earned that ten piastres.  By the same token
I did not let the kaffiyi fall off my head and betray my
western origin.

Unable to think up any more original motions, and having breath
for none, I sat on the floor and spat repeatedly, having seen a
madman do that on the Hebron Road and get feared, if not
respected for it.  There seems to be a theory prevalent in that
part of the world that the sputum of a madman is contagious.

But I overdid it.  Most amateurs do overdo things.

They got so afraid that they decided to put me out into the
street at all costs, where those enemies of society, the police,
might demonstrate their ingenuity.  Yussuf made a dash for the
front door, and I suppose he would have called in help and ended
my share in the adventure, if something had not happened.

The "something" was Noureddin Ali very much something in his
own opinion.

"Why didn't you open the door sooner?" he demanded.  "I have been
knocking for two minutes."

He watched Yussuf lock the door again behind him, and then eyed
the disheveled room with amused curiosity.  He was a rat-faced
little man dressed in a black silk jacket, worsted pants and
brown boots, with the inevitable tarboosh set at an angle of
sheer impudence--a man at least fifty years old by the look of
him, but full of that peppery vigor that so often clings to
little men in middle life.  On the whole he looked more like a
school-teacher, or a lawyer then a conspirator;  but Yussuf
addressed him with great deference as "Noureddin Ali Bey," and
even old alligator-eyes became obsequious.

Both Yussuf and the other man began explaining the situation to
him in rapid-fire Arabic.  I, meanwhile, recovering from the fit
as fast as I dared and trying to remember how to do it.
Noureddin Ali was plainly for having me thrown out, until they
mentioned the name of Staff-Captain Ali Mirza;  at that he tried
to cross-examine Suliman at great length, but could get nothing
out of him.  Suliman had evidently overheard Grim talking about
Noureddin Ali, and was very much afraid of him.

"All right," Noureddin Ali said at last.  "No more business
today, Yussuf.  Keep the door locked, but admit the captain.  We
must find out what this message is about."

Yussuf went to tidying up the place, while Noureddin Ali and the
alligator person talked excitedly in low tones in the corner near
the scullery door.  I lay on the floor with one eye open,
expecting Grim every minute;  but it must have been four in the
afternoon before he came, and all that while, with only short
intervals for food and coffee, Noureddin Ali and the other man
talked steadily, discussing over and over again the details of
some plan.

Shortly after midday Suliman began to whimper for food.  Yussuf
produced a mess of rice and mutton, of which the two Syrians ate
enormously before giving any to the boy;  then they put what was
left in the dish on the floor in front of me, pretty much in the
way you feed a dog, and I hate to remember what I did to it.
It is enough that I did not overlook Grim's advice to eat
like a lunatic, and however suspicious of me Noureddin Ali
might otherwise have been he was satisfied at the end of
that performance.

Several people tried the door, and some of them made signals on
it but Yussuf had a peep-hole where one of the heavy iron nails
had been removed, and after a cautious squint through it at each
arrival he proceeded to ignore them.  One man thundered on the
door for several minutes, but was allowed to go away without as
much as a word of explanation.

That was the first incident that made me feel quite sure
Nourreddin Ali was in fear of the police.  All the time the
thundering was going on he glanced furtively about him like a rat
in a trap.  I saw him feel for a weapon under his arm-pit.  When
the noise ceased and the impatient visitor went away he sighed
with relief.  The place was certainly a trap;  there was no back
way out of it.

When Grim came at last he knocked quietly, and waited in silence
while Yussuf applied his eye to the nail-hole.  When he entered,
the only surprising thing about him seemed to me the thinness of
his disguise.  In the morning, when I had seen him change in ten
minutes from West to East, it had seemed perfect;  but, having
looked for him so long with the Syrian disguise in mind, it
seemed impossible now that any one could be deceived by it.  He
was at no pains to keep the kaffiyi thing close to his face,
and I held my breath, expecting to see Noureddin Ali denounce
him instantly.

But nothing of that sort happened.  Grim sat down, thrust his
legs out in front of him, leaned back and called for coffee.  It
was obvious at once that the alligator person had been lying when
he boasted of knowing Staff-Captain Ali Mirza, for he made no
effort to claim acquaintance or to denounce him as an impostor.
But he nodded to Suliman, and Suliman came over and nudged me.

I let the boy go through a lot of pantomimic argument before
admitting that I understood, but finally I crossed the room to
Grim and offered him the envelope.  He looked surprised, examined
the outside curiously, spoke to me, shrugged his shoulders when I
did not answer, tossed a question or two to Suliman, shrugged
again and tore the letter open.  Then his face changed, and he
glanced to right and left of him as if afraid of being seen.  He
stuffed the letter into his tunic pocket and I went back to the
corner by the front door.

Yussuf was pottering about, still rearranging all the pots and
furniture that I had scattered, but his big ears projected
sidewise and suggested that he might have another motive.
However, it was a simple matter to evade his curiosity by talking
French, and Noureddin All could contain himself no longer.

"Pardon me, sir?  Staff-Captain Ali Mirza?"

Grim nodded suspiciously.

"I have heard of you.  We have all heard of you.  We are proud to
see you in Jerusalem.  We wish all success to your efforts on
behalf of Mustapha Kemal, the great Turkish Nationalist leader.
Our prayer is that he may light such a fire in Anatolia as shall
spread in one vast conflagration throughout the East!"

"Who are you?" asked Grim suspiciously.  (Evidently the real Ali
Mirza had a reputation for gruff manners.)

"Noureddin Ali Bey.  It may be you have heard of me.  I am not
without friends in Damascus."

"Oh, are you Noureddin Ali?" Grim's attitude thawed appreciably.
"We have been looking for more action and less talk from you.  I
made an excuse to visit Jerusalem and discover how much fire
there is under this smoke of boasting."

"Fire!  Ha-ha!  That is the right word!  There is a camouflage of
talk, but under it--Aha!  You shall see!"

"Or is that more talk?"

"We are not all talkers.  Wait and see!"

"Oh, more waiting?  Has Mustapha Kemal Pasha waited in Anatolia?
Has he not set you all an example of deeds without words?  Am I
to wait here indefinitely in Jerusalem to take him news of deeds
that will never happen?"

"Not indefinitely, my dear captain!  And this time there will
really be a deed that will please even such a rigorous lover of
action as Mustapha Kemal!"

Grim shrugged his shoulders again.

"I leave for Damascus at dawn," he said cynically.  "I don't care
to be mocked there for bringing news of promises.  We have had
too many of those barren mares.  I shall say that I have found
everything here is sterile--the talk abortive--the men mere windy
bellies without hearts in them!"





Chapter Fifteen

"I'll have nothing to do with it!"


Noureddin Ali was pained and upset.  Grim had pricked his
conceit--had sent thrust home where he kept his susceptibilities.
He blinked, peered this and that way, exchanged glances with the
alligator person, and then tucked his legs up under him.

"In me you see a doer!" he announced.  He looked the part.  His
lean, pointed nose and beady little eyes were of the interfering,
meddling type.  You could not imagine him, like the yellow-eyed
ruminant next to him, sitting and waiting ruthlessly for things
to happen.  Noureddin Ali looked more likely to go out and
be ruthless.

"So they all say!" Grim retorted.

"Some one should forewarn them in Damascus what a deed will occur
here presently.  Above all, word should reach Mustapha Kemal, in
Anatolia, as soon as possible, so that he may be ready to act."

"All day long," said Grim, "I have wandered about Jerusalem,
listening to this and that rumour of something that may happen.
But I have not found one man who can tell me a fact."

"That is because you did not meet me.  I am--hee-hee!  I am the
father of facts.  You say you leave for Damascus at dawn?  You
are positive?  I could tell you facts that would put a sudden end
to my career if they were spread about Jerusalem!"

"That is the usual boast of men who desire credit in the eyes of
the Nationalist Party," Grim retorted.

"I see you are skeptical.  That is a wise man's attitude, but I
must be cautious, for my life is at stake.  Now--how do you
propose to leave Jerusalem?  There is no train for Damascus at
dawn tomorrow."

"I am on a diplomatic mission," answered Grim.  "The
Administration have placed a car at my disposal to take me as far
as the border."

"Ah!  And tonight?  Where will you be tonight?"

"Why?"

"Because I propose to make a disclosure.  And--ah--hee-hee!--you
would like to live, I take it, and not be sent back to Damascus
in a coffin?  I have--ah--some assistants who--hee-hee!--would
watch your movements.  If you were to betray me afterwards to the
Administration, there would remain at least--the satisfaction--
of--you understand me?--the certainty that you would suffer
for it!"

Grim laughed dryly.

"I shall be at the hotel," he answered.  "In bed.  Asleep.  The
car comes before dawn."

"That is sufficient.  I shall know how to take essential
precautions.  Now--you think I am a man of words, not deeds?  You
were near the Jaffa Gate this morning, for I saw you there.  You
saw a man killed--a policeman, name Bedreddin.  That was an
unwise underling, who stumbled by accident on a clue to what I
shall tell you presently.  He had the impudence to try to
blackmail me--me, of all people!  You saw him killed.  But did
you see who killed him?  I--I killed him, with this right hand!
You do not believe?  You think, perhaps, I lack the strength for
such a blow?  Look here, where the force of it broke my skin on
the handle of the knife!  Now, am I a man of words, not deeds?"

"You want me to report to Mustapha Kemal that all the
accomplishment in Jerusalem amounts to one policeman killed?"

"No, no!  You mistake my meaning.  My point is that having proved
to you I am a ruthless man of action, I am entitled to be
believed when I tell you what next I intend to do."

"Well--I  listen."

"There is going to be--hee-hee!--an explosion!"

"Where?  When?  Of what?"

"In Jerusalem, within a day or two, and of what?  Why, of high
explosive, what else?"

"Much good an explosion in this city will do Mustapha Kemal!"
Grim grumbled.  "You may kill a few beggars and break some
windows.  The British will double the guards afterward at all the
city gates, and that will be the end of it;  except that some of
you, who perhaps may escape being thrown into jail, will apply to
Mustapha Kemal for high commissions in his army on the strength
of it!  Great doings!  Mustapha Kemal will have no bastinadoed."

"Hee-hee!  You are going to be surprised.  What would you say to
an explosion, for instance, that destroyed the Dome of the Rock?"

"That might accomplish results."

"Hee-hee!  You admit it!  An explosion to be blamed on the
Zionists, who must afterward be protected by the British from the
mob!  Would that not set India on fire?"

"It might help.  But who is to do it?"

"You see the doer before you!  I will do it."

"If I thought such a thing was really going to take place--"

"You would think that news worth carrying, eh?  You would hurry
to Damascus, wouldn't you?  And let me assure you, my dear
captain, speed is essential.  There are reasons why the explosion
has not yet occurred--reasons of detail and difficulties to be
overcome.  But now there is little further prospect of delay.
Everything is nearly ready.  The explosive is not yet in place,
but is at hand.  The authorities suspect nothing.  There remains
only a little excavation work, and then--hee-hee!--nothing to do
but choose the hour when hundreds are in the mosque.  Houp-la!
Up she goes.  Does not the idea appeal to you?"

"Sensational--very," Grim admitted.

"Ah!  But the utmost must be made of the sensation.  Men must be
ready in Damascus to stir public feeling on the strength of it.
Word must go to Mustapha Kemal to strike hard while the iron is
hot.  There must be reprisals everywhere.  Blood must flow.

"The Europeans, French as well as British, must be goaded into
making rash mistakes that will further inflame the populace.  It
must be shouted from the house-tops that the Jews have blown up a
Moslem sacred place, and that the British are protecting them.
There must be a true jihad* proclaimed against all non-Moslems
almost simultaneously everywhere.  Do you understand now how
swiftly you must travel to Damascus?" [*Holy war.]

Grim nodded.  "Yet these foreigners are cunning," he said
doubtfully.  "Are you sure your plan is not suspected?"

"Quite sure.  There was one man--a cursed interfering jackanapes
of an American, whom they all call Jimgrim, of whom I was afraid.
He is clever.  He goes snooping here and there, and knows how to
disguise himself.  But he fell downstairs this morning and broke
his thigh in two places.  If anything could make me religious,
that would!  If I were not a nationalist, I would say 'Glory
to God, and blessed be His Prophet, who has smitten him whom
we feared!"'

"That broken leg might be a trick to put you off your guard,"
Grim suggested pleasantly.

"No.  I made secret enquiries.  He is in great pain.  He may lose
the leg.  The doctor who has charge of the case is a Major
Templeton, an irritable person and, like most of the English, too
big a fool to deceive anybody.  No, luckily for Mister Jimgrim it
is not a trick.  Otherwise he would have shared the fate today of
Bedreddin Shah the constable.  The trap was all ready for him.
With the inquisitive and really clever out of the way there is
nothing to be feared.  Now--pardon me, Captain Ali Mirza, but
that letter you received just now;  would you like to show it
to me?"

"Why?" Grim demanded, frowning, and bridling all over.

"Hee-hee!  For the sake of reciprocity.  I have told you my
secret.  If it were not that I am more than usually circumspect,
and accustomed to protect myself, one might say that my life is
now in your hands, captain.  Besides--hee-hee!--I might add that
Jerusalem is my particular domain.  I would have no difficulty in
seeing that letter in any case.  But there should be no need for
--hee-hee!--shall we call them measures?--between friends."

"I see you are a man of resource," said Grim.

"Of great resource, with picked lieutenants.  May I see the
letter now?"

Grim produced it.  Noureddin Ali took it between spidery fingers
and examined it like a schoolmaster conning a boy's composition.
But the expression of his face changed as he took in the
contents, holding the paper so that alligator-eyes could read
it, too.

"Who wrote this?" he asked.

"Can't you read the signature?  Enver Eyub."

"Who is he?"

"One of Mustapha Kemal's staff."

"So.  'In pursuing your mission you will also take steps to
ascertain whether or not Noureddin Ali Bey is a person worthy of
confidence.'  Aha!  That is excellent!  So Mustapha Kemal Pasha
has heard of me?"

Grim nodded.

"And the rest of your mission?"

"Is confidential."

"And are you satisfied that I am to be trusted?"

"I think you mean business."

"Then you should tell me what is the nature of your secret
mission to Jerusalem.  Possibly I can give you needed information.
If you have obtained information of value, you should confide in
me.  I can be most useful when I know most."

Grim frowned.  He began to look uneasy.  And the more he did that,
the more delight Noureddin Ali seemed to take in questioning him,
but be pleaded his own case, too.

"The trouble with the Nationalist movement," he insisted, "is
lack of unity.  There is no mutual confidence--consequently no
combination.  There are too many intellects working at cross
purposes.  You should tell me what is being done, so that I may
fit in my plans accordingly.  When the Dome of the Rock has been
blown up there will be ample opportunity for putting into
execution a combined plan.  You must confide in me."

"Suppose I get rid of that messenger and the boy first,"
Grim suggested.

Grim felt in his pocket and produced a purse full of bank notes.
But they were all big ones.

"Never mind, I have change," said Noureddin Ali.  "How much will
you give him?"

"No," said Grim.  "The boy can take him to the hotel.  Let him
wait for me there.  He has no further business here.  He should
return to Damascus.  He had better travel with me in the car
tomorrow morning.  Take him to the hotel, and wait for me there,
you," he added in Arabic to Suliman.

Yussuf came and opened the door.  Suliman took my hand and led me
out.  The door slammed shut behind me, and a great Sikh, leaning
on his rifle at a corner thirty feet away, came to life just
sufficiently to follow me up-street with curious brown eyes.

"That is Narayan Singh," announced Suliman when we had passed
him.  "He is Jimgrim's friend."

There was another Sikh just in sight of him at the next corner,
and another beyond him again, all looking rather bored but
awfully capable.  None except the first one took the slightest
notice of us.

It was some consolation to know that "Jimgrim's friend" was on
guard outside Yussuf's.  I had no means of knowing what weapons
Grim carried, if any, but was positive of one thing:  if either
Noureddin Ali or the man with alligator eyes should get an
inkling of his real identity his life would not be worth ten
minutes' purchase.  Including Yussuf, who would likely do as he
was told, there would be three to one between those silent walls,
and it seemed to me that Narayan Singh might as well be three
miles away as thirty feet.  However, there was nothing I could do
about it.

It was late afternoon already, and the crowd was swarming all one
way, the women carrying the baskets and the men lording it near
enough to keep an eye on them.  If Suliman and I were followed,
whoever had that job had his work cut out, for we were swallowed
up in a noisy stream of home-going villagers, whose baskets and
other burdens made an effectual screen behind us as well as
in front.

The hotel stands close by the Jaffa Gate, and there the crowd was
densest, for the outgoing swarm was met by another tide, of city-
folk returning.  In the mouth of the hotel arcade stood an
officer whom I knew well enough by sight--Colonel Goodenough,
commander of the Sikhs, a quiet, gray little man with a monocle,
and that air of knowing his own mind that is the real key to
control of Indian troops.  Up a side-street there were a dozen
troop-horses standing, and a British subaltern was making himself
as inconspicuous as he could in the doorway of a store.  It did
not need much discernment to judge that those in authority were
ready to deal swiftly with any kind of trouble.

But the only glimpse I had of any mob-spirit stirring was when
three obvious Zionist Jews were rather roughly hustled by some
Hebron men, who pride themselves on their willingness to brawl
with any one.  Two Sikhs interfered at once, and Goodenough, who
was watching, never batted an eyelash.

I was tired, wanted a whiskey and soda and a bath more than
anything else I could imagine at the moment.  I was eager to get
to my room in the hotel.  Suliman, being not much more than a
baby after all, wanted to go to sleep.  We went past Goodenough,
who eyed me sharply but took no further notice, and we entered
the hotel door.  But there we were met by Cerberus in the shape
of an Arab porter, who cursed our religion and ordered us out
again, threatening violence if we did not make haste.

Suliman argued with him in vain, and even whimpered.  There was
nothing for it but to return to the arcade, where I sat down on a
step, from which a native policeman drove me away officiously.  I
had about made up my mind to go and speak to Goodenough in
English, when Grim appeared.  Not even Goodenough recognized him,
his Syrian stride was so well acted.  He saluted, and the salute
was returned punctiliously but with that reserve toward a
foreigner that the Englishman puts on unconsciously.  When Grim
spoke to him in Arabic Goodenough answered in the same language.
I did not hear what was said at first, but as I drew closer I
heard the sequel, for Grim changed suddenly to English.

"If you can't recognize me through that magnifying-glass of
yours, colonel, I must be one leopard who can really change his
spots.  I'm Grim.  Don't change your expression.  Quick:  look
around and tell me if I'm followed."

"Hard to say.  Such a crowd here.  There's a Syrian over the way
with a bulbous nose, who came along after you;  he's leaning with
his back to the wall now, watching us."

"He's the boy."

"I see Narayan Singh has left his post.  Did you give
him orders?"

"Yes.  Told him to follow any one who followed me.  I don't want
that fellow interfered with.  He may stay there, or more likely
he'll call others to take his place;  they'll watch all night, if
they're allowed to;  let them.  Wish you'd give orders they're to
be left alone.  Then, please let Narayan Singh go off duty and
get some sleep;  I'm going to want him all day tomorrow."

"All right, Grim;  anything else?"

"First opportunity, I wish you'd come to Davey's room upstairs.
Now--long distance stuff again, sir--if any Syrian asks you about
me, you might say I was making sure the car would come for me
at dawn."

They exchanged salutes again as one suspicious alien to another.
Grim looked suitably surprised at sight of me, and led me and
Suliman back to the hotel, where Suliman wanted him to wreak dire
vengeance on the porter;  he grew sulky when he discovered that
his influence with Grim was not sufficient for the purpose, but
forgot it, small boy fashion, ten minutes later, when he fell
asleep on the floor in a corner of Davey's room.

Davey did not look exactly pleased to see us, although he seemed
to like Grim personally, and was the first that day to see
through Grim's disguise at the first glance.  Mrs. Davey, on the
other hand, was radiant with smiles--thrilled at the prospect of
learning secrets.  She produced drinks and pushed the armchairs
up.  When she learned who I was, her husband could hardly keep
her from putting on a costume too, to make a party of it.

Davey was reserved.  He asked no questions.  A gray-headed, gray-
eyed, stocky, sturdy-looking man, who had made impossibilities
come true on three continents, he waited for trouble to come to
him instead of seeking it.  There was silence for several minutes
over the cigars and whiskey before Grim opened fire at last.  He
talked straight out in front of Mrs. Davey, for she had mothered
Cosmopolitan Oil men in a hundred out-of-the-way places.  She
knew more sacred secrets than the Sphinx.

"Any news about your oil concessions, Davey?"

"No.  Not a word.  We've got every prospect in the country marked
out.  Nothing to do now but wait for the mandate, while the
Zionists go behind our backs to the Foreign Office and scheme for
the concessions.  It's my belief the British mean to favor the
Zionists and put us in the ditch.  The fact that we were first on
the ground, and lodged our applications with the Turks before the
war seems to make no difference in their lives."

"Well, old man, I've arranged for you to change your policy,"
said Grim.

"What in thunder do you mean?"

Mrs. Davey giggled with delight, but her husband
frowned ominously.

"I'm supposed to be Staff-Captain Ali Mirza of the
Shereefian army."

"I've heard of him.  He's a bad one, Jim.  He is one of those
Syrian Arabs who will accept any one's money, but who never stays
bought.  Why masquerade as a scoundrel?"

"I was in a place just now with a bunch of murderers, who'd have
made short work of me if I couldn't give them a sound reason for
being in Jerusalem just now."

"Why not have 'em all arrested?"

"For the same reason, Davey, that your Oil Company isn't piping
ten thousand barrels a day from Jericho.  The time is not yet.
Things haven't reached that stage.  I told them your Oil Company
gave up hope long ago of getting a concession from the British,
and has decided to finance Mustapha Kemal."

Davey flung his cigar out of the window, and laid both hands on
his knees.  His face was a picture of baffled indignation.  But
his wife laughed.

"They were tickled to death," Grim continued.  "I'm supposed to
be going to Damascus tomorrow morning with a hundred thousand
dollars in U.S. gold, obtained from you in ten small bags.  We've
got to find some bags and pack them full of something heavy."

"I'll have nothing to do with it!" Davey exploded at last.  "It's
a damned outrage!  Why--this tale will be all over the place.
The Jews will get hold of it, and make complaints in London.
Next you know, the U.S. State Department will be raising blue
hell.  Questions asked in Congress.  Headlines in all the papers!
What do you suppose our people will think of me?"

"Refer them to your wife, Davey.  She's got you out of much
worse messes."

"I'll drive the car straight up to OETA and lodge my protest
against this in less than fifteen minutes!"

"No need;  Davey, old man.  Goodenough will be in here presently.
Kick to him."

Mrs. Davey went into the next room and returned with a roll of
coarse cotton cloth.

"I've no bags, Jim, but if this stuff will do I can sew some
right now."

"Good enough, Emily, go to it."

"D'you want to lose me my job?" demanded Davey.  But his wife
took up the scissors and smiled back at him.

"You know better than that.  We've trusted Jim before."

"Listen, Davey;  this thing's serious," said Grim.

"I know it is!  So'm I!  Nothing doing!"

"You're on the inside of an official secret."

"Curse all official secrets!  My business is oil!"

"There'll be no oil in this man's land for any one for fifty
years if you won't play.  There'll be a jihad instead.  They're
planning to blow up the Dome of the Rock."

"Jee-rusalem!"

"Straight goods, Davey.  Two tons of TNT stolen, and our friend
Scharnhoff, the Austrian, hunting for the Tomb of the Kings--
digging for it day and night--conspirators waiting to run in the
explosive as soon as the tunnel is complete."

"Why not arrest 'em at once?"

"We want to catch the principals red-handed, explosive and all.
We don't know where the explosive is yet.  Bag the lot, and kill
the story.  Otherwise, d'you see what it means, if the news leaks
out?  They'll blame the attempt on the Jews.  And the minute the
British protect the Jews there'll be all Moslem Asia on fire.
Get me?"

"Get you?  Yes, I get you.  I'll get hell from the home office,
though, for meddling in politics."

Goodenough came in then, rather a different man from the stern
little martinet who had stood in the throat of the arcade.  He
was all smiles.

"Evening, Mrs. Davey," he said genially.  "That one man went
away, Grim, and three took his place.  They shan't be disturbed.
Narayan Singh has gone off duty.  Now, Mrs. Davey, I've been told
that Americans all went dry, on account of a new religion called
the Volstead Act.  D'you mean to say you'd tempt a thirsty
soldier with a dry martini?"





Chapter Sixteen

"The Enemy is nearly always useful if you leave him free to
make mistakes."


The next item on the program was to awaken Suliman.  He did not
want to wake up.  He had lost all interest in secret service for
the time being.  Even the sight of Mrs. Davey's New York candy
did not stir enthusiasm;  he declared it was stuff fit for
bints,* not men.   [*Women]

"All right then," Grim announced at last.

"School for you, and I'll get another side-partner."

That settled it.  The boy, on whose lips the word dog was a foul
epithet, was actually proud to share a packing-case bedroom with
Julius Caesar the mess bull-dog.  School, where there would be
other iniquitous small boys to be led into trouble, had no
particular terrors.  But to lose his job and to see another boy,
perhaps a Jew or a Christian, become Jimgrim's Jack-of-all-jobs
was outside the pale of inflictions that pride could tolerate.

"I am awake!" he retorted, rubbing his eyes to prove it.

"Come here, then.  D'you know where to find your mother?"

"At the place where I went yesterday."

"Take her some of Mrs. Davey's candy.  Don't eat it on the way,
mind.  Get inside the place if you can.  If she won't let you in
try how much you can see through the door.  Ask no questions.  If
she asks what you've been doing, tell her the truth:  say that
you cleaned my boots and washed Julius Caesar.  Then come back
here and tell me all you've seen."

"Sending him to spy on his own mother, Jim?" asked Mrs. Davey as
Suliman left the room with candy in both fists.  She paused from
stitching at the cotton bags to look straight at Grim.

"His mother is old Scharnhoff's housekeeper," Grim answered.
"Scharnhoff wouldn't stand for the boy, and drove him out.  The
mother liked Scharnhoff's flesh-pots better than the prospects of
the streets, so she stayed on, swiping stuff from Scharnhoff's
larder now and then to slip to the kid through the back door.
But he was starving when I found him."

Mrs. Davey laid her sewing down.

"D'you  mean to tell me that that old butter-wouldn't-melt-in-
his-mouth professor is that child's father?"

"No.  The father was a Turkish soldier--went away with the
Turkish retreat.  If he's alive he's probably with Mustapha Kemal
in Anatolia.  Old Scharnhoff used to keep a regular harem under
the Turks.  He got rid of them to save his face when our crowd
took Jerusalem.  He puts up with one now.  But he has the
thorough-going Turk's idea of married life."

"And to think I had him here to tea--twice--no, three times!  I
liked him, too!  Found him interesting."

"He is," said Grim.

"Very!" agreed Goodenough.

"If it weren't for that harem habit of his," said Grim, "some
acquaintances of his would have blown up the Dome of the Rock
about this time tomorrow.  As it is, they won't get away with
it.  Suliman came and told me one day that his mother was
carrying food to Scharnhoff, taking it to a little house in
a street that runs below the Haram-es-Sheriff.  I looked into
that.  Then came news that two tons of TNT was missing, on top
of a request from Scharnhoff for permission to go about at night
unquestioned.  After that it was only a question of putting
two and two together--"

"Plus Narayan Singh," said Goodenough.  "I still don't see, Grim,
how you arrived at the conclusion that Scharnhoff is not guilty
of the main intention.  What's to prove that he isn't in the pay
of Mustapha Kemal?"

"I'll explain.  All Scharnhoff cares about is some manuscripts he
thinks he'll find.  He thinks he knows where they are.  The
Chronicles of the Kings of Israel.  I expect he tried pretty hard
to get the Turks to let him excavate for them.  But the Turks
knew better than to offend religious prejudices.  And perhaps
Scharnhoff couldn't afford to bribe heavily enough;  his harem
very likely kept him rather short of money.  Then we come along,
and stop all excavation--cancel all permits--refuse to grant
new ones.

"Scharnhoff's problem is to dig without calling attention to what
he's doing.  As a technical enemy alien he can't acquire
property, or even rent property without permission.  But with the
aid of Suliman's mother he made the acquaintance of our friend
Noureddin Ali, who has a friend, who in turn has a brother, who
owns a little house in that street below the Haram-es-Sheriff."

"Strange coincidence!" said Goodenough.  "It'll need a better
argument than that to save Scharnhoff's neck."

"Pardon me, sir.  No coincidence at all.  Remember, Scharnhoff
has lived in Jerusalem for fifteen years.  He seems to have
satisfied himself that the Tomb of the Kings is directly under
the Dome of the Rock.  How is he to get to it?  The Dome of the
Rock stands in the middle of that great courtyard, with the
buildings of the Haram-es-Sheriff surrounding it on every
side, and hardly a stone in the foundations weighing less than
ten tons.

"He reasons it out that there must be a tunnel somewhere, leading
to the tomb, if it really is under the Dome of the Rock.  I have
found out that he went to work, while the Turks were still here,
to find the mouth of the tunnel.  Remember, he's an archaeologist.
There's very little he doesn't know about Jerusalem.  He knows
who the owner is of every bit of property surrounding the
Haram-es-Sheriff;  he's made it his business to find out.  So
when he finally decided that this little stone house stands over
the mouth of the tunnel, all that remained to do was to get
access to it.  He couldn't do that himself, because of the
regulations.  He had to approach the Arab owner secretly and
indirectly.  That's where Suliman's mother came in handy.

"She contrived the introduction to Noureddin Ali.  Innocent old
Scharnhoff, who is an honest thief--he wouldn't steal money--
sacrilege is Scharnhoff's passion--was an easy mark for Noureddin
Ali.  Noureddin Ali is a red-minded devil, so smart at seeing
possibilities that he is blind to probabilities.  He is paid by
the French to make trouble, and he's the world's long-distance
double-crosser.  I don't believe the French have any hand in this
job.  Scharnhoff needed explosives.  Noureddin Ali saw at once
that if that tunnel can be found and opened up there could be
an atrocity perpetrated that would produce anarchy all through
the East."

"As bad as all that?" asked Mrs.  Davey.

"That's no exaggeration," Goodenough answered.  "I've lived
twenty-five years in India, commanding Sikh and Moslem troops.
The Sikhs are not interested in the Moslem religion in any way,
but they'd make common cause with Moslems if that place were
blown up and the blame could be attached to Jews.  It's the
second most sacred place in Asia.  Even the Hindus would be
stirred to their depths by it;  they'd feel that their own sacred
places were insecure, and that whoever destroyed them would be
protected afterwards by us."

"Gosh!  Who'd be an Englishman!" laughed Davey.

"I don't see that it's proved yet that the idea of an explosion
wasn't Sharnhoff's in the first place," Goodenough objected.

"For one thing, he wouldn't want to destroy antiquities," said
Grim.  "They're his obsession.  He worships ancient history and
all its monuments.  No, Noureddin Ali thought of the explosion.
He knew that Scharnhoff needed money, so he gave him French
money, knowing that would put old Scharnhoff completely in his
power.  Then he tipped off some one down at Ludd to watch for a
chance to steal some TNT.  He had better luck than he expected.
He got two tons of it.  He didn't have all the luck, though.
His plan, I believe, was to time the fireworks simultaneously
with a French-instigated raid from El-Kerak.  But the raid
didn't come off."

"Scharnhoff will hang!" said Goodenough.

"I think not, sir.  He'll prove as meek as an old sheep when we
land on him."

"There, will the bags do?" asked Mrs. Davey.

"What are they for?" Goodenough asked.

"We're supposed to have a slush fund in this room of a hundred
thousand dollars," Davey answered dourly.  "My Oil Company is
supposed to be buying up Mustapha Kemal!  I see my finish, if
news of this ever reaches the States--or unless my version of it
gets there first!"

Grim turned to me.

"We've got to find two people to take your place and mine in the
car tomorrow morning.  Perhaps you'd better go in any case;
you'll enjoy the ride as far as Haifa--stay there a day or two,
and come back when you feel like it.  We'll find some officer to
masquerade as me."

But there I rebelled--flat, downright mutiny.

"If I haven't made good so far," I said, "I'll consider myself
fired, and hold my tongue.  Otherwise, I see this thing through!
Send some one else on the joy-ride."

"Good for you!" said Davey.

"Dammit, man!" said Goodenough, staring at me through his
monocle.  "The rest of us get paid for taking chances.  The only
tangible reward you can possibly get will be a knife in your
back.  Better be sensible and take the ride to Haifa."

"My bet is down," said I.

"Good," Grim nodded.  "It goes.  All the same, you get a joy-
ride.  Can't take too many chances.  Tell you about that later.
Meanwhile, will you detail an officer to come and spend the night
in this hotel and masquerade as me at dawn, sir?  He can wear
this uniform that I've got on--somebody about my height."

"Turner will do that.  What are you going to put in the bags?"
asked Goodenough.

"Cartridges.  They're heavy.  You might tell Turner over the
phone to bring them with him."

At that point Suliman returned, sooner than expected, with news
that made Grim whistle.  Suliman had not been inside the place
where his mother was.  She would not let him.  But he had seen
around her skirts as she stood in the partly opened door.

"There was a hole in the floor," said Suliman, "and a great stone
laid beside it.  Also much gray dust.  And I think there was a
light a long way down in the hole."

But that was not what made Grim whistle.

"What else?  Did your mother say anything?"

"She was ill-tempered."

"That Scharnhoff had beaten her."

"I knew he'd make a bad break sooner or later.  What did he beat
her for?"

"Because she was afraid."

"That's a fine reason.  Afraid of what?"

"He says she is to sell oranges.  Four wooden benches have been
brought, and tomorrow they are to be set outside the door in the
street.  Oranges and raisins have been bought, and she is to sit
outside the door and sell them.  She is afraid."

"Fruit bought already?  Can't be.  Was it inside there?"

"No.  It is to come tomorrow.  She says she does not know how to
sell fruit, and is afraid of the police."

Grim and Goodenough exchanged glances.

"She says that if the police come everybody will be killed, and
that I am to keep watch in the street in the morning and give
warning of the police."

"That should teach you, young man, never to take a woman into
your confidence--eh, Mrs. Davey?" said Goodenough.

"We're certainly the slow-witted sex," she answered, piling the
finished bags one on top of the other on the table.

Grim took me after that to the hotel roof, whence you can see the
whole of Jerusalem.  It was just before moonrise.  The ancient
city lay in shadow, with the Dome of the Rock looming above it,
mysterious and silent.  Down below us in the street, where a
gasoline light threw a greenish-white glare, three Arabs in
native costume were squatting with their backs against the low
wall facing the hotel.

"Noureddin Ali's men," said Grim, chuckling.  "They'll help us to
prove our alibi.  The enemy is nearly always useful if you leave
him free to make mistakes.  You may have to spend the whole night
in the mosque--you and Suliman.  I'll take you there presently.
Two of those men are pretty sure to follow us.  One will probably
follow me back here again.  The other will stay to keep an eye on
you.  About an hour before dawn, in case nothing happens before
that, you and Suliman come back here to the hotel.  The car shall
be here half-an-hour before daylight.  You and Turner pile into
it, and those three men watch you drive away.  They'll hurry off
to tell Noureddin Ali that Staff-Captain Ali Mirza and the
deaf-and-dumb man have really started for Damascus, bags of gold
and all.

"Turner must remember to drop a couple of bags and pick them up
again, to call attention to them.  There'll be a change of
clothes in the car for you.  When you've gone a mile or so, get
into the other clothes and walk back.  If I don't meet you by the
Jaffa Gate, Suliman will, or else Narayan Singh.  Things are
liable to happen pretty fast tomorrow morning.  Let's go.

"I'm supposed to have found out somehow that you're awful
religious and want to pray, so it's the Dome of the Rock for
yours.  Any Moslem who wants to may sleep there, you know.  But
any Christian caught kidding them he's a Moslem would be for it--
short shrift.  He'd be dead before the sheikh of the place could
hand him over to the authorities.  If the TNT were really in
place underneath you, which I'm pretty sure it won't be for a few
hours yet, that would be lots safer than the other chance you're
taking.  So peel your wits.  Let Suliman sleep if he wants to,
but you'll have to keep awake all night."

"But what am I to do in there?  What's likely to happen?"

"Just listen.  The tunnel isn't through to the end yet, I'm sure
of it.  If it were, they'd have taken in the TNT, for it must be
ticklish work keeping it hidden elsewhere, with scores of Sikhs
watching day and night.  But they're very near the end of the
tunnel, or they wouldn't be opening up that fruit stand.  You'll
hear them break through.  When you're absolutely sure of that,
come out of the mosque and say Atcha--just that one word--to the
Sikh sentry you'll see standing under the archway through which
we'll enter the courtyard presently.  That sentry will be Narayan
Singh, and he'll know what to do."

"What shall I do after that?"

"Suit yourself.  Either return to the mosque and go to sleep, if
you can trust yourself to wake in time, or come and sit on the
hotel step until morning.  Have you got it all clear?  It's a
piece of good luck having you to do all this.  No real Moslem
would ever be able to hold his tongue about it.  They're
superstitious about the Dome of the Rock.  But ask questions now,
if you're not clear;  you mustn't be seen speaking in the street
or in the mosque, remember.  All plain sailing?  Come along,
then.  If you're alive tomorrow you'll have had an adventure."





Chapter Seventeen

"Poor old Scharnhoff's in the soup."


We ate a scratch dinner with the Daveys in their room and started
forth.  Grim as usual had his nerve with him.  He led me and
Suliman straight up to the three spies who were squatting against
the wall, and asked whether there were any special regulations
that would prevent my being left for the night in the famous
mosque.  On top of that he asked one of the men to show him the
shortest way.  So two of them elected to come with us, walking
just ahead, and the third man stayed where he was, presumably in
case Noureddin Ali should send to make enquiries.

You must walk through Jerusalem by night, with the moon just
rising, if you want really to get the glamour of eastern tales
and understand how true to life those stories are of old Haroun-
al-Raschid.  It is almost the only city left with its ancient
walls all standing, with its ancient streets intact.  At that
time, in 1920, there was nothing whatever new to mar the setting.
No new buildings.  The city was only cleaner than it was under
the Turks.

Parts of the narrow thoroughfares are roofed over with vaulted
arches.  The domed roofs rise in unplanned, beautiful disorder
against a sky luminous with jewels.  To right and left you can
look through key-hole arches down shadowy, narrow ways to carved
doors through which Knights Templar used to swagger with gold
spurs, and that Saladin's men appropriated after them.

Yellow lamplight, shining from small windows set deep in the
massive walls, casts an occasional band of pure gold across the
storied gloom.  Now and then a man steps out from a doorway, his
identity concealed by flowing eastern finery, pauses for a
moment in the light to look about him, and disappears into
silent mystery.

Half-open doors at intervals give glimpses of white interiors,
and of men from a hundred deserts sitting on mats to smoke great
water-pipes and talk intrigue.  There are smells that are
stagnant with the rot of time;  other smells pungent with
spice, and mystery, and the alluring scent of bales of
merchandise that, like the mew of gulls, can set the mind
traveling to lands unseen.

Through other arched doors, even at night, there is a glimpse of
blindfold camels going round and round in ancient gloom at the
oil-press.  There are no sounds of revelry.  The Arab takes his
pleasures stately fashion, and the Jew has learned from history
that the safest way to enjoy life is to keep quiet about it.  Now
and then you can hear an Arab singing a desert song, not very
musical but utterly descriptive of the life he leads.  We
caught the sound of a flute played wistfully in an upper room
by some Jew returned from the West to take up anew the thread
of ancient history.

Grim nudged me sharply in one shadowy place, where the street
went down in twenty-foot-long steps between the high walls of
windowless harems.  Another narrow street crossed ours thirty
feet ahead of us, and our two guides were hurrying, only glancing
back at intervals to make sure we had not given them the slip.
The cross-street was between us and them, and as Grim nudged me
two men--a bulky, bearded big one and one of rather less than
middle height, both in Arab dress--passed in front of us.  There
was no chance of being overheard, and Grim spoke in a low voice:

"Do you recognize them?" "I shook my head.

"Scharnhoff and Noureddin Ali!"

I don't see now how he recognized them.  But I suppose a man who
works long enough at Grim's business acquires a sixth sense.
They were walking swiftly, arguing in low tones, much too busy
with their own affairs to pay attention to us.  Our two guides
glanced back a moment later, but they had vanished by then into
the gloom of the cross-street.

There was a dim lamp at one corner of that crossing.  As we
passed through its pale circle of light I noticed a man who
looked like an Arab lurking in the shadow just beyond it.  I
thought he made a sign to Grim, but I did not see Grim return it.

Grim watched his chance, then spoke again:

"That man in the shadow is a Sikh--Narayan Singh's sidekick--
keeping tabs on Scharnhoff.  I'll bet old Scharnhoff has cold
feet and went to find Noureddin Ali to try and talk him out of
it.  Might as well try to pretty-pussy a bob-cat away from a hen-
yard!  Poor old Scharnhoff's in the soup!"

Quite suddenly after that we reached a fairly wide street and the
arched Byzantine gateway of the Haram-es-Sheriff, through which
we could see tall cypress trees against the moonlit sky and the
dome of the mosque beyond them.  They do say the Taj Mahal at
Agra is a lovelier sight, and more inspiring;  but perhaps that
is because the Taj is farther away from the folk who like to have
opinions at second-hand.  Age, history, situation, setting,
sanctity--the Dome of the Rock has the advantage of all those,
and the purple sky, crowded with coloured stars beyond it is more
wonderful over Jerusalem, because of the clearness of the
mountain air.

In that minute, and for the first time, I hated the men
who could plot to blow up that place.  Hitherto I had been
merely interested.

Because it was long after the hour when non-Moslem visitors are
allowed to go about the place with guides, we were submitted to
rather careful scrutiny by men who came out of the shadows and
said nothing, but peered into our faces.  They did not speak to
let us by, but signified admittance by turning uninterested backs
and retiring to some dark corners to resume the vigil.  I thought
that the Sikh sentry, who stood with bayonet fixed outside the
arch, looked at Grim with something more than curiosity, but no
sign that I could detect passed between them.

The great white moonlit courtyard was empty.  Not a soul stirred
in it.  Not a shadow moved.  Because of the hour there were not
even any guides lurking around the mosque.  The only shape that
came to life as we approached the main entrance of the mosque was
the man who takes care of the slippers for a small fee.

Grim, since he was in military dress, allowed the attendant to
tie on over his shoes the great straw slippers they keep there
for that purpose.  Suliman had nothing on his feet.  I kicked off
the red Damascus slippers I was wearing, and we entered the
octagonal building by passing under a curtain at the rear of the
deep, vaulted entrance.

Nobody took any notice of us at first.  It was difficult to see,
for one thing;  the light of the lamps that hung on chains from
the arches overhead was dimmed by coloured lenses and did little
more than beautify the gloom.  But in the dimness in the midst
you could see the rock of Abraham, surrounded by a railing to
preserve it from profane feet.  Little by little the shadows took
shape of men praying, or sleeping, or conversing in low tones.

The place was not crowded.  There were perhaps a hundred men in
there, some of whom doubtless intended to spend the night.  All
of them, though they gave us a cursory glance, seemed disposed to
mind their own business.  It looked for a minute as if we were
going to remain in there unquestioned.  But the two spies who had
come with us saw a chance to confirm or else disprove our bona
fides, and while one of them stayed and watched us the other went
to fetch the Sheikh of the Mosque.

He came presently, waddling very actively for such a stout man--a
big, burly, gray-bearded intellectual, with eyes that beamed
intelligent good-humour through gold-rimmed glasses.  He did not
seem at all pleased to have been disturbed, until he drew near
enough to scan our faces.  Then his change of expression, as soon
as he had looked once into Grim's eyes, gave me cold chills all
down the back.  I could have sworn he was going to denounce us.

Instead, he turned on the two spies.  He tongue-lashed them in
Arabic.  I could not follow it word for word.  I gathered that
they had hinted some suspicion as to the genuineness of Grim's
pretension to be Staff-Captain Ali Mirza.  He was rebuking them
for it.  They slunk away.  One went and sat near the door we had
entered by.  The other vanished completely.

"Jimgrim!  What do you do here at this hour?" asked the sheikh as
soon as we stood alone.

"Talk French," Grim answered.  "We can't afford to be overheard."

"True, O Jimgrim!  It is all your life and my position is worth
for you to be detected in here in that disguise at such an hour!
And who are these with you?"

"It is all your life and mosque are worth to turn us out!" Grim
answered.  "When was I ever your enemy?"

"Never yet, but--what does this mean?"

"You shall know in the morning--you alone.  This man, who can
neither hear nor speak, and the child with him, must stay in here
tonight, and go when they choose, unquestioned."

"Jimgrim, this is not a place for setting traps for criminals.
Set your watch outside, and none shall interfere with you."

"'Shall the heart within be cleansed by washing hands?'" Grim
quoted, and the shiekh smiled.

"Do you mean there are criminals within the mosque?  If so, this
is sanctuary, Jimgrim.  They shall not be disturbed.  Set
watchmen at the doors and catch them as they leave, if you will.
This is holy ground."

"There'll be none of it left to boast about this time tomorrow,
if you choose to insist!" Grim answered.

"Should there be riddles between you and me?" asked the sheikh.

"You shall know all in the morning."

The sheikh's face changed again, taking on a look of mingled rage
and cunning.

"I know, then, what it is!  The rumour is true that those cursed
Zionists intend to desecrate the place.  This fellow, who you say
is deaf and dumb, is one of your spies--is he not?  Perhaps he
can smell a Zionist--eh?  Well, there are others!  Better tell me
the truth, Jimgrim, and in fifteen minutes I will pack this place
so full of true Moslems that no conspirator could worm his way
in!  Then if the Jews start anything let them beware!"

"By the beard of your Prophet," Grim answered impiously, "this
has nothing to do with Zionists."

"Neither have I, then, anything to do with this trespass.  You
have my leave to depart at once, Jimgrim!"

"After the ruin--"

"There will be no ruin, Jimgrim!  I will fill the place
with men."

"Better empty it of men!  The more there are in it, the bigger
the death-roll!  Shall I say afterwards that I begged leave to
set a watch, and you refused?"

"You--you, Jimgrim--you talk to me of ruin and a death-roll?  You
are no every-day alarmist."

"Did you ever catch me in a lie?"

"No, Jimgrim.  You are too clever by far for that!  If you were
to concoct a lie it would take ten angels to unravel it!  But--
you speak of ruin and a death-roll, eh?"  He stroked his beard
for about a minute.

"You have heard, perhaps, that Moslems are sharpening their
swords for a reckoning with the Jews?  There may be some truth in
it.  But there shall be no gathering in this place for any such
purpose, for I will see to that.  You need set no watch in here
on that account."

"The time always comes," Grim answered, "when you must trust a
man or mistrust him.  You've known me eleven years.  What are you
going to do?"

"In the name of God, what shall I answer! Taib,* Jimgrim, I will
trust you.  What is it you wish?"  [*All right.]

"To leave this deaf-and-dumb man and the boy, below the
Rock, undisturbed."

"That cannot well be.  Occasionally others  go to pray in that
place.  Also, there is a Moslem who has made the pilgrimage from
Trichinopoli.  I myself have promised to show him the mosque
tonight, because he leaves Jerusalem at dawn, and only I speak a
language he can understand.  There will be others with him, and I
cannot refuse to take them down below the Rock."

"That is nothing," Grim answered.  "They will think nothing of a
deaf-and-dumb man praying or sleeping in a  a corner."

"Is that all he wishes to do?  He will remain still in one place?
Then come."

"One other thing.  That fellow who went and fetched you--he sits
over there by the north door now--he will ask you questions about
me presently.  Tell him I'm leaving for Damascus in the morning.
If he asks what we have been speaking about so long, tell him I
brought you the compliments of Mustapha Kemal."

"I will tell him to go to jahannam!"

"Better be civil to him. His hour comes tomorrow."

The sheikh led the way along one side of the inner of three
concentric parts into which the mosque is divided by rows of
marble columns, until we came to a cavernous opening in the
floor, where steps hewn in the naked rock led downward into a
cave that underlies the spot on which tradition says Abraham made
ready to sacrifice his son.

It was very dark below.  Only one little oil lamp was burning, on
a rock shaped like an altar in one corner.  It cast leaping
shadows that looked like ghosts on the smooth, uneven walls.  The
whole place was hardly more than twenty feet wide each way.
There was no furniture, not even the usual mats--nothing but
naked rock to lie or sit on, polished smooth as glass by
centuries of naked feet.

I was going to sit in a corner, but Grim seized my arm and
pointed to the centre of the floor, stamping with his foot to
show the exact place I should take.  It rang vaguely hollow under
the impact, and Suliman, already frightened by the shadows,
seized my hand in a paroxysm of terror.

"You've got to prove you're a man tonight and stick it out!" Grim
said to him in English;  and with that, rather than argue the
point and risk a scene, he followed the sheikh up the steps and
disappeared.  Grim's methods with Suliman were a strange mixture
of understanding sympathy and downright indifference to sentiment
that got him severely criticized by the know-it-all party, who
always, everywhere condemn.  But he certainly got results.

A legion of biblical and Koranic devils owned Suliman.  They were
the child's religion.  When he dared, he spat at the name of
Christianity.  Whenever Grim whipped him, which he had to do now
and again, for theft or for filthy language, he used to curse
Grim's religion, although Grim's religion was a well-kept secret,
known to none but himself.  But the kid was loyal to Grim with a
courage and persistence past belief, and Grim knew how to worm
the truth out of him and make him keep his word, which is more
than some of the professional reformers know how to do with
their proteges.  I believe that Suliman would rather have earned
Grim's curt praise than all the fabulous delights of even a
Moslem paradise.

But the kid was in torment.  His idea of manliness precluded any
exhibition of fear in front of me, if he could possibly restrain
himself.  He would not have minded breaking down in front of
Grim, for he knew that Grim knew him inside out.  On the
contrary, he looked down on me, as a mere amateur at the game,
who had never starved at the Jaffa Gate, nor eaten candle-ends,
or gambled for milliemes* with cab-drivers' sons while picking up
odds and ends of gossip for a government that hardly knew of his
existence.  In front of me he proposed to act the man--guide--
showman--mentor.  He considered himself my boss.  [*The smallest
coin of the country.]

But it was stem work.  If there had been a little noise to make
the shadows less ghostly;  if Suliman had not been full of half-
digested superstition;  or if he had not overheard enough to be
aware that a prodigious, secret plot was in some way connected
with that cavern, he could have kept his courage up by swaggering
in front of me.

He nearly fell asleep, with his head in my lap, at the end of
half-an-hour.  But when there was a sound at last he almost
screamed.  I had to clap my hand over his mouth;  whereat he
promptly bit my finger, resentful because he knew then that I
knew he was afraid.

It proved to be approaching footsteps--the sheikh of the mosque
again, leading the man from Trichinopoli and a party of three
friends.  Their rear was brought up by Noureddin;  Ali's spy,
anxious about me, but pretending to want to overhear the sheikh's
account of things.

The sheikh reeled it all off in a cultured voice accustomed to
using the exact amount of energy required, but even so his words
boomed in the cavern like the forethought of thunder.  You
couldn't help wondering whether a man of his intelligence
believed quite all he said, however much impressed the man from
Trichinopoli might be.

"We are now beneath the very rock on which Abraham was willing to
sacrifice his only son, Isaac.  This rock is the centre of the
world.  Jacob anointed it.  King Solomon built his temple over
it.  The Prophet of God, the Prince Mahommed, on whose head be
blessings! said of this place that it is next in order of
holiness after Mecca, and that one prayer said here is worth ten
elsewhere.  Here, in this place, is where King Solomon used to
kneel in prayer, and where God appeared to him.  This corner is
where David prayed.  Here prayed Mahommed.

"Look up.  This hollow in the roof is over the spot where the
Prophet Mahommed slept.  When he arose there was not room for him
to stand upright, so the Rock receded, and the hollow place
remains to this day in proof of it.  Beneath us is the Bir-el-
Arwah, the well of souls, where those who have died come to pray
twice weekly.  Listen!"

He stamped three times with his foot on the spot about two
feet in front of where I sat, and a faint, hollow boom answered
the impact.

"You hear?  The Rock speaks!  It spoke in plain words when the
Prophet prayed here, and was translated instantly to heaven on
his horse El-Burak.  Here, deep in the Rock, is the print of the
hand of the angel, who restrained the Rock from following the
Prophet on his way to Paradise.  Here, in this niche, is where
Abraham used to pray;  here, Elijah.  On the last day the Kaaba
of Mecca must come to this place.  For it is here, in this cave,
that the blast of the trumpet will sound, announcing the day of
judgment.  Then God's throne will be planted on the Rock above
us.  Be humble in the presence of these marvels."

He turned on his pompous heel and led the way out again without
as much as a sidewise glance at me.  The spy was satisfied;  he
followed the party up the rock-hewn steps, and as a matter of
fact went to sleep on a mat near the north door, for so I found
him later on.

The silence shut down again.  Suliman went fast asleep, snoring
with the even cadence of a clock's tick, using my knees for a
pillow with a perfect sense of ownership.  He was there to keep
care of me, not I of him.  The sleep suggestion very soon took
hold of me, too, for there was nothing whatever to do but sit and
watch the shadows move, trying to liken them to something real as
they changed shape in answer to the flickering of the tiny, naked
flame.  Thereafter, the vigil resolved itself into a battle
with sleep, and an effort to keep my wits sufficiently alert for
sudden use.

I had no watch.  There was nothing to give the least notion of
how much time had passed.  I even counted the boy's snores for a
while, and watched one lonely louse moving along the wall--so
many snores to the minute--so many snores to an inch of crawling;
but the louse changed what little mind he had and did not walk
straight, and I gave up trying to calculate the distance he
traveled in zigzags and curves, although it would have been an
interesting problem for a navigator.  Finally, Suliman's
snoring grew so loud that that in itself kept me awake;  it
was like listening to a hair-trombone;  each blast of it rasped
your nerves.

You could not hear anything in the mosque above, although there
were only eleven steps and the opening was close at hand;  for
the floor above was thickly carpeted, and if there were any
sounds they were swallowed by that and the great, domed roof.
When I guessed it might be midnight I listened for the voice of
the muezzin;  but if he did call the more-than-usually faithful
to wake up and pray, he did it from a minaret outside, and no
faint echo of his voice reached me.  I was closed in a tomb in
the womb of living rock, to all intents and purposes.

But it must have been somewhere about midnight when I heard a
sound that set every vein in my body tingling.  At first it was
like the sort of sound that a rat makes gnawing;  but there
couldn't be rats eating their way through that solid stone.  I
thought I heard it a second time, but Suliman's snoring made it
impossible to listen properly.  I shook him violently, and he
sat up.

"Keep still!  Listen!"

Between sleeping and waking the boy forgot all about the iron
self-control he practised for Grim's exacting sake.

"What is it?  I am afraid!"

"Be still, confound you!  Listen!"

"How close beneath us are the souls of the dead?  Oh, I
am afraid!"

"Silence!  Breathe through your mouth.  Make no noise at all!"

He took my hand and tried to sit absolutely still;  but the
gnawing noise began again, more distinctly, followed by two or
three dull thuds from somewhere beneath us.

"Oh, it is the souls of dead men!  Oh--"

"Shut up, you little idiot!  All right, I'll tell Jimgrim!"

Fear and that threat combined were altogether too much for him.
One sprig of seedling manhood remained to him, and only one--the
will to smother emotion that he could not control a second
longer.  He buried his head in my lap, stuffing his mouth with
the end of the abiyi to choke the sobs back. I covered his head
completely and, like the fabled ostrich, in that darkness he
felt better.

Suddenly, as clear as the ring of glass against thick glass in
the distance, something gave way and fell beneath us.  Then
again.  Then there were several thuds, followed by a rumble that
was unmistakable--falling masonry;  it was the noise that bricks
make when they dump them from a tip-cart, only smothered by the
thickness of the cavern floor.  I shook Suliman again.

"Come on.  We're going.  Now, let me have a good account of you
to give to Jimgrim.  Shut your teeth tight, and remember the part
you've got to play."

He scrambled up the steps ahead of me, and I had to keep hold of
the skirts of his smock to prevent him from running.  But he took
my hand at the top, and we managed to get out through the north
door without exciting comment, and without waking the spy,
although I would just as soon have wakened him, for Grim seemed
to think it important that his alibi and mine should be well
established;  however, there were two others watching by the
hotel.  Ten minutes later I was glad I had not disturbed him.

I gave Suliman a two-piastre piece to pay the man who had charge
of my slippers at the door, and the young rascal was so far
recovered from his fright that he demanded change out of it, and
stood there arguing until he got it.  Then, hand-in-hand, we
crossed the great moonlit open court to the gate by which Grim
had brought us in.

Looking back, so bright was the moon that you could even see the
blue of the tiles that cover the mosque wall, and the interwoven
scroll of writing from the Koran that runs around like a frieze
below the dome.  But it did not look real.  It was like a
dream-picture--perhaps the dream of the men who slept huddled
under blankets in the porches by the gate.  If so, they
dreamed beautifully.

There was a Sikh, as Grim had said there would be, standing with
fixed bayonet on the bottom step leading to the street.  He
stared hard at me, and brought his rifle to the challenge as I
approached him--a six-foot, black-bearded stalwart he was, with a
long row of campaign ribbons, and the true, truculent Sikh way of
carrying his head.  He looked strong enough to carry an ox away.

"Atcha!" said I, going close to him.

He did not answer a word, but shouldered his rifle and marched
off.  Before he had gone six paces he brought the rifle to the
trail, and started running.  Another Sikh--a younger man--stepped
out of the shadow and took his place on the lower step.  He was
not quite so silent, and he knew at least one word of Arabic.

"Imshi!" he grunted;  and that, in plain U.S. American, means
"Beat it!"

I had no objection.  It sounded rather like good advice.
Remembering what Grim had said about the danger I was running,
and looking at the deep black shadows of the streets, it occurred
to me that that spy, who slept so soundly by the mosque door,
might wake up and be annoyed with himself.  When men of that type
get annoyed they generally like to work it off on somebody.

Rather, than admit that he had let me get away from him he might
prefer to track me through the streets and use his knife on me in
some dark corner.  After that he could claim credit with
Noureddin Ali by swearing he had reason to suspect me of
something or other.  The suggestion did not seem any more unreal
to me than the moonlit panorama of the Haram-es-Sheriff, or the
Sikh who had stepped out of nowhere-at-all to "Imshi" me away.

On the other hand, I had no fancy for the hotel steps.  To sit
and fall asleep there would be to place myself at the mercy of
the other two spies, who might come and search me;  and I was
conscious of certain papers in an inner pocket, and of underclothes
made in America, that might have given the game away.

Besides, I was no longer any too sure of Suliman.  The boy was so
sleepy that his wits were hardly in working order;  if those two
spies by the hotel were to question him he might betray the two
of us by some clumsy answer.  If there was to be trouble that
night I preferred to have it at the hands of Sikhs, who are
seldom very drastic unless you show violence.  I might be
arrested if I walked the streets, but that would be sheer profit
as compared to half-a-yard of cold knife in the broad of my back.

"Take me to the house where you talked with your mother," I said
to Suliman.

So we turned to the left and set off together in that direction,
watched with something more than mild suspicion by the Sikh, and,
if Suliman's sensations were anything like mine, feeling about as
cheerless, homeless and aware of impending evil as the dogs that
slunk away into the night.  I took advantage of the first deep
shadow I could find to walk in, less minded to explore than to
avoid pursuit.




Chapter Eighteen

"But we're ready for them."


Without in the least suspecting it I had gone straight into a
blind trap, into which, it was true, I could not be followed by
Noureddin Ali's spy, but out of which there was no escape without
being recognized.  The moment I stepped into the deep shadow I
heard an unmistakable massed movement behind me.  Sure that I
could not be seen, I faced about.  A platoon of Sikhs had
appeared from somewhere, and were standing at ease already,
across the end of the street I had entered, with the moonlight
silvering their bayonets.

Well, most streets have two ends.  So I walked forward, not
taking much trouble about concealment, since it was not easy to
walk silently.  If the Sikh can't see his enemy he likes to fire
first and challenge afterwards.  I preferred to be seen.  The
sight of those uncompromising bayonets had changed my mind about
the choice of evils.  The knife of a hardly probable assassin
seemed a wiser risk than the ready triggers of the Punjaub.
Half-way down the street Suliman tugged at my cloak.

"That is the place where my mother is," he said, pointing to a
narrow door on the left.

But I was taking no chances in that direction--not at that
moment.  The little stone house was all in darkness.  There were
no windows that I could see.  No sound came from it.  And farther
down the street there was a lamp burning, whose light spelled
safety from shots fired at the sound of foot-fall on suspicion.
I wanted that light between me and the Sikh platoon, yet did not
dare run for it, since that would surely have started trouble.
It is my experience of Sikhs that when they start a thing they
like to finish it.  They are very good indeed at explanations
after the event.

The Sikhs must have seen us pass through the belt of gasoline
light, but they did not challenge, so I went forward more slowly,
with rather less of that creepy feeling that makes a man's spine
seem to belong to some one else.  Toward its lower end the street
curved considerably, and we went about a quarter of a mile before
the glare of another light began to appear around the bend.

That was at a cross-street, up which I proposed to turn more or
less in the direction of the hotel.  But I did nothing of the
sort.  There was a cordon of Sikhs drawn across there, too, with
no British officer in sight to enforce discretion.

Come to think of it, I have always regarded a bayonet wound in
the stomach as the least desirable of life's unpleasantries.

So Suliman and I turned back.  I decided to investigate that dark
little stone house, after all;  for it occurred to me that, if
that was the centre of conspiracy, then Grim would certainly show
up there sooner or later and straighten out the predicament.
Have you ever noticed how hungry you get walking about aimlessly
in the dark, especially when you are sleepy in the bargain?
Suliman began to whimper for food, and although I called him a
belly on legs by way of encouragement he had my secret sympathy.
I was as hungry as he was;  and I needed a drink, too, which he
didn't.  The little devil hadn't yet included whiskey in his list
of vices.

The side of the street an which the little stone house stood was
the darker, so we sat down with our backs against its wall, and
the boy proceeded to fall asleep at once.  The one thing I was
sure I must not do was imitate him.  So I began to look about me
in the hope of finding something sufficiently interesting to keep
me awake.

There was nothing in the street except the makings of a bad
smell.  There was plenty of that.  I searched the opposite wall,
on which the moon shone, but there was nothing there of even
architectural interest.  My eyes traveled higher, and rested at
last on something extremely curious.

The wall was not very high at that point.  It formed the blind
rear of a house that faced into a court of some sort approached
by an alley from another street.  There were no windows.  A small
door some distance to my left belonged obviously to the next
house.  On top of the wall, almost exactly, but not quite, in the
middle of it, was a figure that looked like a wooden carving--
something like one of those fat, seated Chinamen they used to set
over the tea counter of big grocer's shops.

But the one thing that you never see, and can be sure of not
seeing in Jerusalem outside of a Christian church, is a carved
human figure of any kind.  The Moslems are fanatical on that
point.  Whatever exterior statues the crusaders for instance
left, the Saracens and Turks destroyed.  Besides, why was it not
exactly in the middle?

It was much too big and thick-set to be a sleeping vulture.  It
was the wrong shape to be any sort of chimney.  It was certainly
not a bale of merchandise put up on the roof to dry.  And the
longer you looked at it the less it seemed to resemble anything
recognizable.  I had about reached the conclusion that it must be
a bundle of sheepskins up-ended, ready to be spread out in the
morning sun, and was going to cast about for something else to
puzzle over, when it moved.  The man who thinks he would not feel
afraid when a thing like that moves in the dark unexpectedly has
got to prove it before I believe him.  The goose-flesh broke out
all over me.

A moment later the thing tilted forward, and a man's head emerged
from under a blanket.  It chuckled damnably.  If there had been a
rock of the right size within reach I would have thrown it, for
it is not agreeable to be chuckled at when you are hungry,
sleepy, and in a trap.  I know just how trapped animals feel.

But then it spoke in good plain English;  and you could not
mistake the voice.

"That's what comes of suiting yourself, doesn't it!  Place
plugged at both ends, and nowhere to go but there and back!
Thanks for tipping off Narayan Singh--you see, we were all ready.
Here's a pass that'll let you out--catch!"

He threw down a piece of white paper, folded.

"Show that to the Sikhs at either end.  Now beat it, while the
going's good.  Leave Suliman there.  I shall want him when he has
had his sleep out.  Say:  hadn't you better change your   mind
about coming back too soon from that joy ride?  Haven't you had
enough of this?  The next move's dangerous."

"Is it my choice?" I asked.

"We owe you some consideration."

"Then I'm in on the last act."

"All right.  But don't blame me.  Turner will give you orders.
Get a move on."

I lowered Suliman's head gently from my knee on to a nice
comfortable corner of the stone gutter, and went up-street to
interview the Sikhs.  It was rather like a New York Customs
inspection, after your cabin steward has not been heavily enough
tipped, and has tipped off the men in blue by way of distributing
the discontent.  I showed them the safe-pass Grim had scribbled.
They accepted that as dubious preliminary evidence of my right to
be alive, but no more.  I was searched painstakingly and
ignominiously for weapons.  No questions asked.  Nothing taken
for granted.  Even my small change was examined in the moonlight,
coin by coin, to make sure, I suppose, that it wouldn't explode
if struck on stone.  They gave everything back to me, including
my underwear.

A bearded non-commissioned officer entered a description of me in
a pocket memorandum book.  If his face, as he wrote it, was
anything to judge by he described me as a leper without a
license.  Then I was cautioned gruffly in an unknown tongue and
told to "imshi!"  It isn't a bad plan to "imshi" rather quickly
when a Sikh platoon suggests your doing it.  I left them standing
all alone, with nothing but the empty night to bristle at.

The rest of that night, until half-an-hour before dawn was a
half-waking dream of discomfort and chilly draughts in the mouth
of the hotel arcade, where I sat and watched the spies, and they
watched me.  The third man was presumably still sleeping in the
mosque, but it was satisfactory to know that the other two were
just as cold and unhappy as I felt.

About ten minutes before the car came the third man showed up
sheepishly, looking surprised as well as relieved to find me
sitting there.  He put in several minutes explaining matters to
his friends.  I don't doubt he lied like a horse-trader and gave
a detailed account of having followed me from place to place, for
he used a great deal of pantomimic gesture.  The other two were
cynical with the air of men who must sit and listen to another
blowing his own trumpet.

The car arrived with a fanfare of horn-blowing, the chauffeur
evidently having had instructions to call lots of attention to
himself.  Turner came out at once, with the lower part of his
face protected against the morning chill by a muffler.  Being
about the same height, and in that Syrian uniform, he looked
remarkably like Grim, except that he did not imitate the stride
nearly as well.

He stumbled over me, clutched my shoulder and made signs for the
benefit of the spies.  Then he whispered to me to help him carry
out the "money" bags.  So we each took three for the first trip,
and each contrived to drop one.  By the time all ten bags were in
the car there can hardly have remained any doubt in the
conspirators' minds that we were really taking funds to Mustapha
Kemal, or at any rate to somebody up north.

But Davey was no half-way concession maker.  Having lent himself
unwillingly to the trick, he did his utmost to make it succeed,
like a good sport.  He stuck his head out of a bedroom window.

"Don't forget, now, to send me those rugs from Damascus!"
he shouted.

It all went like clockwork.  Glancing back as we drove by the
Jaffa Gate I saw the three spies walk away, and there is very
often more information in men's backs than in their faces.  They
walked like laborers returning home with a day's work behind
them, finished;  not at all like men in doubt, nor as if they
suspected they were followed, although in fact they were.  Three
Sikhs emerged from the corner by the Gate and strolled along
behind them.  Detailed preparations for the round-up had begun.
The unostentatious mechanism of it seemed more weird and terrible
than the conspiracy itself.

There was a full company of Sikhs standing to arms in a side
street leading off the Jaffa Road, but they took no notice of us.
Their officer looked keenly at us once, and then very
deliberately stared the other way, illustrating how some fighting
men make pretty poor dissemblers;  every one of his dark-skinned
rank and file had observed all the details of our outfit without
seeming to see us at all.

"We're using nothing but Sikhs on this job," said Turner.
"British troops wouldn't appreciate the delicacy of the
situation.  Moslems couldn't be trusted not to talk.  The Sikhs
enjoy the surreptitious part of it, and don't care enough about
the politics to get excited.  Wish I might be in at the finish,
though!  Have you any notion what the real objective is?"

"No," said I, and tried not to feel, or look pleased with myself.
But no mere amateur can conceal that, in the moment of discovery,
he knows more about the inside of an official business than one
of the Administration's lawful agents.  That is nine-tenths of
the secret of "bossed" politics--the sheer vanity of being on the
inside, "in the know."  I suppose I smirked.   "Damn this ride
to Haifa!  What the hell have you done, I wonder, that you should
have a front pew?  Is the Intelligence short of officers?"

I had done nothing beyond making Grim's acquaintance and by good
luck tickling his flair for odd friendship.  I thought it better
not to say that, so I went on lying.

"I don't suppose I know any more than you do."

"Rot!  I posted the men who watched you into Djemal's place
yesterday, and watched you out again.  You acted pretty poorly,
if you ask me.  It's a marvel we didn't have to go in there and
rescue you.  I suppose you're another of Grim's favorites.  He
picks some funny ones.  Half the men in jail seem to be friends
of his."

I decided to change the subject.

"I was told to change clothes and walk back after a mile or so,"
I said.  "Suppose we don't make it a Marathon.  Why walk farther
than we need to?"

"Uh!"

I think he was feeling sore enough to take me ten miles for the
satisfaction of making me tramp them back to Jerusalem.  But it
turned out not to be his day for working off grievances.  We were
bowling along pretty fast, and had just reached open country
where it would be a simple matter to change into other clothes
without risk of being seen doing it, when we began to be
overhauled by another, larger car that came along at a terrific
pace.  It was still too dark to make out who was in it until it
drew almost abreast.

"The Administrator by the Horn Spoon!  What next, I wonder!  Pull
up!" said Turner.  "Morning, sir."

The two cars came to a standstill.  The Administrator leaned out.

"I think I can save you a walk," he said, smiling.  "How about
changing your clothes between the cars and driving back with me?"

I did not even know yet what new disguise I was to assume, but
Turner opened a hand-bag and produced a suit of my own clothes
and a soft hat.

"Burgled your bedroom," he explained.

All he had forgotten was suspenders.  No doubt it would have
given him immense joy to think of me walking back ten miles
without them.

Sir Louis gave his orders while I changed clothes.

"You'd better keep going for some time, Turner.  No need to go
all the way to Haifa, but don't get back to Jerusalem before
noon at the earliest, and be sure you don't talk to anybody on
your way."

Turner drove on.  I got in beside the Administrator.

"Grim tells me that you don't object to a certain amount of risk.
You've been very useful, and he thinks you would like to see the
end of the business.  I wouldn't think of agreeing to it, only we
shall have to call on you as a witness against Scharnhoff and
Noureddin Ali.  As you seem able to keep still about what you
know, it seems wiser not to change witnesses at this stage.  It
is highly important that we should have one unofficial observer,
who is neither Jew nor Moslem, and who has no private interest to
serve.  But I warn you, what is likely to happen this morning
will be risky."

I looked at the scar on his cheek, and the campaign ribbons, and
the attitude of absolute poise that can only be attained by years
of familiarity with danger.

"Why do you soldiers always act like nursemaids toward
civilians?" I asked him.  "We're bone of your bone."

He laughed.

"Entrenched privilege!  If we let you know too much you'd think
too little of us!"

We stopped at a Jew's store outside the city for suspenders, and
then made the circuit outside the walls in a whirlwind of dust,
stopping only at each gate to get reports from the officers
commanding companies drawn up in readiness to march in and police
the city.

"It's all over the place that disaster of some sort is going to
happen today," said Sir Louis.  "It only needs a hatful of
rumours to set Jerusalemites at one another's throats.  But we're
ready for them.  The first to start trouble this morning will be
the first to get it.  Now--sorry you've no time for breakfast--
here's the Jaffa Gate.  Will you walk through the city to that
street where Grim talked with you from a roof last night?  You'll
find him thereabouts.  Sure you know the way?  Good-bye.  Good
luck!  No, you won't need a pass;  there'll be nobody to
interfere with you."





Chapter Nineteen

"Dead or alive, sahib."


I did get breakfast nevertheless, but in a strange place.  The
city shutters were coming down only under protest, because, just
as in Boston and other hubs of sanctity, shop-looting starts less
than five minutes after the police let go control.  There was an
average, that morning, of about ten rumours to the ear.  So the
shop-keepers had to be ordered to open up.  About the mildest
rumour was that the British had decide to vacate and to leave the
Zionists in charge of things.  You couldn't fool an experienced
Jew as to what would happen in that event.  There was another
rumour that Mustapha Kemal was on the march.  Another that an
Arab army was invading from the direction of El-Kerak.  But there
were British officers walking about with memorandum books, and a
fifty-pound fine looked more serious than an outbreak that had
not occurred yet.  So they were putting down their shutters.

I had nearly reached the Haram-es-Sheriff, and was passing a
platoon of Sikhs who dozed beside their rifles near a street
corner, when Grim's voice hailed me through the half-open door
behind them.  He was back in his favourite disguise as a Bedouin,
squatting on a mat near the entrance of a vaulted room, where he
could see through the door without being seen.

"This is headquarters for the present," he explained.  "Soon as
we bag the game we'll run 'em in here quick as lightning.  Most
likely keep 'em here all day, so's not to have to parade 'em
through the streets until after dark.  A man's coming soon with
coffee and stuff to eat."

"What's become of Suliman?"

"He's shooting craps with two other young villains close to
where you left him last night.  I'm hoping he'll get word with
his mother."

Grim looked more nervous than I had ever seen him.  There was a
deep frown between his eyes.  He talked as if he were doing it to
keep himself from worrying.

"What's eating you?" I asked.

"Noureddin Ali.  After all this trouble to bag the whole gang
without any fuss there's a chance he's given us the slip.  I
watched all night to make sure he didn't come out of that door.
He didn't.  But I've no proof he's in there.  Scharnhoff's in
there, and five of the chief conspirators.  Noureddin Ali may be.
But a man brought me a story an hour ago about seeing him on the
city wall.  However, here's the food.  So let's eat."

He sat and munched gloomily, until presently Goodenough joined
us, looking, what with that monocle and one thing and another, as
if he had just stepped out of a band-box.

"Well, Grim, the net's all ready.  If that TNT is where you say
it is, in that big barn behind the fruit-stalls near the Jaffa
Gate, it's ours the minute they make a move."

"There isn't a doubt on that point," Grim answered.  "Why else
should Scharnhoff open a fruit-shop?  The license for it was
taken out by one of Noureddin Ali's agents, whose brother deals
in fruit wholesale and owns that barn.  Narayan Singh tracked
some suspicious packages to that place four days ago.  They'll
start to carry it into the city hidden under loads of fruit just
as soon as the morning crowd begins to pour in.  We only need let
them get the first consignment in, so as to have the chain of
evidence complete.  Are you sure your men will let the first lot
go through?"

"Absolutely.  Just came from giving them very careful
instructions. The minute that first load disappears into the city
they'll close in on the barn and arrest every one they find in
there.  But what are you gloomy about?"

"I'd hate to miss the big fish."

"You mean Noureddin Ali ?"

"It looks to me as if he's been a shade too wise for us.  One man
swore he saw him on the wall this morning, but he was gone when I
sent to make sure.  We've got all the rest.  There are five in
Djemal's Cafe, waiting for the big news;  they'll be handcuffed
one at a time by the police when they get tired of waiting and
come out.

"But I'd rather bag Noureddin Ali than all the others put
together.  He's got brains, that little beast has.  He'd know how
to use this story against us with almost as much effect as if
he'd pulled the outrage off."

He had hardly finished speaking when Narayan Singh's great bulk
darkened the doorway.  He closed the door behind him, as if
afraid the other Sikhs might learn bad news.

"It is true, sahib.  He was on the wall.  He is there again."

"Have you seen him?"

"Surely.  He makes signals to the men who are loading the donkeys
now in the door of the barn.  It would be a difficult shot.  His
head hardly shows between the battlements.  But I think I could
hit him from the road below.  Shall I try?"

"No, you'd only scare him into hiding if you miss.  Oh hell!
There are three ways up on to the wall at that point.  There's no
time to block them all--not if he's signalling now.  He'll see
your men close in on the barn, sir, and beat it for the skyline.
Oh, damn and blast the luck!"

"At least we can try to cut him off," said Goodenough.  "I'll
take some men myself and have a crack at it."

"No use, sir.  You'd never catch sight of him.  I wish you'd let
Narayan Singh take three men, make for the wall by the shortest
way, and hunt him if it takes a week."

"Why not?  All right.  D'you hear that, Narayan Singh?"

"Atcha, sahib."

"You understand?" said Grim.  "Keep him moving.  Keep after him."

"Do the sahibs wish him alive or dead?"

"Either way," said Goodenough.

"If he's gone from the wall when you get there," Grim added,
"bring us the news.  You'll know where to find us"

"Atcha"

The Sikh brought his rifle to the shoulder, faced about,
marched out, chose three men from the platoon in the street,
and vanished.

"Too bad, too bad!" said Goodenough, but Grim did not answer.  He
was swearing a blue streak under his breath.  The next to arrive
on the scene was Suliman, grinning with delight because he had
won all the money of the other urchins, but brimming with news in
the bargain.  He considered a mere colonel of cavalry beneath
notice, and addressed himself to Grim without ceremony.

"My mother brought out oranges in baskets and set them on benches
on both sides of the door.  Then she went in, and I heard her
scream.  There was a fight inside."

"D'you care to bet, sir?" asked Grim.

"On what?"

"I'll bet you a hundred piastres Scharnhoff has tried to make his
get-away, and they've either killed him or tied him hand and
foot.  Another hundred on top of that, that Scharnhoff offers to
turn state witness, provided he's alive when we show up."

"All right.  I'll bet you he hangs."

"Are you coming with us, sir?"

"Wouldn't miss it for a king's ransom."

"The back way out, then."

Grim beckoned the Sikhs into the room, left one man in there in
charge of Suliman, who swore blasphemously at being left behind,
and led the way down a passage that opened into an alley
connecting with a maze of others like rat runs, mostly arched
over and all smelly with the unwashed gloom of ages.  At the end
of the last alley we entered was a flight of stone steps, up
which we climbed to the roof of the house on which I had seen
Grim the night before.

There was a low coping on the side next the street, and some one
had laid a lot of bundles of odds and ends against it;  lying
down, we could look out between those without any risk of being
seen from below, but Goodenough made the Sikhs keep well in the
background and only we three peered over the edge.  About two
hundred yards in front of us the Dome of the Rock glistened in
the morning sun above the intervening roofs.  The street was
almost deserted, although the guards at either end had been
removed for fear of scaring away the conspirators.  We watched
for about twenty minutes before any one passed but occasional
beggars, some of whom stopped to wonder why oranges should stand
on sale outside a door with nobody in charge of them.  Three
separate individuals glanced right and left and then helped
themselves pretty liberally from the baskets.

But at last there came five donkeys very heavily loaded with
oranges and raisins, in charge of six men, which was a more than
liberal allowance.  When they stopped at the little stone house
in front of us there was another thing noticeable;  instead of
hitting the donkeys hard on the nose with a thick club, which is
the usual way of calling a halt in Palestine, they went to the
heads and stopped them reasonably gently.  So, although all six
men were dressed to resemble peasants, they were certainly
nothing of the kind.

Nor were they such wide-awake conspirators as they believed
themselves, for they were not in the least suspicious of six
other men, also dressed as peasants, who followed them up-street,
and sat down in full view with their backs against a wall.  Yet I
could see quite plainly the scabbard of a bayonet projecting
through a hole in the ragged cloak of the nearest of those
casual wayfarers.

They had to knock several minutes before the door opened
gingerly;  then they off-loaded the donkeys, and it took two men
to carry each basketful, with a third lending a hand in case of
accident.  Only one man went back with the donkeys, and two of
the casual loafers against the wall got up to saunter after him;
the other five honest merchants went inside, and we heard the
bolt shoot into its iron slot behind them.

"How about it, Grim?" asked Goodenough then.

"Ready, sir.  Will you give the order?"

We filed in a hurry down the steps into the alley, ran in a zig-
zag down three passages, and reached another alley with narrow
door at its end that faced the street.  Grim had made every
preparation.  There was a heavy baulk of timber lying near the
door, with rope-handles knotted into holes bored through it at
intervals.  The Sikhs picked that up and followed us into
the street.

The mechanism of the Administration's net was a thing to wonder
at.  As we emerged through the door the "peasants" who were
loafing with their backs against the wall got up and formed a
cordon across the street.  Simultaneously, although I neither saw
nor heard any signal, a dozen Sikhs under a British officer came
down the street from the other direction at the double and formed
up in line on our lefthand.  A moment later, our men were
battering the door down with their baulk of timber, working all
together as if they had practised the stunt thoroughly.

It was a stout door, three inches thick, of ancient olivewood and
reinforced with forged iron bands.  The hinges, too, had been
made by hand in the days when, if a man's house was not his
fortress, he might just as well own nothing;  they were cemented
deep into the wall, and fastened to the door itself with half-
inch iron rivets.  The door had to be smashed to pieces, and the
noise we made would have warned the devils in the middle of
the world.

"We shouldn't have let them get in with any TNT at all," said
Goodenough.  "They'll touch it off before we can prevent them."

"Uh-uh!  They're not that kind," Grim answered.  "They'll fight
for their skins.  Have your gun ready, sir.  They've laid their
plans for a time-fuse and a quick getaway.  They'll figure the
going may be good still if they can once get past us.  Look out
for a rush!"

But when the door went down at last in a mess of splinters
there was no rush--nothing but silence--a dark, square, stone
room containing two cots and a table, and fruit scattered all
over the floor amid gray dust and fragments of cement.  Grim
laughed curtly.

"Look, sir!"

The fruit-baskets were on the floor by one of the cots, and the
TNT containers were still in them.  They had tipped out the
fruit, and then run at the sound of the battering ram.

Goodenough stepped into the room, and we followed him.  Beyond
the table, half-hidden by a great stone slab, was a dark hole in
the floor.  Evidently the last man through had tried to cover up
the hole, but had found the stone too heavy.  The Sikhs dragged
it clear and disclosed the mouth of a tunnel, rather less than a
man's height, sloping sharply downward.

"What we need now is mustard gas.  Smoke 'em out,"
said Goodenough.

"Might kill 'em," Grim objected.

"That'd be too bad, wouldn't it!"

"We could starve 'em out, for that matter," said Grim.  "But
they've probably got water down there, and perhaps food.  Every
hour of delay adds to the risk of rioting.  We've got to get this
hole sealed up permanently, and deny that it was ever opened."

"We could do that at once!  But I won't be a party to sealing 'em
up alive."

"Besides, sir, they've certainly got firearms, and they might
just possible have one can of TNT down there."

"All right," said Goodenough.  "I'll lead the way down."

"I've a plan," said Grim.

He took one of the fruit-baskets and began breaking it up.

"Who has a white shirt?" he asked.

I was the haberdasher.  The others, Sikhs included, were all
clothed in khaki from coat to skin.  Grim's Bedouin array was
dark-brown.  I peeled the shirt off, and Grim rigged it on a
frame of basket-work, with a clumsy pitch-forked arrangement of
withes at the bottom.  The idea was not obvious until he twisted
the withes about his waist;  then, when he bent down, the shirt
stood up erect above him.

"If you don't mind, sir, we'll have two or three Sikhs go first.
Have them take their boots off and crawl quietly as flat down as
they can keep.  I'll follow 'em with this contraption.  They'll
be able to see the white shirt dimly against the tunnel, and if
they do any shooting they'll aim at that.  Then if the rest of
you keep low behind me we've a good chance to rush them before
they can do any damage."

I never met a commanding officer more free from personal conceit
than Goodenough, and as I came to know more of him later on that
characteristic stood out increasingly.  He was not so much a man
of ideas as one who could recognize them.  That done, he made use
of his authority to back up his subordinates, claiming no credit
for himself but always seeing to it that they got theirs.

The result was that he was simultaneously despised and loved--
despised by the self-advertising school, of which there are
plenty in every army, and loved--with something like fanaticism
by his junior officers and men.

"I agree to that," he said simply, screwing in his monocle.  Then
he turned and instructed the Sikhs in their own language.

"You follow last," he said to me.  "Now--all ready?"

He had a pistol in one hand and a flashlight in the other, but
had to stow them both away again in order to crawl in the tunnel.
Grim had no weapon in sight.  The two Sikhs who were to lead had
stripped themselves of everything that might make a noise, but
the others kept both boots and rifles, with bayonets fixed, for
it did not much matter what racket they made.  In fact, the more
noise we, who followed, made, the better, since that would draw
attention from the Sikhs in front.  All we had to do was to keep
our bodies below Grim's kite affair, out of the probable line
of fire.

Nevertheless, that dark hole was untempting.  A dank smell came
out of it, like the breath of those old Egyptian tombs in which
the bones of horses, buried with their masters, lie all about on
shelves.  You couldn't see into it more than a yard or two, for
the only light came through the doorway of the windowless room,
and the tunnel led into the womb of rock where, perhaps, no light
had been since Solomon's day.

But the leading Sikhs went in without hesitation and got down on
their bellies.  They might have been swallowed whole for all that
I heard or saw of them from that minute.  You could guess why the
Turks and Germans had not really craved to meet those fellows out
in No-man's-land.

Grim went in on all-fours like a weird animal, with my shirt
dancing on its frame above his back.  Goodenough went next,
peering through that window-pane monocle like a deep-sea fish.
All the rest of the Sikhs went after him in Indian file, dragging
their rifle-butts along the tunnel floor and making noise enough
to remind you of the New York subway.

I went in at the tail end, trying at intervals to peer around a
khaki-covered Punjaub rump, alternately getting my head and
fingers bruised by heels I could not see and a rifle-butt that
only moved in jerks when you didn't expect it to.  My nose was
bleeding at the end of ten yards.

But you couldn't keep your distance.  Whenever the men in front
checked at some obstruction or paused to listen, all those behind
closed up;  and by the time those behind had run their noses
against iron-shod heels the men in front were on their way again.
You couldn't see a thing until you rammed your head into it, and
then the sense of touch gave you a sort of sight suggestion, as
when you see things in a dream.  As for sound, the tunnel acted
like a whispering gallery, mixing all the noises up together, so
that you could not guess whether a man had spoken, or a stone had
fallen, or a pistol had gone off, or all three.

Once or twice, when the line closed up on itself caterpillar-
fashion, I was able to make out my white shirt dancing dimly;
and once, where some trick of the tunnel sorted out the sounds, I
caught a scrap of conversation.

"D'you suppose they'll be able to see the shirt?"

"God knows.  I can hardly make it out from here."

"When it looks like the right time to you, sir, turn the
flashlight on it."

"All right.  God damn! Keep on going--you nearly knocked out
my eye-glass!"

Even over my shoulder, looking backward, I could see practically
nothing, for what little light came in through the opening was
swallowed by the first few yards.  There was a suspicion of
paleness in the gloom behind, and the occasional suggestion of an
outline of rough wall;  no more.

Nor was the tunnel straight by any means.  It turned and twisted
constantly;  and at every bend the men who originally closed it
had built up a wall of heavy masonry that Scharnhoff had had to
force his way through.  In those places the broken stones were
now lying in the fairway, as you knew by the suffering when you
came in contact with them;  some of the split-off edges were as
sharp as glass.

It was good fun, all the same, while it lasted.  If we had been
crawling down a sewer, or a modern passage of any kind, the sense
of danger and discomfort would, no doubt, have overwhelmed all
other considerations.  But, even supposing Scharnhoff had been on
a vain hunt, and the veritable Tomb of the Kings of Judah did not
lie somewhere in the dark ahead of us, we were nevertheless under
the foundations of Solomon's temple, groping our way into
mysteries that had not been disclosed, perhaps, since the days
when the Queen of Sheba came and paid her homage to the most
wise king.  You could feel afraid, but you couldn't wish you
weren't there.

I have no idea how long it took to crawl the length of that black
passage.  It seemed like hours.  I heard heavy footsteps behind
me after a while.  Some one following in a hurry, who could see
no better than we could, kept stumbling over the falling masonry;
and once, when he fell headlong, I heard him swear titanically in
a foreign tongue.  I called back to whoever it was to crawl
unless he wanted to be shot, but probably the words were all
mixed up in the tunnel echoes, for he came on as before.

Then all at once Goodenough flashed on the light for a fraction
of a second and the shirt showed like a phantom out of blackness.
The instant answer to that was a regular volley of shots from in
front.  The flash of several pistols lit up the tunnel, and
bullets rattled off the walls and roof.  The shirt fell, shot
loose from its moorings, and the leading Sikhs gave a shout as
they started to rush forward.

We all surged after them, but there was a sudden check, followed
by a babel worse than when a dozen pi-dogs fight over a rubbish-
heap.  You couldn't make head or tail of it, except that
something desperate was happening in front, until suddenly a man
with a knife in his hand, too wild with fear to use it, came
leaping and scrambling over the backs of Sikhs, like a forward
bucking the line.  The Sikh in front of me knelt upright and
collared him round the knees.  The two went down together, I on
top of both of them with blood running down my arm, for the man
had started to use his knife at last, slashing out at random, and
I rather think that slight cut he gave me saved the Sikh's life.
But you can make any kind of calculation afterwards, about what
took place in absolute darkness, without the least fear of being
proven wrong.  And since the Sikh and I agreed on that point no
other opinion matters.

I think that between the two of us we had that man about
nonplused, although we couldn't see.  I had his knife, and the
Sikh was kneeling on his stomach, when a hundred and eighty
pounds of bone and muscle catapulted at us from the rear and
sprawled on us headlong, saved by only a miracle from skewering
some one with a bayonet as he fell.

He laughed while he fought, this newcomer, and even asked
questions in the Sikh tongue.  He had my arm in a grip like a
vise and wrenched at it until I cursed him.  Then he found a leg
in the dark and nearly broke that, only to discover it was the
other Sikh's.  Still laughing, as if blindfolded fighting was his
meat and drink, he reached again, and this time his fingers
closed on enemy flesh.  Judging by the yells, they hurt, too.

There must have been at least another minute of cat-and-dog-fight
struggling--hands being stepped on and throats clutched--before
Goodenough rolled himself free from an antagonist in front and,
groping for the flashlight, found it and flashed it on.  The
first thing I recognized by its light was the face of Narayan
Singh, with wonderful white teeth grinning through his black
beard within six inches of my nose.

"Damn you!" I laughed.  "You weigh a ton.  Get off--you nearly
killed me!"

"Nearly, in war-time, means a whole new life to lose, sahib.  Be
pleased to make the most of it!" he answered.

Within two minutes after that we had eight prisoners disarmed and
subdued, some of them rather the worse for battery.  The amazing
thing was that we hadn't a serious casualty among the lot of us.
We could have totaled a square yard of skin, no doubt, and a
bushel of bruises (if that is the way you measure them) but mine
was the only knife-wound.  I felt beastly proud.

By the light of the electric torch we dragged and prodded the
prisoners back whence they had come, and presently Grim or
somebody found a lantern and lit it.  We found ourselves in a
square cavern--a perfect cube it looked like--about thirty feet
wide each way.

In the midst was a plain stone coffer with its lid removed and
set on end against it.  In the coffer lay a tall man's skeleton,
with the chin still bound in linen browned with age.  There were
other fragments of linen here and there, but the skeleton's bones
had been disturbed and had fallen more or less apart.

Over in one corner were two large bundles done up in modern gunny-
bags, and Grim went over to examine them.

"Hello!" he said.  "Here's Scharnhoff and his lady friend!"

He ripped the lashings of both bundles and disclosed the Austrian
and the woman, gagged and tied, both almost unconscious from
inability to breathe, but not much hurt otherwise.

The Sikhs herded the prisoners, old alligator-eyes among them,
into another corner.  Grim tore my shirt into strips to bandage
my arm with.  Goodenough talked with Narayan Singh, while we
waited for Scharnhoff to recover full consciousness.

"Those murderers!" he gasped at last.  "Schweinehunde!"

"Better spill the beans, old boy," Grim said, smiling down at
him.  "You'll hang at the same time they do, if you can't tell a
straight story."

"Ach!  I do not care!  There were no manuscripts--nothing!  I
don't know whose skeleton that is--some old king David, perhaps;
for that is not David's real tomb that the guides show.  Hang
those murderers and I am satisfied!"

"Your story may help hang them.  Come on, out with it!"

"Have you caught Noureddin Ali?"

"Never mind!"

"But I do mind!  And you should mind!"

Scharnhoff sat up excitedly.  He was dressed in the Arab garments
I had seen in his cupboard that day when Grim and I called on
him, with a scholar's turban that made him look very distinguished
in spite of his disarray.

"That Noureddin Ali is a devil!  Together we would look for the
Tomb of the Kings.  Together we would smuggle out the manuscripts
--translate them together--publish the result together.  He lent
me money.  He promised to bring explosives.  Oh, he was full of
enthusiasm!  It was not until last night, when I had broken that
last obstruction down and discovered nothing but this coffin,
that I learned his real plan.  The devil intended all along to
fill this tomb with high explosive and to destroy the mosque above,
with everybody in it!  Curse him!"

"Never mind cursing him," said Grim, "tell us the story."

"He sent oranges here, all marked with the labels of a Zionist
colony.  When I told him that the explosive would arrive too
late, he said I should use it to smash these walls and find
another tomb.  He himself disappeared, and when I questioned
his men they told me the explosive would be brought in hidden
under fruit in baskets.  I waited then in the hope of killing
him myself--"

"Hah-hah!" laughed Grim.

"That is true!  But they bound me, and later on bound the woman,
and laid us here to be blown up together with the mosque."

Grim turned to Goodenough, who had been listening.

"Do I win the bet, sir?"

"Ten piastoes!" said Goodenough.  "Yes. Narayan Singh says
Noureddin Ali was gone by the time they reached the wall."

"Sure, or he'd have brought Noureddin Ali.  I've been thinking,
sir.  We've one chance left to bag that buzzard.  Will you give
me carte blanche?"

"Yes.  Go ahead."

Grim crossed the place to the corner where old alligator-eyes
stood herded with the other prisoners.

"Are you guilty?" he demanded.

"No.  Guilty of nothing.  I came out of curiosity to see what was
happening here."

"Thought so.  Can you hold your tongue?  Then go!  Get out
of here!"

Alligator-eyes didn't wait for a second urging, nor stay to
question his good luck, but went off in a shambling hurry.

"You are mad!" exclaimed Scharnhoff.  "That man is the next-worst!"

"Grim, are you sure that's wise?" asked Goodenough.

"We can get him any time we want him, sir," Grim answered.  "He
lacks Noureddin Ali's gift of slipperiness."

He turned to Narayan Singh.

"Follow that man, but don't let him know he's followed.  He'll
show you where Noureddin Ali is.  Get him this time!"

"Dead or alive, sahib?"

"Either."




Chapter Twenty

"All men are equal in the dark."


The first thing Goodenough did after Grim had sent Narayan Singh
off on his deadly mission was to summon the sheikh of the Dome of
the Rock.  He himself went to fetch him rather than risk having
the sheikh bring a crowd of witnesses, who would be sure to talk
afterwards.  The all-important thing was to conceal the fact that
sacrilege had been committed.  But it was also necessary to
establish the fact that Zionists had had no hand in it.

"You see," Grim explained, sitting on the edge of the stone
coffin, "we could hold Jerusalem.  But if word of this business
were to spread far and wide, you couldn't hold two or three
hundred million fanatics;  and believe me, they'd cut loose!"

"The sheikh must realize that," said I.  "What do you bet me
he won't try to black-mail the Administration on the strength
of it?"

"I'll bet you my job!  Watch the old bird.  Listen in.  He's
downy.  He knows a chance when he sees it, and he might try
to cheat you at dominoes.  But in a big crisis he's a number
one man."

While we waited we tried to get an opinion out of Scharnhoff
about the coffin and the skeleton inside it.  But the old fellow
was heart-broken.  I think he told the truth when he said he
couldn't explain it.

"What is there to say of it, except that it is very ancient?
There is no decoration.  The coffin is beautifully shaped out of
one solid piece of stone, but that is all.  The skeleton is that
of an old man, who seems to have been wounded once or twice in
battle.  The linen is good, but there is no jewelry;  no
ornaments.  And it is buried here in a very sacred place, so
probably, it is one of the Jewish kings, or else one of the
prophets.  It might be King David--who knows?  And what do I
care?  It is what a man sets down on parchment, and not his bones
that interest me!"

The sheikh arrived at last, following Goodenough down the dark
passage with the supreme nonchalance of the priest too long
familiar with sacred places to be thrilled or frightened by them.
He stood in the entrance gazing about him, blinking speculatively
through the folds of fat surrounding his bright eyes.  Goodenough
took the lantern and held it close to the prisoners' faces one
by one.

"You see?" he said.  "All Syrians.  All Moslems.  Not a Jew among
them.  I'll take you and show you the others presently."

"What will you do with them?"

"That's for a court to decide.  Hang them, most likely.  They
were plotting murder."

"They will talk at the trial."

"Behind closed doors!" said Goodenough.

"Ahum!" said the sheikh, stroking his beard.  It would not
have been compatible with either his religion or his racial
consciousness not to try to make the utmost of the situation.
"This would be a bad thing for all the Christian governments if
the tale leaked out.  Religious places have been desecrated.
There would be inflammation of Moslem prejudices everywhere."

"It would be worse for you!" Grim retorted.  The sheikh stared
hard at him, stroking his beard again,

"How so, Jimgrim?  Have I had a hand in this?"

"This is your famous Bir-el-Arwah, where, as you tell your
faithful, the souls of the dead come to pray twice a week.  This
is the gulf beneath the Rock of Abraham that you tell them
reaches to the middle of the world.  Look at it!  Shall we
publish flashlight photographs?"

The sheikh's eyes twinkled as he recognized the force of that
argument.  He turned it over in his mind for a full minute before
he answered.

"You cannot be expected to understand spiritual things," he said
at last.  "However," looking up, "this is not under the Rock.
This is another place."

Goodenough pulled a compass from his pocket, but Grim shook
his head.

"Go on," said Grim. "What of it?"

"It is better to close up this place and say nothing."

"Except this." Goodenough retorted:  "you will say at the first
and every succeeding opportunity that you know it is not true
that Zionists tried to blow up the Dome of the Rock."

"How do I know they did not try?"

"Perhaps we'd better ask the Administrator to come and inspect
this place officially and put the exact facts on the record,"
Goodenough retorted.

"You understand, don't you?" said Grim.

"Everything we've done until now has been strictly unofficial.
There's a difference."

"And this effendi?" he asked, staring at me.  "What of him?"

"He is commended to your special benevolence," Grim answered.
"The way to keep a man like him discreet is to make a friend of
him.  Treat him as you do me, then we three shall be friends."

The sheikh nodded, and that proved to be the beginning of a
rather intimate acquaintance with him that stood me in good stead
more than once afterwards.  The influence that a man in his
position can exert, if he cares to, is almost beyond the belief
of those who pin their faith to money and mere officialdom.

The prisoners were marched out.  All except Scharnhoff and the
woman were confirmed temporarily in the room in which Grim and I
had breakfasted.  The woman was taken to the jail until an
American missionary could be found to take charge of her.  They
always hand the awkward cases over to Americans, partly because
they have a gift for that sort of thing, but also because, in
case of need, you can blame Americans without much risk of
a reaction.

Goodenough left a guard of Sikhs outside the street entrance, to
keep out all intruders until the sheikh could collect a few
trustworthy masons to seal up the passage again.  Grim,
Scharnhoff and I walked quite leisurely to Grim's quarters, where
Grim left the two of us together in the room downstairs while he
changed into uniform.

"What will they do with me?" asked Scharnhoff.  He was not far
from collapse.  He lay back in the armchair with his mouth open.
I got him some of Grim's whiskey.

"Nothing ungenerous," I said.  "If you were going to be hanged
Grim would have told you."

"Do you--do you think he will let me go?"

"Not until he's through with you," said I, "if I'm any judge
of him."

"What use can I be to him?  My life is not worth a minute's
purchase if Noureddin Ali finds me--he or that other whom they
let go.  Oh, what idiots to let Noureddin Ali give them the slip,
and then to turn the second-worst one loose as well!  Those
English are all mad.  That man Grim has been corrupted by them!"

Grim hardly looked corrupted, rather iron-hard and energetic when
he returned presently in his major's uniform.  You could tell the
color of his eyes now;  they were blue-gray, and there was a
light in them that should warn the wary not to oppose him unless
a real fight was wanted.  His manner was brisk, brusk, striding
over trifles.  He nodded to me.

"You sick of this?" he asked me.

"How many times?  I want to see it through."

"All right.  Your own risk."

He turned on Scharnhoff, standing straight in front of him, with
both arms behind his back.

"Look here.  Have you any decency in that body of yours?  Do you
want to prove it?  Or would you rather hang like a common
scoundrel?  Which is it to be?"

"I--I--I--I--do not understand you.  What do you mean?"

"Are you game to risk your neck decently or would you rather have
the hangman put you out of pain?"

"I--I was not a conspirator, Major Grim.  If I had known what
they intended I would never have lent myself to such a purpose.
I needed money for my excavations--it has been very difficult to
draw on my bank in Vienna.  Noureddin Ali represented himself to
me as an enthusiastic antiquarian;  and when I spoke of my need
he offered money, as I told you already.  I never suspected until
last night that he and Abdul Ali of Damascus are French secret
agents.  But last night he boasted to me about Abdul Ali.  He
laughed at me.  Then he--"

"Yes, yes," Grim interrupted.  "Will you play the man now, if I
give you the chance?"

"If you will accord me opportunity, at least I will do my best."

"Understand;  you'll not be allowed to live here afterward.
You'll be repatriated to Austria, or wherever you come from.
All you're offered is a chance to clean your slate morally before
you go."

"I shall be grateful."

"Will you obey?"

"Absolutely--to the limit of my power, that is to say.  I am not
an athlete--not a man of active habits."

"Very well.  Listen." Grim turned to me again

"Take Scharnhoff to his house.  You know the way.  When afternoon
comes, set a table in the garden and let him sit at it.  He may
as well read.  If nothing happens before dark, take him out a
lamp and some food.  He mustn't move away.  He'd better change
into his proper clothes first.  Your job will be to keep an eye
on him until I come.  You'd better keep out of sight as much as
possible, especially after dark.  Better watch him through the
window.  And, by the way, take this pistol.  If Scharnhoff
disobeys you, shoot him."

He turned again on Scharnhoff.

"I hope you're not fooling yourself.  I should say the chance is
two or three to one that you'll come out of this alive.  If
you're killed, you may flatter yourself that's a mighty sight
cleaner than hanging.  If you come out with a whole skin, you
shall leave the country without even going to jail.  Time to
go now."

I slipped the heavy pistol into my pocket and led the way without
saying a word.  Scharnhoff followed me, rather drearily, and we
walked side by side toward the German Colony, he looking exactly
like one of those respectable and devout educated Arabs of the
old style, who teach from commentaries on the Koran.  We excited
no comment whatever.

"What will he do?  What is his purpose?" Scharnhoff asked me
after a while.  "If a man is in danger of death, he likes to know
the reason--the purpose of it."

I had a better than faint glimmering of Grim's purpose, but saw
no necessity to air my views on the subject.

"I'm amused," said I, "at the strictly unofficial status of all
this.  You see, I'm no more connected with this administration
than you are.  I'm as alien as you.  You might say, I'm a
stranger in Jerusalem.  Yet, here I am, with a perfectly official
pistol, loaded with official cartridges, under unofficial orders
to shoot you at the first sign of disobedience.  And--strictly
unofficially, between you and me--I shan't hesitate to do it!"

He contrived a smile out of the depths of his despondency.

"I wonder--should you shoot me--what they would do to
you afterwards."

"Something unofficial," I suggested. "But we'll leave that up to
them.  The point is--"

"Oh, don't worry!  You shall have no trouble from me."  It took a
long time to reach his house, for the poor old chap was suffering
from lack of sleep, and physical weariness, as well as disappointment,
and I had to let him sit down by the wayside once or twice.  Being
in hard condition, and not much more than half his age, I had almost
forgotten that I had not slept the night before.  Keen curiosity as
to what might happen between now and midnight was keeping me going.

He could hardly drag himself into the house.  But a bath, and
some food that I found in the larder restored him considerably.
He helped me carry out the table.  He chose a book of Schiller's
poems to take with him, but did not read it;  he sat with his
elbows on the table and his back toward the front door, resting
his chin gloomily on both fists.  He remained in that attitude
all afternoon, and for all I know slept part of the time.

Between him and the window of the room I sat in were some shrubs
that obscured the view considerably.  I could see Scharnhoff
through them easily enough, but I don't think he could see me,
and certainly no one could have seen me from the road.  I felt
fairly sure that no one saw me until it began to grow dark and I
carried out the lamp.  Even then, it was Scharnhoff who struck
the match and lit it, so that I was in shadow all the time--
probably unrecognizable.

It had been fairly easy to keep awake until then, but as the room
grew darker and darker, and nothing happened, the yearning to
fall asleep became actual agony.  It was a rather large, square
room, crowded up with a jumble of antiquities.  The only real
furniture was the window-seat on which I knelt, and an oblong
table;  but even the table was laid on its side to make room for
a battered Roman bust standing on the floor between its legs.

I had left the door of the room wide open, in order to be able to
hear anything that might happen in the house;  but the only sound
came from a couple of rats that gnawed and rustled interminably
among the rubbish in the corner.

It must have been nearly eight o'clock, and I believe I had
actually dozed off at last, kneeling in the window, when all at
once it seemed to me that the rats were making a different, and
greater noise than I ever heard rats make.  It was pitch-black
dark.  I couldn't see my hand in front of me.  My first thought
was to glance through the window at Scharnhoff, but something--
intuition, I suppose--made me draw aside from the window instead.

Then, beyond any shadow of a doubt, I heard a man move, and
the hair rose all up the back of my head.  I remembered
the pistol, clutched it, and found voice enough for two words:
"Who's there?"

"Hee-hee!" came the answer from behind the table.  "So Major
Jimgrim lied about a broken leg, and thought to trap Noureddin
Ali, did he!  Don't move, Major Jimgrim!  Don't move!  We will
have a little talk before we bid each other good-bye!  I cannot
last long in any case, for the cursed Sikhs are after me.  I
would rather that you should kill me than those Sikhs should, but
I would like to kill you also.  If you move before I give you
leave you are a dead man, Major Jimgrim!  Hee-hee!  You cannot
see me!  Better keep still!"

If it was flattering to be mistaken for Grim in the dark, it was
hardly pleasant in the circumstances.  For a moment I was angry.
It flashed across my mind that Grim had planned this.  But on
second thought I refused to believe he would deceive me about
Scharnhoff and use me as a decoy without my permission.  I
decided to keep still and see what happened.

"Do you think you deserve to live, Major Jimgrim?" Noureddin
Ali's voice went on.  I heard him shift his position.  He was
probably trying to see my outline against the dark wall in order
to take aim.  "You, a foreigner, interfering in the politics of
this land?  But for you there would have been an explosion today
that would have liberated all the Moslem world.  But for that lie
about a broken leg you would have died a little after ten o'clock
this morning--hee-hee--instead of now!  Don't move, Major
Jimgrim!  You and I will have a duel presently.  There is lots of
time.  The Sikhs lost track of me."

I did move.  I stooped down close to the floor, so that he might
fire over my head if, as I suspected, he was merely gaining time
in order to take sure aim.  I tried to see which end of the table
he was talking from, but he was hidden completely.

"Do you think you should go free, to perpetrate more cowardly
interference, after spoiling that well-laid plan?  Hee-hee!  You
poor fool!  Busy-bodies such as you invariably overreach
themselves.  Having tricked me two or three times, you thought,
didn't you? that you could draw me here to kill Scharnhoff, that
poor old sheep.  You were careful, weren't you? to let Omar
Mahmoud go, in order that he might tell me how Scharnhoff had
turned witness against us.  And the Sikhs followed Omar Mahmoud,
until Omar Mahmoud found me.  And then they hunted me.  Hee-hee!
Don't move!  Was that the plan?  Simultaneously then, being
yourself only a fool after all, you flatter me and underestimate
my intelligence.  Hee-hee!

"You were right in thinking I would not submit to capture and
death without first wreaking vengeance.  But vengeance on such a
sheep as Scharnhoff?  With Major Jimgrim still alive?  What
possessed you?  Were you mad?  I satisfied myself an hour ago
that Scharnhoff was the bait, which the redoubtable Major Jimgrim
would be watching.  Perhaps I shall deal with Scharnhoff
afterwards--hee-hee!--who knows?  Now--now shall we fight that
duel?  Are you ready?"

I supposed that meant that he could not see me and had given up
hope of it.  He would like to have me move first, so as to judge
my exact whereabouts by sound.  I reached out very cautiously,
and rapped the muzzle of my pistol on the floor twice.

He fired instantly, three shots in succession.  The bullets went
wild to my left and brought down showers of plaster from the
wall.  I feared he might have seen me by the pistol-flash.  I did
not fire back.  There was no need.  Something moved swiftly like
a black ghost through the open door.  There was a thud--and the
ring of a steel swivel--and a scream.

"Has the sahib a match?" said a gruff voice that I thought
I recognized.

I was trembling--excitement, of course--only children and women
and foreigners ever feel afraid!  It took me half a minute to
find the match box, and the other half to strike a light.

Narayan Singh was standing by the end of the table.  He was
wiping blood off his bayonet with a piece of newspaper.  He
looked cool enough to have carried the paper in his pocket for
that purpose.  I got up, feeling ashamed to be seen crouching on
the floor.  But Narayan Singh smiled approval.

"You did well, sahib.  All men are equal in the dark.  Until he
fired first there was nothing wise to do but hide."

"How long have you been here?" I asked.

"Five minutes.  I only waited for a sure thrust.  But hah? the
sahib feels like a dead man come to life again, eh?  Well I know
that feeling!"

The match burned my fingers.  I struck another.  As I did that
Grim stood in the doorway, smiling.

"Is he dead?" he asked.

"Surely, sahib.  Shall I go now and get that other one--that
Omar Mahmoud?"

"No need," said Grim.  "They rounded him up five minutes after he
had found Noureddin."

"Then have I done all that was required of me?"

"No, Narayan Singh.  You haven't shaken hands with me yet."

"Thank you, Jimgrim."

The match went out.  I struck a third one.  Grim turned to me.

"Hungry?"

"Sleepy."

"Oh, to hell with sleep!  Let's bring old Scharnhoff into the
other room, dig out some eats and drinks, and get a story from
him.  All right, Narayan Singh;  there'll be a guard here in
ten minutes to take charge of that body.  After that, dismiss.
I'll report you to Colonel Goodenough for being a damned
good soldier."

"My colonel sahib knew that years ago," the great Sikh answered
quietly.





End of Project Gutenberg's Jimgrim and Allah's Peace, by Talbot Mundy

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK JIMGRIM AND ALLAH'S PEACE ***

***** This file should be named 11357.txt or 11357.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/1/3/5/11357/



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's
eBook number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number.  The replaced older file is renamed.
VERSIONS based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

EBooks posted prior to November 2003, with eBook numbers BELOW #10000,
are filed in directories based on their release date.  If you want to
download any of these eBooks directly, rather than using the regular
search system you may utilize the following addresses and just
download by the etext year.

     http://www.gutenberg.net/etext06

    (Or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99,
     98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90)

EBooks posted since November 2003, with etext numbers OVER #10000, are
filed in a different way.  The year of a release date is no longer part
of the directory path.  The path is based on the etext number (which is
identical to the filename).  The path to the file is made up of single
digits corresponding to all but the last digit in the filename.  For
example an eBook of filename 10234 would be found at:

     http://www.gutenberg.net/1/0/2/3/10234

or filename 24689 would be found at:
     http://www.gutenberg.net/2/4/6/8/24689

An alternative method of locating eBooks:
     http://www.gutenberg.net/GUTINDEX.ALL

