Project Gutenberg's The Elusive Pimpernel, by Baroness Emmuska Orczy

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Elusive Pimpernel

Author: Baroness Emmuska Orczy

Posting Date: December 23, 2008 [EBook #2785]
Release Date: August, 2001
[Last updated: October 6, 2011]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ELUSIVE PIMPERNEL ***




Produced by J.C. Byers and L.M. Shaf





THE ELUSIVE PIMPERNEL

By Baroness Orczy




Contents


     I.       Paris: 1793
     II.      A Retrospect
     III.     Ex-Ambassador Chauvelin
     IV.      The Richmond Gala
     V.       Sir Percy and His Lady
     VI.      For the Poor of Paris
     VII.     Premonition
     VIII.    The Invitation
     IX.      Demoiselle Candeille
     X.       Lady Blakeney's Rout
     XI.      The Challenge
     XII.     Time -- Place -- Conditions
     XIII.    Reflections
     XIV.     The Ruling Passion
     XV.      Farewell
     XVI.     The Passport
     XVII.    Boulogne
     XVIII.   No. 6
     XIX.     The Strength of the Weak
     XX.      Triumph
     XXI.     Suspense
     XXII.    Not Death
     XXIII.   The Hostage
     XXIV.    Colleagues
     XXV.     The Unexpected
     XXVI.    The Terms of the Bargain
     XXVII.   The Decision
     XXVIII.  The Midnight Watch
     XXIX.    The National Fete
     XXX.     The Procession
     XXXI.    Final Dispositions
     XXXII.   The Letter
     XXXIII.  The English Spy
     XXXIV.   The Angelus
     XXXV.    Marguerite





Chapter I: Paris: 1793

There was not even a reaction.

On! ever on! in that wild, surging torrent; sowing the wind of anarchy,
of terrorism, of lust of blood and hate, and reaping a hurricane of
destruction and of horror.

On! ever on! France, with Paris and all her children still rushes
blindly, madly on; defies the powerful coalition,--Austria, England,
Spain, Prussia, all joined together to stem the flow of carnage,--defies
the Universe and defies God!

Paris this September 1793!--or shall we call it Vendemiaire, Year I.
of the Republic?--call it what we will! Paris! a city of bloodshed, of
humanity in its lowest, most degraded aspect. France herself a gigantic
self-devouring monster, her fairest cities destroyed, Lyons razed to the
ground, Toulon, Marseilles, masses of blackened ruins, her bravest sons
turned to lustful brutes or to abject cowards seeking safety at the cost
of any humiliation.

That is thy reward, oh mighty, holy Revolution! apotheosis of equality
and fraternity! grand rival of decadent Christianity.

Five weeks now since Marat, the bloodthirsty Friend of the People,
succumbed beneath the sheath-knife of a virgin patriot, a month since
his murderess walked proudly, even enthusiastically, to the guillotine!
There has been no reaction--only a great sigh!... Not of content or
satisfied lust, but a sigh such as the man-eating tiger might heave
after his first taste of long-coveted blood.

A sigh for more!

A king on the scaffold; a queen degraded and abased, awaiting death,
which lingers on the threshold of her infamous prison; eight hundred
scions of ancient houses that have made the history of France; brave
generals, Custine, Blanchelande, Houchard, Beauharnais; worthy patriots,
noble-hearted women, misguided enthusiasts, all by the score and by the
hundred, up the few wooden steps which lead to the guillotine.

An achievement of truth!

And still that sigh for more!

But for the moment,--a few seconds only,--Paris looked round her mighty
self, and thought things over!

The man-eating tiger for the space of a sigh licked his powerful jaws
and pondered!

Something new!--something wonderful!

We have had a new Constitution, a new Justice, new Laws, a new Almanack!

What next?

Why, obviously!--How comes it that great, intellectual, aesthetic Paris
never thought of such a wonderful thing before?

A new religion!

Christianity is old and obsolete, priests are aristocrats, wealthy
oppressors of the People, the Church but another form of wanton tyranny.

Let us by all means have a new religion.

Already something has been done to destroy the old! To destroy! always
to destroy! Churches have been ransacked, altars spoliated, tombs
desecrated, priests and curates murdered; but that is not enough.

There must be a new religion; and to attain that there must be a new
God.

"Man is a born idol-worshipper."

Very well then! let the People have a new religion and a new God.

Stay!--Not a God this time!--for God means Majesty, Power, Kingship!
everything in fact which the mighty hand of the people of France has
struggled and fought to destroy.

Not a God, but a goddess.

A goddess! an idol! a toy! since even the man-eating tiger must play
sometimes.

Paris wanted a new religion, and a new toy, and grave men, ardent
patriots, mad enthusiasts, sat in the Assembly of the Convention and
seriously discussed the means of providing her with both these things
which she asked for.

Chaumette, I think it was, who first solved the difficulty:--Procureur
Chaumette, head of the Paris Municipality, he who had ordered that
the cart which bore the dethroned queen to the squalid prison of the
Conciergerie should be led slowly past her own late palace of the
Tuileries, and should be stopped there just long enough for her to see
and to feel in one grand mental vision all that she had been when she
dwelt there, and all that she now was by the will of the People.

Chaumette, as you see, was refined, artistic;--the torture of the fallen
Queen's heart meant more to him than a blow of the guillotine on her
neck.

No wonder, therefore, that it was Procureur Chaumette who first
discovered exactly what type of new religion Paris wanted just now.

"Let us have a Goddess of Reason," he said, "typified if you will by
the most beautiful woman in Paris. Let us have a feast of the Goddess of
Reason, let there be a pyre of all the gew-gaws which for centuries
have been flaunted by overbearing priests before the eyes of starving
multitudes, let the People rejoice and dance around that funeral pile,
and above it all let the new Goddess tower smiling and triumphant. The
Goddess of Reason! the only deity our new and regenerate France shall
acknowledge throughout the centuries which are to come!"

Loud applause greeted the impassioned speech.

"A new goddess, by all means!" shouted the grave gentlemen of the
National Assembly, "the Goddess of Reason!"

They were all eager that the People should have this toy; something to
play with and to tease, round which to dance the mad Carmagnole and sing
the ever-recurring "Ca ira."

Something to distract the minds of the populace from the consequences of
its own deeds, and the helplessness of its legislators.

Procureur Chaumette enlarged upon his original idea; like a true artist
who sees the broad effect of a picture at a glance and then fills in the
minute details, he was already busy elaborating his scheme.

"The goddess must be beautiful... not too young... Reason can only go
hand in hand with the riper age of second youth... she must be decked
out in classical draperies, severe yet suggestive... she must be rouged
and painted... for she is a mere idol... easily to be appeased with
incense, music and laughter."

He was getting deeply interested in his subject, seeking minutiae of
detail, with which to render his theme more and more attractive.

But patience was never the characteristic of the Revolutionary
Government of France. The National Assembly soon tired of Chaumette's
dithyrambic utterances. Up aloft on the Mountain, Danton was yawning
like a gigantic leopard.

Soon Henriot was on his feet. He had a far finer scheme than that of
the Procureur to place before his colleagues. A grand National fete,
semi-religious in character, but of the new religion which destroyed and
desecrated and never knelt in worship.

Citizen Chaumette's Goddess of Reason by all means--Henriot conceded
that the idea was a good one--but the goddess merely as a figure-head:
around her a procession of unfrocked and apostate priests, typifying
the destruction of ancient hierarchy, mules carrying loads of sacred
vessels, the spoils of ten thousand churches of France, and ballet girls
in bacchanalian robes, dancing the Carmagnole around the new deity.

Public Prosecutor Foucquier Tinville thought all these schemes very
tame. Why should the People of France be led to think that the era of
a new religion would mean an era of milk and water, of pageants and of
fireworks? Let every man, woman, and child know that this was an era of
blood and again of blood.

"Oh!" he exclaimed in passionate accents, "would that all the traitors
in France had but one head, that it might be cut off with one blow of
the guillotine!"

He approved of the National fete, but he desired an apotheosis of the
guillotine; he undertook to find ten thousand traitors to be beheaded on
one grand and glorious day: ten thousand heads to adorn the Place de
la Revolution on a great, never-to-be-forgotten evening, after the
guillotine had accomplished this record work.

But Collot d'Herbois would also have his say. Collot lately hailed from
the South, with a reputation for ferocity unparalleled throughout the
whole of this horrible decade. He would not be outdone by Tinville's
bloodthirsty schemes.

He was the inventor of the "Noyades," which had been so successful at
Lyons and Marseilles. "Why not give the inhabitants of Paris one of
these exhilarating spectacles?" he asked with a coarse, brutal laugh.

Then he explained his invention, of which he was inordinately proud.
Some two or three hundred traitors, men, women, and children, tied
securely together with ropes in great, human bundles and thrown upon a
barge in the middle of the river: the barge with a hole in her bottom!
not too large! only sufficient to cause her to sink slowly, very slowly,
in sight of the crowd of delighted spectators.

The cries of the women and children, and even of the men, as they felt
the waters rising and gradually enveloping them, as they felt themselves
powerless even for a fruitless struggle, had proved most exhilarating,
so Citizen Collot declared, to the hearts of the true patriots of Lyons.

Thus the discussion continued.

This was the era when every man had but one desire, that of outdoing
others in ferocity and brutality, and but one care, that of saving his
own head by threatening that of his neighbour.

The great duel between the Titanic leaders of these turbulent parties,
the conflict between hot-headed Danton on the one side and cold-blooded
Robespierre on the other, had only just begun; the great, all-devouring
monsters had dug their claws into one another, but the issue of the
combat was still at stake.

Neither of these two giants had taken part in these deliberations anent
the new religion and the new goddess. Danton gave signs now and then
of the greatest impatience, and muttered something about a new form of
tyranny, a new kind of oppression.

On the left, Robespierre in immaculate sea-green coat and carefully
gauffered linen was quietly polishing the nails of his right hand
against the palm of his left.

But nothing escaped him of what was going on. His ferocious egoism, his
unbounded ambition was even now calculating what advantages to himself
might accrue from this idea of the new religion and of the National
fete, what personal aggrandisement he could derive therefrom.

The matter outwardly seemed trivial enough, but already his keen and
calculating mind had seen various side issues which might tend to place
him--Robespierre--on a yet higher and more unassailable pinnacle.

Surrounded by those who hated him, those who envied and those who feared
him, he ruled over them all by the strength of his own cold-blooded
savagery, by the resistless power of his merciless cruelty.

He cared about nobody but himself, about nothing but his own exaltation:
every action of his career, since he gave up his small practice in a
quiet provincial town in order to throw himself into the wild vortex
of revolutionary politics, every word he ever uttered had but one
aim--Himself.

He saw his colleagues and comrades of the old Jacobin Clubs ruthlessly
destroyed around him: friends he had none, and all left him indifferent;
and now he had hundreds of enemies in every assembly and club in Paris,
and these too one by one were being swept up in that wild whirlpool
which they themselves had created.

Impassive, serene, always ready with a calm answer, when passion
raged most hotly around him, Robespierre, the most ambitious, most
self-seeking demagogue of his time, had acquired the reputation of being
incorruptible and selfless, an enthusiastic servant of the Republic.

The sea-green Incorruptible!

And thus whilst others talked and argued, waxed hot over schemes for
processions and pageantry, or loudly denounced the whole matter as the
work of a traitor, he, of the sea-green coat, sat quietly polishing his
nails.

But he had already weighed all these discussions in the balance of his
mind, placed them in the crucible of his ambition, and turned them into
something that would benefit him and strengthen his position.

Aye! the feast should be brilliant enough! gay or horrible, mad or
fearful, but through it all the people of France must be made to feel
that there was a guiding hand which ruled the destinies of all, a head
which framed the new laws, which consolidated the new religion and
established its new goddess: the Goddess of Reason.

Robespierre, her prophet!




Chapter II: A Retrospect



The room was close and dark, filled with the smoke from a defective
chimney.

A tiny boudoir, once the dainty sanctum of imperious Marie Antoinette; a
faint and ghostly odour, like unto the perfume of spectres, seemed still
to cling to the stained walls, and to the torn Gobelin tapestries.

Everywhere lay the impress of a heavy and destroying hand: that of the
great and glorious Revolution.

In the mud-soiled corners of the room a few chairs, with brocaded
cushions rudely torn, leant broken and desolate against the walls. A
small footstool, once gilt-legged and satin-covered, had been overturned
and roughly kicked to one side, and there it lay on its back, like some
little animal that had been hurt, stretching its broken limbs upwards,
pathetic to behold.

From the delicately wrought Buhl table the silver inlay had been harshly
stripped out of its bed of shell.

Across the Lunette, painted by Boucher and representing a chaste
Diana surrounded by a bevy of nymphs, an uncouth hand had scribbled in
charcoal the device of the Revolution: Liberte, Egalite, Fraternite
ou la Mort; whilst, as if to give a crowning point to the work of
destruction and to emphasise its motto, someone had decorated the
portrait of Marie Antoinette with a scarlet cap, and drawn a red and
ominous line across her neck.

And at the table two men were sitting in close and eager conclave.

Between them a solitary tallow candle, unsnuffed and weirdly flickering,
threw fantastic shadows upon the walls, and illumined with fitful and
uncertain light the faces of the two men.

How different were these in character!

One, high cheek-boned, with coarse, sensuous lips, and hair elaborately
and carefully powdered; the other pale and thin-lipped, with the keen
eyes of a ferret and a high intellectual forehead, from which the sleek
brown hair was smoothly brushed away.

The first of these men was Robespierre, the ruthless and incorruptible
demagogue; the other was Citizen Chauvelin, ex-ambassador of the
Revolutionary Government at the English Court.

The hour was late, and the noises from the great, seething city
preparing for sleep came to this remote little apartment in the now
deserted Palace of the Tuileries, merely as a faint and distant echo.

It was two days after the Fructidor Riots. Paul Deroulede and the woman
Juliette Marny, both condemned to death, had been literally spirited
away out of the cart which was conveying them from the Hall of Justice
to the Luxembourg Prison, and news had just been received by the
Committee of Public Safety that at Lyons, the Abbe du Mesnil, with the
ci-devant Chevalier d'Egremont and the latter's wife and family, had
effected a miraculous and wholly incomprehensible escape from the
Northern Prison.

But this was not all. When Arras fell into the hands of the
Revolutionary army, and a regular cordon was formed round the town, so
that not a single royalist traitor might escape, some three score women
and children, twelve priests, the old aristocrats Chermeuil, Delleville
and Galipaux and many others, managed to pass the barriers and were
never recaptured.

Raids were made on the suspected houses: in Paris chiefly where the
escaped prisoners might have found refuge, or better still where their
helpers and rescuers might still be lurking. Foucquier Tinville, Public
Prosecutor, led and conducted these raids, assisted by that bloodthirsty
vampire, Merlin. They heard of a house in the Rue de l'Ancienne Comedie
where an Englishmen was said to have lodged for two days.

They demanded admittance, and were taken to the rooms where the
Englishman had stayed. These were bare and squalid, like hundreds of
other rooms in the poorer quarters of Paris. The landlady, toothless and
grimy, had not yet tidied up the one where the Englishman had slept: in
fact she did not know he had left for good.

He had paid for his room, a week in advance, and came and went as he
liked, she explained to Citizen Tinville. She never bothered about him,
as he never took a meal in the house, and he was only there two days.
She did not know her lodger was English until the day he left. She
thought he was a Frenchman from the South, as he certainly had a
peculiar accent when he spoke.

"It was the day of the riots," she continued; "he would go out, and I
told him I did not think that the streets would be safe for a foreigner
like him: for he always wore such very fine clothes, and I made sure
that the starving men and women of Paris would strip them off his back
when their tempers were roused. But he only laughed. He gave me a bit of
paper and told me that if he did not return I might conclude that he had
been killed, and if the Committee of Public Safety asked me questions
about me, I was just to show the bit of paper and there would be no
further trouble."

She had talked volubly, more than a little terrified at Merlin's scowls,
and the attitude of Citizen Tinville, who was known to be very severe if
anyone committed any blunders.

But the Citizeness--her name was Brogard and her husband's brother kept
an inn in the neighbourhood of Calais--the Citizeness Brogard had a
clear conscience. She held a license from the Committee of Public Safety
for letting apartments, and she had always given due notice to the
Committee of the arrival and departure of her lodgers. The only thing
was that if any lodger paid her more than ordinarily well for the
accommodation and he so desired it, she would send in the notice
conveniently late, and conveniently vaguely worded as to the
description, status and nationality of her more liberal patrons.

This had occurred in the case of her recent English visitor.

But she did not explain it quite like that to Citizen Foucquier Tinville
or to Citizen Merlin.

However, she was rather frightened, and produced the scrap of paper
which the Englishman had left with her, together with the assurance that
when she showed it there would be no further trouble.

Tinville took it roughly out of her hand, but would not glance at it.
He crushed it into a ball and then Merlin snatched it from him with a
coarse laugh, smoothed out the creases on his knee and studied it for a
moment.

There were two lines of what looked like poetry, written in a language
which Merlin did not understand. English, no doubt.

But what was perfectly clear, and easily comprehended by any one, was
the little drawing in the corner, done in red ink and representing a
small star-shaped flower.

Then Tinville and Merlin both cursed loudly and volubly, and bidding
their men follow them, turned away from the house in the Rue de
l'Ancienne Comedie and left its toothless landlady on her own doorstep
still volubly protesting her patriotism and her desire to serve the
government of the Republic.

Tinville and Merlin, however, took the scrap of paper to Citizen
Robespierre, who smiled grimly as he in his turn crushed the offensive
little document in the palm of his well-washed hands.

Robespierre did not swear. He never wasted either words or oaths, but he
slipped the bit of paper inside the double lid of his silver snuff box
and then he sent a special messenger to Citizen Chauvelin in the Rue
Corneille, bidding him come that same evening after ten o'clock to room
No. 16 in the ci-devant Palace of the Tuileries.

It was now half-past ten, and Chauvelin and Robespierre sat opposite one
another in the ex-boudoir of Queen Marie Antoinette, and between them on
the table, just below the tallow-candle, was a much creased, exceedingly
grimy bit of paper.

It had passed through several unclean hands before Citizen Robespierre's
immaculately white fingers had smoothed it out and placed it before the
eyes of ex-Ambassador Chauvelin.

The latter, however, was not looking at the paper, he was not even
looking at the pale, cruel face before him. He had closed his eyes and
for a moment had lost sight of the small dark room, of Robespierre's
ruthless gaze, of the mud-stained walls and greasy floor. He was seeing,
as in a bright and sudden vision, the brilliantly-lighted salons of the
Foreign Office in London, with beautiful Marguerite Blakeney gliding
queenlike on the arm of the Prince of Wales.

He heard the flutter of many fans, the frou-frou of silk dresses, and
above all the din and sound of dance music, he heard an inane laugh and
an affected voice repeating the doggerel rhyme that was even now written
on that dirty piece of paper which Robespierre had placed before him:

     "We seek him here, and we seek him there,
      Those Frenchies seek him everywhere!
      Is he in heaven, is he in hell,
      That demmed elusive Pimpernel?"

It was a mere flash! One of memory's swiftly effaced pictures, when she
shows us for the fraction of a second, indelible pictures from out our
past. Chauvelin, in that same second, while his own eyes were closed
and Robespierre's fixed upon him, also saw the lonely cliffs of Calais,
heard the same voice singing: "God save the King!" the volley of
musketry, the despairing cries of Marguerite Blakeney; and once again he
felt the keen and bitter pang of complete humiliation and defeat.




Chapter III: Ex-Ambassador Chauvelin



Robespierre had quietly waited the while. He was in no hurry: being a
night-bird of very pronounced tastes, he was quite ready to sit here
until the small hours of the morning watching Citizen Chauvelin mentally
writhing in the throes of recollections of the past few months.

There was nothing that delighted the sea-green Incorruptible quite so
much as the aspect of a man struggling with a hopeless situation and
feeling a net of intrigue drawing gradually tighter and tighter around
him.

Even now, when he saw Chauvelin's smooth forehead wrinkled into an
anxious frown, and his thin hand nervously clutched upon the table,
Robespierre heaved a pleasurable sigh, leaned back in his chair, and
said with an amiable smile:

"You do agree with me, then, Citizen, that the situation has become
intolerable?"

Then as Chauvelin did not reply, he continued, speaking more sharply:

"And how terribly galling it all is, when we could have had that man
under the guillotine by now, if you had not blundered so terribly last
year."

His voice had become hard and trenchant like that knife to which he was
so ready to make constant allusion. But Chauvelin still remained silent.
There was really nothing that he could say.

"Citizen Chauvelin, how you must hate that man!" exclaimed Robespierre
at last.

Then only did Chauvelin break the silence which up to now he had
appeared to have forced himself to keep.

"I do!" he said with unmistakable fervour.

"Then why do you not make an effort to retrieve the blunders of last
year?" queried Robespierre blandly. "The Republic has been unusually
patient and long-suffering with you, Citizen Chauvelin. She has taken
your many services and well-known patriotism into consideration. But
you know," he added significantly, "that she has no use for worthless
tools."

Then as Chauvelin seemed to have relapsed into sullen silence, he
continued with his original ill-omened blandness:

"Ma foi! Citizen Chauvelin, were I standing in your buckled shoes, I
would not lose another hour in trying to avenge mine own humiliation!"

"Have I ever had a chance?" burst out Chauvelin with ill-suppressed
vehemence. "What can I do single-handed? Since war has been declared
I cannot go to England unless the Government will find some official
reason for my doing so. There is much grumbling and wrath over here, and
when that damned Scarlet Pimpernel League has been at work, when a score
or so of valuable prizes have been snatched from under the very knife
of the guillotine, then, there is much gnashing of teeth and useless
cursings, but nothing serious or definite is done to smother those
accursed English flies which come buzzing about our ears."

"Nay! you forget, Citizen Chauvelin," retorted Robespierre, "that we of
the Committee of Public Safety are far more helpless than you. You
know the language of these people, we don't. You know their manners and
customs, their ways of thought, the methods they are likely to employ:
we know none of these things. You have seen and spoken to men in England
who are members of that damned League. You have seen the man who is its
leader. We have not."

He leant forward on the table and looked more searchingly at the thin,
pallid face before him.

"If you named that leader to me now, if you described him, we could
go to work more easily. You could name him, and you would, Citizen
Chauvelin."

"I cannot," retorted Chauvelin doggedly.

"Ah! but I think you could. But there! I do not blame your silence. You
would wish to reap the reward of your own victory, to be the instrument
of your own revenge. Passions! I think it natural! But in the name of
your own safety, Citizen, do not be too greedy with your secret. If the
man is known to you, find him again, find him, lure him to France! We
want him--the people want him! And if the people do not get what they
want, they will turn on those who have withheld their prey."

"I understand, Citizen, that your own safety and that of your government
is involved in this renewed attempt to capture the Scarlet Pimpernel,"
retorted Chauvelin drily.

"And your head, Citizen Chauvelin," concluded Robespierre.

"Nay! I know that well enough, and you may believe me, and you will,
Citizen, when I say that I care but little about that. The question is,
if I am to lure that man to France what will you and your government do
to help me?"

"Everything," replied Robespierre, "provided you have a definite plan
and a definite purpose.

"I have both. But I must go to England in, at least, a semi-official
capacity. I can do nothing if I am to hide in disguise in out-of-the-way
corners."

"That is easily done. There has been some talk with the British
authorities anent the security and welfare of peaceful French subjects
settled in England. After a good deal of correspondence they have
suggested our sending a semi-official representative over there to look
after the interests of our own people commercially and financially.
We can easily send you over in that capacity if it would suit your
purpose."

"Admirably. I have only need of a cloak. That one will do as well as
another."

"Is that all?"

"Not quite. I have several plans in my head, and I must know that I
am fully trusted. Above all, I must have power--decisive, absolute,
illimitable power."

There was nothing of the weakling about this small, sable-clad man, who
looked the redoubtable Jacobin leader straight in the face and brought a
firm fist resolutely down upon the table before him. Robespierre paused
a while ere he replied; he was eying the other man keenly, trying to
read if behind that earnest, frowning brow there did not lurk some
selfish, ulterior motive along with that demand for absolute power.

But Chauvelin did not flinch beneath that gaze which could make every
cheek in France blanch with unnamed terror, and after that slight moment
of hesitation Robespierre said quietly:

"You shall have the complete power of a military dictator in every town
or borough of France which you may visit. The Revolutionary Government
shall create you, before you start for England, Supreme Head of all the
Sub-Committees of Public Safety. This will mean that in the name of the
safety of the Republic every order given by you, of whatsoever nature
it might be, must be obeyed implicitly under pain of an arraignment for
treason."

Chauvelin sighed a quick, sharp sigh of intense satisfaction, which he
did not even attempt to disguise before Robespierre.

"I shall want agents," he said, "or shall we say spies? and, of course,
money."

"You shall have both. We keep a very efficient secret service in
England and they do a great deal of good over there. There is much
dissatisfaction in their Midland counties--you remember the Birmingham
riots? They were chiefly the work of our own spies. Then you know
Candeille, the actress? She had found her way among some of those
circles in London who have what they call liberal tendencies. I believe
they are called Whigs. Funny name, isn't it? It means perruque, I think.
Candeille has given charity performances in aid of our Paris poor,
in one or two of these Whig clubs, and incidentally she has been very
useful to us."

"A woman is always useful in such cases. I shall seek out the Citizeness
Candeille."

"And if she renders you useful assistance, I think I can offer her
what should prove a tempting prize. Women are so vain!" he added,
contemplating with rapt attention the enamel-like polish on his
finger-nails. "There is a vacancy in the Maison Moliere. Or--what might
prove more attractive still--in connection with the proposed National
fete, and the new religion for the people, we have not yet chosen
a Goddess of Reason. That should appeal to any feminine mind. The
impersonation of a goddess, with processions, pageants, and the rest...
Great importance and prominence given to one personality.... What
say you, Citizen? If you really have need of a woman for the furtherance
of your plans, you have that at your disposal which may enhance her
zeal."

"I thank you, Citizen," rejoined Chauvelin calmly. "I always entertained
a hope that some day the Revolutionary Government would call again on
my services. I admit that I failed last year. The Englishman is
resourceful. He has wits and he is very rich. He would not have
succeeded, I think, but for his money--and corruption and bribery are
rife in Paris and on our coasts. He slipped through my fingers at the
very moment when I thought that I held him most securely. I do admit all
that, but I am prepared to redeem my failure of last year, and... there
is nothing more to discuss.--I am ready to start."

He looked round for his cloak and hat, and quietly readjusted the set
of his neck-tie. But Robespierre detained him a while longer: that
born mountebank, born torturer of the souls of men, had not gloated
sufficiently yet on the agony of mind of this fellow-man.

Chauvelin had always been trusted and respected. His services in
connection with the foreign affairs of the Revolutionary Government had
been invaluable, both before and since the beginning of the European
War. At one time he formed part of that merciless decemvirate
which--with Robespierre at its head--meant to govern France by laws of
bloodshed and of unparalleled ferocity.

But the sea-green Incorruptible had since tired of him, then had
endeavoured to push him on one side, for Chauvelin was keen and clever,
and, moreover, he possessed all those qualities of selfless patriotism
which were so conspicuously lacking in Robespierre.

His failure in bringing that interfering Scarlet Pimpernel to justice
and the guillotine had completed Chauvelin's downfall. Though not
otherwise molested, he had been left to moulder in obscurity during this
past year. He would soon enough have been completely forgotten.

Now he was not only to be given one more chance to regain public favour,
but he had demanded powers which in consideration of the aim in
view, Robespierre himself could not refuse to grant him. But the
Incorruptible, ever envious and jealous, would not allow him to exult
too soon.

With characteristic blandness he seemed to be entering into all
Chauvelin's schemes, to be helping in every way he could, for there
was something at the back of his mind which he meant to say to the
ex-ambassador, before the latter took his leave: something which
would show him that he was but on trial once again, and which would
demonstrate to him with perfect clearness that over him there hovered
the all-powerful hand of a master.

"You have but to name the sum you want, Citizen Chauvelin," said the
Incorruptible, with an encouraging smile, "the government will not stint
you, and you shall not fail for lack of authority or for lack of funds."

"It is pleasant to hear that the government has such uncounted wealth,"
remarked Chauvelin with dry sarcasm.

"Oh! the last few weeks have been very profitable," retorted
Robespierre; "we have confiscated money and jewels from emigrant
royalists to the tune of several million francs. You remember the
traitor Juliette Marny, who escape to England lately? Well! her mother's
jewels and quite a good deal of gold were discovered by one of our most
able spies to be under the care of a certain Abbe Foucquet, a calotin
from Boulogne--devoted to the family, so it seems."

"Yes?" queried Chauvelin indifferently.

"Our men seized the jewels and gold, that is all. We don't know yet what
we mean to do with the priest. The fisherfolk of Boulogne like him, and
we can lay our hands on him at any time, if we want his old head for
the guillotine. But the jewels were worth having. There's a historic
necklace worth half a million at least."

"Could I have it?" asked Chauvelin.

Robespierre laughed and shrugged his shoulders.

"You said it belonged to the Marny family," continued the ex-ambassador.
"Juliette Marny is in England. I might meet her. I cannot tell what may
happen: but I feel that the historic necklace might prove useful. Just
as you please," he added with renewed indifference. "It was a thought
that flashed through my mind when you spoke--nothing more."

"And to show you how thoroughly the government trusts you, Citizen
Chauvelin," replied Robespierre with perfect urbanity, "I will myself
direct that the Marny necklace be placed unreservedly in your hands; and
a sum of fifty thousand francs for your expenses in England. You see,"
he added blandly, "we give you no excuse for a second failure."

"I need none," retorted Chauvelin drily, as he finally rose from his
seat, with a sigh of satisfaction that this interview was ended at last.

But Robespierre too had risen, and pushing his chair aside he took
a step or two towards Chauvelin. He was a much taller man than the
ex-ambassador. Spare and gaunt, he had a very upright bearing, and
in the uncertain light of the candle he seemed to tower strangely
and weirdly above the other man: the pale hue of his coat, his
light-coloured hair, the whiteness of his linen, all helped to give to
his appearance at that moment a curious spectral effect.

Chauvelin somehow felt an unpleasant shiver running down his spine as
Robespierre, perfectly urbane and gentle in his manner, placed a long,
bony hand upon his shoulder.

"Citizen Chauvelin," said the Incorruptible, with some degree of
dignified solemnity, "meseems that we very quickly understood one
another this evening. Your own conscience, no doubt, gave you a
premonition of what the purport of my summons to you would be. You say
that you always hoped the Revolutionary Government would give you one
great chance to redeem your failure of last year. I, for one, always
intended that you should have that chance, for I saw, perhaps, just
a little deeper into your heart than my colleagues. I saw not only
enthusiasm for the cause of the People of France, not only abhorrence
for the enemy of your country, I saw a purely personal and deadly hate
of an individual man--the unknown and mysterious Englishman who proved
too clever for you last year. And because I believe that hatred will
prove sharper and more far-seeing than selfless patriotism, therefore I
urged the Committee of Public Safety to allow you to work out your own
revenge, and thereby to serve your country more effectually than any
other--perhaps more pure-minded patriot would do. You go to England
well-provided with all that is necessary for the success of your plans,
for the accomplishment of your own personal vengeance. The Revolutionary
Government will help you with money, passports, safe conducts; it
places its spies and agents at your disposal. It gives you practically
unlimited power, wherever you may go. It will not enquire into your
motives, nor yet your means, so long as these lead to success. But
private vengeance or patriotism, whatever may actuate you, we here in
France demand you deliver into our hands the man who is known in two
countries as the Scarlet Pimpernel! We want him alive if possible,
or dead if it must be so, and we want as many of his henchmen as will
follow him to the guillotine. Get them to France, and we'll know how to
deal with them, and let the whole of Europe be damned."

He paused for a while, his hand still resting on Chauvelin's shoulder,
his pale green eyes holding those of the other man as if in a trance.
But Chauvelin neither stirred nor spoke. His triumph left him quite
calm; his fertile brain was already busy with his plans. There was no
room for fear in his heart, and it was without the slightest tremor that
he waited for the conclusion of Robespierre's oration.

"Perhaps, Citizen Chauvelin," said the latter at last, "you have already
guessed what there is left for me to say. But lest there should remain
in your mind one faint glimmer of doubt or of hope, let me tell you
this. The Revolutionary Government gives you this chance of redeeming
your failure, but this one only; if you fail again, your outraged
country will know neither pardon nor mercy. Whether you return to France
or remain in England, whether you travel North, South, East or West,
cross the Oceans, or traverse the Alps, the hand of an avenging People
will be upon you. Your second failure will be punished by death,
wherever you may be, either by the guillotine, if you are in France, or
if you seek refuge elsewhere, then by the hand of an assassin.

"Look to it, Citizen Chauvelin! for there will be no escape this time,
not even if the mightiest tyrant on earth tried to protect you, not even
if you succeeded in building up an empire and placing yourself upon a
throne."

His thin, strident voice echoed weirdly in the small, close boudoir.
Chauvelin made no reply. There was nothing that he could say. All that
Robespierre had put so emphatically before him, he had fully realised,
even whilst he was forming his most daring plans.

It was an "either--or" this time, uttered to HIM now. He thought again
of Marguerite Blakeney, and the terrible alternative he had put before
HER less than a year ago.

Well! he was prepared to take the risk. He would not fail again. He was
going to England under more favourable conditions this time. He knew who
the man was, whom he was bidden to lure to France and to death.

And he returned Robespierre's threatening gaze boldly and unflinchingly;
then he prepared to go. He took up his hat and cloak, opened the door
and peered for a moment into the dark corridor, wherein, in the far
distance, the steps of a solitary sentinel could be faintly heard: he
put on his hat, turned to look once more into the room where Robespierre
stood quietly watching him, and went his way.




Chapter IV: The Richmond Gala



It was perhaps the most brilliant September ever known in England, where
the last days of dying summer are nearly always golden and beautiful.

Strange that in this country, where that same season is so peculiarly
radiant with a glory all its own, there should be no special expression
in the language with which to accurately name it.

So we needs must call it "fin d'ete": the ending of the summer; not the
absolute end, nor yet the ultimate departure, but the tender lingering
of a friend obliged to leave us anon, yet who fain would steal a day
here and there, a week or so in which to stay with us: who would make
that last pathetic farewell of his endure a little while longer still,
and brings forth in gorgeous array for our final gaze all that he has
which is most luxuriant, most desirable, most worthy of regret.

And in this year of grace 1793, departing summer had lavished the
treasures of her palette upon woodland and river banks; had tinged the
once crude green of larch and elm with a tender hue of gold, had brushed
the oaks with tones of warm russet, and put patches of sienna and
crimson on the beech.

In the gardens the roses were still in bloom, not the delicate blush
or lemon ones of June, nor yet the pale Banksias and climbers, but the
full-blooded red roses of late summer, and deep-coloured apricot ones,
with crinkled outside leaves faintly kissed by the frosty dew. In
sheltered spots the purple clematis still lingered, whilst the dahlias,
brilliant of hue, seemed overbearing in their gorgeous insolence,
flaunting their crudely colored petals against sober backgrounds of
mellow leaves, or the dull, mossy tones of ancient, encircling walls.

The Gala had always been held about the end of September. The weather,
on the riverside, was most dependable then, and there was always
sufficient sunshine as an excuse for bringing out Madam's last new
muslin gown, or her pale-coloured quilted petticoat. Then the ground
was dry and hard, good alike for walking and for setting up tents and
booths. And of these there was of a truth a most goodly array this year:
mountebanks and jugglers from every corner of the world, so it seemed,
for there was a man with a face as black as my lord's tricorne, and
another with such flat yellow cheeks as made one think of batter
pudding, and spring aconite, of eggs and other very yellow things.

There was a tent wherein dogs--all sorts of dogs, big, little, black,
white or tan--did things which no Christian with respect for his own
backbone would have dared to perform, and another where a weird-faced
old man made bean-stalks and walking sticks, coins of the realm and lace
kerchiefs vanish into thin air.

And as it was nice and hot one could sit out upon the green and listen
to the strains of the band, which discoursed sweet music, and watch the
young people tread a measure on the sward.

The quality had not yet arrived: for humbler folk had partaken of very
early dinner so as to get plenty of fun, and long hours of delight for
the sixpenny toll demanded at the gates.

There was so much to see and so much to do: games of bowls on the
green, and a beautiful Aunt Sally, there was a skittle alley, and two
merry-go-rounds: there were performing monkeys and dancing bears, a
woman so fat that three men with arms outstretched could not get round
her, and a man so thin that he could put a lady's bracelet round his
neck and her garter around his waist.

There were some funny little dwarfs with pinched faces and a knowing
manner, and a giant come all the way from Russia--so 'twas said.

The mechanical toys too were a great attraction. You dropped a penny
into a little slit in a box and a doll would begin to dance and play the
fiddle: and there was the Magic Mill, where for another modest copper
a row of tiny figures, wrinkled and old and dressed in the shabbiest of
rags, marched in weary procession up a flight of steps into the Mill,
only to emerge again the next moment at a further door of this wonderful
building looking young and gay, dressed in gorgeous finery and tripping
a dance measure as they descended some steps and were finally lost to
view.

But what was most wonderful of all and collected the goodliest crowd of
gazers and the largest amount of coins, was a miniature representation
of what was going on in France even at this very moment.

And you could not help but be convinced of the truth of it all, so
cleverly was it done. There was a background of houses and a very
red-looking sky. "Too red!" some people said, but were immediately
quashed by the dictum of the wise, that the sky represented a sunset, as
anyone who looked could see. Then there were a number of little figures,
no taller than your hand, but with little wooden faces and arms and
legs, just beautifully made little dolls, and these were dressed in
kirtles and breeches--all rags mostly--and little coats and wooden
shoes. They were massed together in groups with their arms all turned
upwards.

And in the center of this little stage on an elevated platform there
were miniature wooden posts close together, and with a long flat board
at right angles at the foot of the posts, and all painted a bright red.
At the further end of the boards was a miniature basket, and between the
two posts, at the top, was a miniature knife which ran up and down in a
groove and was drawn by a miniature pulley. Folk who knew said that this
was a model of a guillotine.

And lo and behold! when you dropped a penny into a slot just below the
wooden stage, the crowd of little figures started waving their arms up
and down, and another little doll would ascend the elevated platform and
lie down on the red board at the foot of the wooden posts. Then a figure
dressed in brilliant scarlet put out an arm presumably to touch the
pulley, and the tiny knife would rattle down on to the poor little
reclining doll's neck, and its head would roll off into the basket
beyond.

Then there was a loud whirr of wheels, a buzz of internal mechanism, and
all the little figures would stop dead with arms outstretched, whilst
the beheaded doll rolled off the board and was lost to view, no doubt
preparatory to going through the same gruesome pantomime again.

It was very thrilling, and very terrible: a certain air of hushed awe
reigned in the booth where this mechanical wonder was displayed.

The booth itself stood in a secluded portion of the grounds, far from
the toll gates, and the band stand and the noise of the merry-go-round,
and there were great texts, written in red letters on a black ground,
pinned all along the walls.

"Please spare a copper for the starving poor of Paris."

A lady, dressed in grey quilted petticoat and pretty grey and black
striped paniers, could be seen walking in the booth from time to time,
then disappearing through a partition beyond. She would emerge again
presently carrying an embroidered reticule, and would wander round among
the crowd, holding out the bag by its chain, and repeating in tones
of somewhat monotonous appeal: "For the starving poor of Paris, if you
please!"

She had fine, dark eyes, rather narrow and tending upwards at the outer
corners, which gave her face a not altogether pleasant expression.
Still, they were fine eyes, and when she went round soliciting alms,
most of the men put a hand into their breeches pocket and dropped a coin
into her embroidered reticule.

She said the word "poor" in rather a funny way, rolling the "r" at the
end, and she also said "please" as if it were spelt with a long line of
"e's," and so it was concluded that she was French and was begging for
her poorer sisters. At stated intervals during the day, the mechanical
toy was rolled into a corner, and the lady in grey stood up on a
platform and sang queer little songs, the words of which nobody could
understand.

"Il etait une bergere et ron et petit pataplon...."

But it all left an impression of sadness and of suppressed awe upon the
minds and susceptibilities of the worthy Richmond yokels come with
their wives or sweethearts to enjoy the fun of the fair, and gladly
did everyone emerge out of that melancholy booth into the sunshine, the
brightness and the noise.

"Lud! but she do give me the creeps," said Mistress Polly, the pretty
barmaid from the Bell Inn, down by the river. "And I must say that I
don't see why we English folk should send our hard-earned pennies to
those murdering ruffians over the water. Bein' starving so to speak,
don't make a murderer a better man if he goes on murdering," she added
with undisputable if ungrammatical logic. "Come, let's look at something
more cheerful now."

And without waiting for anyone else's assent, she turned towards the
more lively portion of the grounds, closely followed by a ruddy-faced,
somewhat sheepish-looking youth, who very obviously was her attendant
swain.

It was getting on for three o-clock now, and the quality were beginning
to arrive. Lord Anthony Dewhurst was already there, chucking every
pretty girl under the chin, to the annoyance of her beau. Ladies were
arriving all the time, and the humbler feminine hearts were constantly
set a-flutter at sight of rich brocaded gowns, and the new Charlottes,
all crinkled velvet and soft marabout, which were so becoming to the
pretty faces beneath.

There was incessant and loud talking and chattering, with here and there
the shriller tones of a French voice being distinctly noticeable in the
din. There were a good many French ladies and gentlemen present, easily
recognisable, even in the distance, for their clothes were of more sober
hue and of lesser richness than those of their English compeers.

But they were great lords and ladies, nevertheless, Dukes and Duchesses
and Countesses, come to England for fear of being murdered by those
devils in their own country. Richmond was full of them just now, as they
were made right welcome both at the Palace and at the magnificent home
of Sir Percy and Lady Blakeney.

Ah! here comes Sir Andrew Ffoulkes with his lady! so pretty and
dainty does she look, like a little china doll, in her new-fashioned
short-waisted gown: her brown hair in soft waves above her smooth
forehead, her great, hazel eyes fixed in unaffected admiration on the
gallant husband by her side.

"No wonder she dotes on him!" sighed pretty Mistress Polly after she had
bobbed her curtsy to my lady. "The brave deeds he did for love of her!
Rescued her from those murderers over in France and brought her to
England safe and sound, having fought no end of them single-handed, so
I've beard it said. Have you not, Master Thomas Jezzard?"

And she looked defiantly at her meek-looking cavalier.

"Bah!" replied Master Thomas with quite unusual vehemence in response to
the disparaging look in her brown eyes, "'Tis not he who did it all,
as you well know, Mistress Polly. Sir Andrew Ffoulkes is a gallant
gentleman, you may take your Bible oath on that, but he that fights
the murdering frogeaters single-handed is he whom they call The Scarlet
Pimpernel: the bravest gentleman in all the world."

Then, as at mention of the national hero, he thought that he detected in
Mistress Polly's eyes an enthusiasm which he could not very well ascribe
to his own individuality, he added with some pique:

"But they do say that this same Scarlet Pimpernel is mightily
ill-favoured, and that's why no one ever sees him. They say he is fit to
scare the crows away and that no Frenchy can look twice at his face, for
it's so ugly, and so they let him get out of the country, rather than
look at him again."

"Then they do say a mighty lot of nonsense," retorted Mistress Polly,
with a shrug of her pretty shoulders, "and if that be so, then why don't
you go over to France and join hands with the Scarlet Pimpernel? I'll
warrant no Frenchman'll want to look twice at your face."

A chorus of laughter greeted this sally, for the two young people had
in the meanwhile been joined by several of their friends, and now formed
part of a merry group near the band, some sitting, others standing, but
all bent on seeing as much as there was to see in Richmond Gala this
day. There was Johnny Cullen, the grocer's apprentice from Twickenham,
and Ursula Quekett, the baker's daughter, and several "young 'uns" from
the neighbourhood, as well as some older folk.

And all of them enjoyed a joke when they heard one and thought Mistress
Polly's retort mightily smart. But then Mistress Polly was possessed of
two hundred pounds, all her own, left to her by her grandmother, and
on the strength of this extensive fortune had acquired a reputation for
beauty and wit not easily accorded to a wench that had been penniless.

But Mistress Polly was also very kind-hearted. She loved to tease Master
Jezzard, who was an indefatigable hanger-on at her pretty skirts, and
whose easy conquest had rendered her somewhat contemptuous, but at the
look of perplexed annoyance and bewildered distress in the lad's face,
her better nature soon got the upper hand. She realized that her remark
had been unwarrantably spiteful, and wishing to make atonement, she
said with a touch of coquetry which quickly spread balm over the honest
yokel's injured vanity:

"La! Master Jezzard, you do seem to make a body say some queer things.
But there! you must own 'tis mighty funny about that Scarlet Pimpernel!"
she added, appealing to the company in general, just as if Master
Jezzard had been disputing the fact. "Why won't he let anyone see who he
is? And those who know him won't tell. Now I have it for a fact from
my lady's own maid Lucy, that the young lady as is stopping at Lady
Blakeney's house has actually spoken to the man. She came over from
France, come a fortnight to-morrow; she and the gentleman they call
Mossoo Deroulede. They both saw the Scarlet Pimpernel and spoke to him.
He brought them over from France. Then why won't they say?"

"Say what?" commented Johnny Cullen, the apprentice.

"Who this mysterious Scarlet Pimpernel is."

"Perhaps he isn't," said old Clutterbuck, who was clerk of the vestry at
the church of St. John's the Evangelist.

"Yes!" he added sententiously, for he was fond of his own sayings and
usually liked to repeat them before he had quite done with them, "that's
it, you may be sure. Perhaps he isn't."

"What do you mean, Master Clutterbuck?" asked Ursula Quekett, for she
knew the old man liked to explain his wise saws, and as she wanted to
marry his son, she indulged him whenever she could. "What do you mean?
He isn't what?"

"He isn't. That's all," explained Clutterbuck with vague solemnity.

Then seeing that he had gained the attention of the little party round
him, he condescended to come to more logical phraseology.

"I mean, that perhaps we must not ask, 'who IS this mysterious Scarlet
Pimpernel?' but 'who WAS that poor and unfortunate gentleman?'"

"Then you think..." suggested Mistress Polly, who felt unaccountably
low-spirited at this oratorical pronouncement.

"I have it for a fact," said Mr. Clutterbuck solemnly, "that he whom
they call the Scarlet Pimpernel no longer exists now: that he was
collared by the Frenchies, as far back as last fall, and in the language
of the poets, has never been heard of no more."

Mr. Clutterbuck was very fond of quoting from the works of certain
writers whose names he never mentioned, but who went by the poetical
generality of "the poets." Whenever he made use of phrases which he was
supposed to derive from these great and unnamed authors, he solemnly
and mechanically raised his hat, as a tribute of respect to these giant
minds.

"You think that The Scarlet Pimpernel is dead, Mr. Clutterbuck? That
those horrible Frenchies murdered him? Surely you don't mean that?"
sighed Mistress Polly ruefully.

Mr. Clutterbuck put his hand up to his hat, preparatory no doubt to
making another appeal to the mysterious poets, but was interrupted in
the very act of uttering great thoughts by a loud and prolonged laugh
which came echoing from a distant corner of the grounds.

"Lud! but I'd know that laugh anywhere," said Mistress Quekett, whilst
all eyes were turned in the direction whence the merry noise had come.

Half a head taller than any of his friends around him, his lazy blue
eyes scanning from beneath their drooping lids the motley throng around
him, stood Sir Percy Blakeney, the centre of a gaily-dressed little
group which seemingly had just crossed the toll-gate.

"A fine specimen of a man, for sure," remarked Johnnie Cullen, the
apprentice.

"Aye! you may take your Bible oath on that!" sighed Mistress Polly, who
was inclined to be sentimental.

"Speakin' as the poets," pronounced Mr. Clutterbuck sententiously,
"inches don't make a man."

"Nor fine clothes neither," added Master Jezzard, who did not approve of
Mistress Polly's sentimental sigh.

"There's my lady!" gasped Miss Barbara suddenly, clutching Master
Clutterbuck's arm vigorously. "Lud! but she is beautiful to-day!"

Beautiful indeed, and radiant with youth and happiness, Marguerite
Blakeney had just gone through the gates and was walking along the sward
towards the band stand. She was dressed in clinging robes of shimmery
green texture, the new-fashioned high-waisted effect suiting her
graceful figure to perfection. The large Charlotte, made of velvet to
match the gown, cast a deep shadow over the upper part of her face, and
gave a peculiar softness to the outline of her forehead and cheeks.

Long lace mittens covered her arms and hands and a scarf of diaphanous
material edged with dull gold hung loosely around her shoulders.

Yes! she was beautiful! No captious chronicler has ever denied that! and
no one who knew her before, and who saw her again on this late summer's
afternoon, could fail to mark the additional charm of her magnetic
personality. There was a tenderness in her face as she turned her head
to and fro, a joy of living in her eyes that was quite irresistibly
fascinating.

Just now she was talking animatedly with the young girl who was walking
beside her, and laughing merrily the while:

"Nay! we'll find your Paul, never fear! Lud! child, have you forgotten
he is in England now, and that there's no fear of his being kidnapped
here on the green in broad daylight."

The young girl gave a slight shudder and her child-like face became a
shade paler than before. Marguerite took her hand and gave it a kindly
pressure. Juliette Marny, but lately come to England, saved from under
the very knife of the guillotine, by a timely and daring rescue, could
scarcely believe as yet that she and the man she loved were really out
of danger.

"There is Monsieur Deroulede," said Marguerite after a slight pause,
giving the young girl time to recover herself and pointing to a group of
men close by. "He is among friends, as you see."

They made such a pretty picture, these two women, as they stood together
for a moment on the green with the brilliant September sun throwing
golden reflections and luminous shadows on their slender forms.
Marguerite, tall and queen-like in her rich gown, and costly jewels,
wearing with glorious pride the invisible crown of happy wifehood:
Juliette, slim and girlish, dressed all in white, with a soft, straw
hat on her fair curls, and bearing on an otherwise young and child-like
face, the hard imprint of the terrible sufferings she had undergone, of
the deathly moral battle her tender soul had had to fight.

Soon a group of friends joined them. Paul Deroulede among these, also
Sir Andrew and Lady Ffoulkes, and strolling slowly towards them, his
hands buried in the pockets of his fine cloth breeches, his broad
shoulders set to advantage in a coat of immaculate cut, priceless lace
ruffles at neck and wrist, came the inimitable Sir Percy.




Chapter V: Sir Percy and His Lady



To all appearances he had not changed since those early days of
matrimony, when his young wife dazzled London society by her wit and by
her beauty, and he was one of the many satellites that helped to bring
into bold relief the brilliance of her presence, of her sallies and of
her smiles.

His friends alone, mayhap--and of these only an intimate few--had
understood that beneath that self-same lazy manner, those shy and
awkward ways, that half-inane, half-cynical laugh, there now lurked an
undercurrent of tender and passionate happiness.

That Lady Blakeney was in love with her own husband, nobody could fail
to see, and in the more frivolous cliques of fashionable London this
extraordinary phenomenon had oft been eagerly discussed.

"A monstrous thing, of a truth, for a woman of fashion to adore her own
husband!" was the universal pronouncement of the gaily-decked little
world that centred around Carlton House and Ranelagh.

Not that Sir Percy Blakeney was unpopular with the fair sex. Far be it
from the veracious chronicler's mind even to suggest such a thing. The
ladies would have voted any gathering dull if Sir Percy's witty sallies
did not ring from end to end of the dancing hall, if his new satin coat
and 'broidered waistcoat did not call for comment or admiration.

But that was the frivolous set, to which Lady Blakeney had never
belonged.

It was well known that she had always viewed her good-natured husband
as the most willing and most natural butt for her caustic wit; she still
was fond of aiming a shaft or two at him, and he was still equally ready
to let the shaft glance harmlessly against the flawless shield of his
own imperturbable good humour, but now, contrary to all precedent, to
all usages and customs of London society, Marguerite seldom was seen at
routs or at the opera without her husband; she accompanied him to all
the races, and even one night--oh horror!--had danced the gavotte with
him.

Society shuddered and wondered! tried to put Lady Blakeney's sudden
infatuation down to foreign eccentricity, and finally consoled itself
with the thought that after all this nonsense could not last, and that
she was too clever a woman and he too perfect a gentleman to keep up
this abnormal state of things for any length of time.

In the meanwhile, the ladies averred that this matrimonial love was a
very one-sided affair. No one could assert that Sir Percy was anything
but politely indifferent to his wife's obvious attentions. His lazy eyes
never once lighted up when she entered a ball-room, and there were those
who knew for a fact that her ladyship spent many lonely days in her
beautiful home at Richmond whilst her lord and master absented himself
with persistent if unchivalrous regularity.

His presence at the Gala had been a surprise to everyone, for all
thought him still away, fishing in Scotland or shooting in Yorkshire,
anywhere save close to the apron strings of his doting wife. He himself
seemed conscious of the fact that he had not been expected at this
end-of-summer fete, for as he strolled forward to meet his wife and
Juliette Marny, and acknowledge with a bow here and a nod there the many
greetings from subordinates and friends, there was quite an apologetic
air about his good-looking face, and an obvious shyness in his smile.

But Marguerite gave a happy little laugh when she saw him coming towards
her.

"Oh, Sir Percy!" she said gaily, "and pray have you seen the show? I vow
'tis the maddest, merriest throng I've seen for many a day. Nay! but for
the sighs and shudders of my poor little Juliette, I should be enjoying
one of the liveliest days of my life."

She patted Juliette's arm affectionately.

"Do not shame me before Sir Percy," murmured the young girl, casting shy
glances at the elegant cavalier before her, vainly trying to find in the
indolent, foppish personality of this society butterfly, some trace of
the daring man of action, the bold adventurer who had snatched her and
her lover from out the very tumbril that bore them both to death.

"I know I ought to be gay," she continued with an attempt at a smile, "I
ought to forget everything, save what I owe to..."

Sir Percy's laugh broke in on her half-finished sentence.

"Lud! and to think of all that I ought not to forget!" he said loudly.
"Tony here has been clamouring for iced punch this last half-hour, and I
promised to find a booth wherein the noble liquid is properly dispensed.
Within half an hour from now His Royal Highness will be here. I assure
you, Mlle. Juliette, that from that time onwards I have to endure the
qualms of the damned, for the heir to Great Britain's throne always
contrives to be thirsty when I am satiated, which is Tantalus' torture
magnified a thousandfold, or to be satiated when my parched palate most
requires solace; in either case I am a most pitiable man."

"In either case you contrive to talk a deal of nonsense, Sir Percy,"
said Marguerite gaily.

"What else would your ladyship have me do this lazy, hot afternoon?"

"Come and view the booths with me," she said. "I am dying for a sight of
the fat woman and the lean man, the pig-faced child, the dwarfs and
the giants. There! Monsieur Deroulede," she added, turning to the young
Frenchman who was standing close beside her, "take Mlle. Juliette to
hear the clavecin players. I vow she is tired of my company."

The gaily-dressed group was breaking up. Juliette and Paul Deroulede
were only too ready to stroll off arm-in-arm together, and Sir Andrew
Ffoulkes was ever in attendance on his young wife.

For one moment Marguerite caught her husband's eye. No one was within
earshot.

"Percy," she said.

"Yes, m'dear."

"When did you return?"

"Early this morning."

"You crossed over from Calais?"

"From Boulogne."

"Why did you not let me know sooner?"

"I could not, dear. I arrived at my lodgings in town, looking a
disgusting object.... I could not appear before you until I had washed
some of the French mud from off my person. Then His Royal Highness
demanded my presence. He wanted news of the Duchesse de Verneuil, whom I
had the honour of escorting over from France. By the time I had told him
all that he wished to hear, there was no chance of finding you at home,
and I thought I should see you here."

Marguerite said nothing for a moment, but her foot impatiently tapped
the ground, and her fingers were fidgeting with the gold fringe of her
scarf. The look of joy, of exquisite happiness, seemed to have suddenly
vanished from her face; there was a deep furrow between her brows.

She sighed a short, sharp sigh, and cast a rapid upward glance at her
husband.

He was looking down at her, smiling good-naturedly, a trifle
sarcastically perhaps, and the frown on her face deepened.

"Percy," she said abruptly.

"Yes, m'dear."

"These anxieties are terrible to bear. You have been twice over to
France within the last month, dealing with your life as lightly as if
it did not now belong to me. When will you give up these mad adventures,
and leave others to fight their own battles and to save their own lives
as best they may?"

She had spoken with increased vehemence, although her voice was scarce
raised above a whisper. Even in her sudden, passionate anger she was on
her guard not to betray his secret. He did not reply immediately, but
seemed to be studying the beautiful face on which heartbroken anxiety
was now distinctly imprinted.

Then he turned and looked at the solitary booth in the distance, across
the frontal of which a large placard had been recently affixed, bearing
the words: "Come and see the true representation of the guillotine!"

In front of the booth a man dressed in ragged breeches, with Phrygian
cap on his head, adorned with a tri-colour cockade, was vigorously
beating a drum, shouting volubly the while:

"Come in and see, come in and see! the only realistic presentation of
the original guillotine. Hundreds perish in Paris every day! Come and
see! Come and see! the perfectly vivid performance of what goes on
hourly in Paris at the present moment."

Marguerite had followed the direction of Sir Percy's eyes. She too was
looking at the booth, she heard the man's monotonous, raucous cries. She
gave a slight shudder and once more looked imploringly at her husband.
His face--though outwardly as lazy and calm as before--had a strange set
look about the mouth and firm jaw, and his slender hand, the hand of a
dandy accustomed to handle cards and dice and to play lightly with the
foils, was clutched tightly beneath the folds of the priceless Mechlin
frills.

It was but a momentary stiffening of the whole powerful frame, an
instant's flash of the ruling passion hidden within that very secretive
soul. Then he once more turned towards her, the rigid lines of his face
relaxed, he broke into a pleasant laugh, and with the most elaborate and
most courtly bow he took her hand in his and raising her fingers to his
lips, he gave the answer to her questions:

"When your ladyship has ceased to be the most admired woman in Europe,
namely, when I am in my grave."




Chapter VI: For the Poor of Paris



There was no time to say more then. For the laughing, chatting groups
of friends had once more closed up round Marguerite and her husband,
and she, ever on the alert, gave neither look nor sign that any serious
conversation had taken place between Sir Percy and herself.

Whatever she might feel or dread with regard to the foolhardy adventures
in which he still persistently embarked, no member of the League
ever guarded the secret of his chief more loyally than did Marguerite
Blakeney.

Though her heart overflowed with a passionate pride in her husband, she
was clever enough to conceal every emotion save that which Nature had
insisted on imprinting in her face, her present radiant happiness
and her irresistible love. And thus before the world she kept up that
bantering way with him, which had characterized her earlier matrimonial
life, that good-natured, easy contempt which he had so readily accepted
in those days, and which their entourage would have missed and would
have enquired after, if she had changed her manner towards him too
suddenly.

In her heart she knew full well that within Percy Blakeney's soul
she had a great and powerful rival: his wild, mad, passionate love of
adventure. For it he would sacrifice everything, even his life; she
dared not ask herself if he would sacrifice his love.

Twice in a few weeks he had been over to France: every time he went she
could not know if she would ever see him again. She could not imagine
how the French Committee of Public Safety could so clumsily allow the
hated Scarlet Pimpernel to slip through its fingers. But she never
attempted either to warn him or to beg him not to go. When he brought
Paul Deroulede and Juliette Marny over from France, her heart went
out to the two young people in sheer gladness and pride because of his
precious life, which he had risked for them.

She loved Juliette for the dangers Percy had passed, for the anxieties
she herself had endured; only to-day, in the midst of this beautiful
sunshine, this joy of the earth, of summer and of the sky, she had
suddenly felt a mad, overpowering anxiety, a deadly hatred of the
wild adventurous life, which took him so often away from her side. His
pleasant, bantering reply precluded her following up the subject, whilst
the merry chatter of people round her warned her to keep her words and
looks under control.

But she seemed now to feel the want of being alone, and, somehow, that
distant booth with its flaring placard, and the crier in the Phrygian
cap, exercised a weird fascination over her.

Instinctively she bent her steps thither, and equally instinctively the
idle throng of her friends followed her. Sir Percy alone had halted in
order to converse with Lord Hastings, who had just arrived.

"Surely, Lady Blakeney, you have no though of patronising that
gruesome spectacle?" said Lord Anthony Dewhurst, as Marguerite almost
mechanically had paused within a few yards of the solitary booth.

"I don't know," she said, with enforced gaiety, "the place seems
to attract me. And I need not look at the spectacle," she added
significantly, as she pointed to a roughly-scribbled notice at the
entrance of the tent: "In aid of the starving poor of Paris."

"There's a good-looking woman who sings, and a hideous mechanical toy
that moves," said one of the young men in the crowd. "It is very dark
and close inside the tent. I was lured in there for my sins, and was in
a mighty hurry to come out again."

"Then it must be my sins that are helping to lure me too at the present
moment," said Marguerite lightly. "I pray you all to let me go in there.
I want to hear the good-looking woman sing, even if I do not see the
hideous toy on the move."

"May I escort you then, Lady Blakeney?" said Lord Tony.

"Nay! I would rather go in alone," she replied a trifle impatiently. "I
beg of you not to heed my whim, and to await my return, there, where the
music is at its merriest."

It had been bad manners to insist. Marguerite, with a little
comprehensive nod to all her friends, left the young cavaliers still
protesting and quickly passed beneath the roughly constructed doorway
that gave access into the booth.

A man, dressed in theatrical rags and wearing the characteristic scarlet
cap, stood immediately within the entrance, and ostentatiously rattled a
money box at regular intervals.

"For the starving poor of Paris," he drawled out in nasal monotonous
tones the moment he caught sight of Marguerite and of her rich gown. She
dropped some gold into the box and then passed on.

The interior of the booth was dark and lonely-looking after the glare
of the hot September sun and the noisy crowd that thronged the sward
outside. Evidently a performance had just taken place on the elevated
platform beyond, for a few yokels seemed to be lingering in a desultory
manner as if preparatory to going out.

A few disjointed comments reached Marguerite's ears as she approached,
and the small groups parted to allow her to pass. One or two women
gaped in astonishment at her beautiful dress, whilst others bobbed a
respectful curtsey.

The mechanical toy arrested her attention immediately. She did not find
it as gruesome as she expected, only singularly grotesque, with all
those wooden little figures in their quaint, arrested action.

She drew nearer to have a better look, and the yokels who had lingered
behind, paused, wondering if she would make any remark.

"Her ladyship was born in France," murmured one of the men, close to
her, "she would know if the thing really looks like that."

"She do seem interested," quoth another in a whisper.

"Lud love us all!" said a buxom wench, who was clinging to the arm of a
nervous-looking youth, "I believe they're coming for more money."

On the elevated platform at the further end of the tent, a slim
figure had just made its appearance, that of a young woman dressed in
peculiarly sombre colours, and with a black lace hood thrown lightly
over her head.

Marguerite thought that the face seemed familiar to her, and she also
noticed that the woman carried a large embroidered reticule in her
bemittened hand.

There was a general exodus the moment she appeared. The Richmond yokels
did not like the look of that reticule. They felt that sufficient
demand had already been made upon their scant purses, considering the
meagerness of the entertainment, and they dreaded being lured to further
extravagance.

When Marguerite turned away from the mechanical toy, the last of the
little crowd had disappeared, and she was alone in the booth with the
woman in the dark kirtle and black lace hood.

"For the poor of Paris, Madame," said the latter mechanically, holding
out her reticule.

Marguerite was looking at her intently. The face certainly seemed
familiar, recalling to her mind the far-off days in Paris, before
she married. Some young actress no doubt driven out of France by that
terrible turmoil which had caused so much sorrow and so much suffering.
The face was pretty, the figure slim and elegant, and the look of
obvious sadness in the dark, almond-shaped eyes was calculated to
inspire sympathy and pity.

Yet, strangely enough, Lady Blakeney felt repelled and chilled by this
sombrely-dressed young person: an instinct, which she could not have
explained and which she felt had no justification, warned her that
somehow or other, the sadness was not quite genuine, the appeal for the
poor not quite heartfelt.

Nevertheless, she took out her purse, and dropping some few sovereigns
into the capacious reticule, she said very kindly:

"I hope that you are satisfied with your day's work, Madame; I fear
me our British country folk hold the strings of their purses somewhat
tightly these times."

The woman sighed and shrugged her shoulders.

"Oh, Madame!" she said with a tone of great dejection, "one does what
one can for one's starving countrymen, but it is very hard to elicit
sympathy over here for them, poor dears!"

"You are a Frenchwoman, of course," rejoined Marguerite, who had noted
that though the woman spoke English with a very pronounced foreign
accent, she had nevertheless expressed herself with wonderful fluency
and correctness.

"Just like Lady Blakeney herself," replied the other.

"You know who I am?

"Who could come to Richmond and not know Lady Blakeney by sight."

"But what made you come to Richmond on this philanthropic errand of
yours?"

"I go where I think there is a chance of earning a little money for
the cause which I have at heart," replied the Frenchwoman with the same
gentle simplicity, the same tone of mournful dejection.

What she said was undoubtedly noble and selfless. Lady Blakeney felt in
her heart that her keenest sympathy should have gone out to this
young woman--pretty, dainty, hardly more than a girl--who seemed to be
devoting her young life in a purely philanthropic and unselfish cause.
And yet in spite of herself, Marguerite seemed unable to shake off that
curious sense of mistrust which had assailed her from the first, nor
that feeling of unreality and staginess with which the Frenchwoman's
attitude had originally struck her.

Yet she tried to be kind and to be cordial, tried to hide that coldness
in her manner which she felt was unjustified.

"It is all very praiseworthy on your part, Madame," she said somewhat
lamely. "Madame...?" she added interrogatively.

"My name is Candeille--Desiree Candeille," replied the Frenchwoman.

"Candeille?" exclaimed Marguerite with sudden alacrity, "Candeille...
surely..."

"Yes... of the Varietes."

"Ah! then I know why your face from the first seemed familiar to me,"
said Marguerite, this time with unaffected cordiality. "I must have
applauded you many a time in the olden days. I am an ex-colleague, you
know. My name was St. Just before I married, and I was of the Maison
Moliere."

"I knew that," said Desiree Candeille, "and half hoped that you would
remember me."

"Nay! who could forget Demoiselle Candeille, the most popular star in
the theatrical firmament?"

"Oh! that was so long ago."

"Only four years."

"A fallen star is soon lost out of sight."

"Why fallen?"

"It was a choice for me between exile from France and the guillotine,"
rejoined Candeille simply.

"Surely not?" queried Marguerite with a touch of genuine sympathy.
With characteristic impulsiveness, she had now cast aside her former
misgivings: she had conquered her mistrust, at any rate had relegated
it to the background of her mind. This woman was a colleague: she had
suffered and was in distress; she had every claim, therefore, on a
compatriot's help and friendship. She stretched out her hand and took
Desiree Candeille's in her own; she forced herself to feel nothing but
admiration for this young woman, whose whole attitude spoke of sorrows
nobly borne, of misfortunes proudly endured.

"I don't know why I should sadden you with my story," rejoined Desiree
Candeille after a slight pause, during which she seemed to be waging
war against her own emotion. "It is not a very interesting one. Hundreds
have suffered as I did. I had enemies in Paris. God knows how that
happened. I had never harmed anyone, but someone must have hated me and
must have wished me ill. Evil is so easily wrought in France these days.
A denunciation--a perquisition--an accusation--then the flight from
Paris... the forged passports... the disguise... the bribe... the
hardships... the squalid hiding places.... Oh! I have gone through
it all... tasted every kind of humiliation... endured every kind of
insult.... Remember! that I was not a noble aristocrat... a Duchess
or an impoverished Countess..." she added with marked bitterness, "or
perhaps the English cavaliers whom the popular voice has called the
League of the Scarlet Pimpernel would have taken some interest in me. I
was only a poor actress and had to find my way out of France alone, or
else perish on the guillotine."

"I am so sorry!" said Marguerite simply.

"Tell me how you got on, once you were in England," she continued after
a while, seeing that Desiree Candeille seemed absorbed in thought.

"I had a few engagements at first," replied the Frenchwoman. "I played
at Sadler's Wells and with Mrs. Jordan at Covent Garden, but the Aliens'
Bill put an end to my chances of livelihood. No manager cared to give me
a part, and so..."

"And so?"

"Oh! I had a few jewels and I sold them.... A little money and I live on
that.... But when I played at Covent Garden I contrived to send part of
my salary over to some of the poorer clubs of Paris. My heart aches for
those that are starving.... Poor wretches, they are misguided and misled
by self-seeking demagogues.... It hurts me to feel that I can do nothing
more to help them... and eases my self-respect if, by singing at public
fairs, I can still send a few francs to those who are poorer than
myself."

She had spoken with ever-increasing passion and vehemence. Marguerite,
with eyes fixed into vacancy, seeing neither the speaker nor her
surroundings, seeing only visions of those same poor wreckages of
humanity, who had been goaded into thirst for blood, when their shrunken
bodies should have been clamouring for healthy food,--Marguerite
thus absorbed, had totally forgotten her earlier prejudices and now
completely failed to note all that was unreal, stagy, theatrical, in the
oratorical declamations of the ex-actress from the Varietes.

Pre-eminently true and loyal herself in spite of the many deceptions and
treacheries which she had witnessed in her life, she never looked for
falsehood or for cant in others. Even now she only saw before her a
woman who had been wrongfully persecuted, who had suffered and had
forgiven those who had caused her to suffer. She bitterly accused
herself for her original mistrust of this noble-hearted, unselfish
woman, who was content to tramp around in an alien country, bartering
her talents for a few coins, in order that some of those, who were the
originators of her sorrows, might have bread to eat and a bed in which
to sleep.

"Mademoiselle," she said warmly, "truly you shame me, who am also
French-born, with the many sacrifices you so nobly make for those who
should have first claim on my own sympathy. Believe me, if I have
not done as much as duty demanded of me in the cause of my starving
compatriots, it has not been for lack of good-will. Is there any way
now," she added eagerly, "in which I can help you? Putting aside the
question of money, wherein I pray you to command my assistance, what can
I do to be of useful service to you?"

"You are very kind, Lady Blakeney..." said the other hesitatingly.

"Well? What is it? I see there is something in your mind..."

"It is perhaps difficult to express... but people say I have a good
voice... I sing some French ditties... they are a novelty in England, I
think.... If I could sing them in fashionable salons... I might
perhaps..."

"Nay! you shall sing in fashionable salons," exclaimed Marguerite
eagerly, "you shall become the fashion, and I'll swear the Prince of
Wales himself shall bid you sing at Carlton House... and you shall name
your own fee, Mademoiselle... and London society shall vie with the
elite of Bath, as to which shall lure you to its most frequented
routs.... There! there! you shall make a fortune for the Paris poor...
and to prove to you that I mean every word I say, you shall begin your
triumphant career in my own salon to-morrow night. His Royal Highness
will be present. You shall sing your most engaging songs... and for
your fee you must accept a hundred guineas, which you shall send to
the poorest workman's club in Paris in the name of Sir Percy and Lady
Blakeney."

"I thank your ladyship, but..."

"You'll not refuse?"

"I'll accept gladly... but... you will understand... I am not very old,"
said Candeille quaintly, "I... I am only an actress... but if a young
actress is unprotected... then..."

"I understand," replied Marguerite gently, "that you are far too pretty
to frequent the world all alone, and that you have a mother, a sister
or a friend... which?... whom you would wish to escort you to-morrow. Is
that it?"

"Nay," rejoined the actress, with marked bitterness, "I have neither
mother, nor sister, but our Revolutionary Government, with tardy
compassion for those it has so relentlessly driven out of France,
has deputed a representative of theirs in England to look after the
interests of French subjects over here!"

"Yes?"

"They have realised over in Paris that my life here has been devoted to
the welfare of the poor people of France. The representative whom the
government has sent to England is specially interested in me and in
my work. He is a stand-by for me in case of trouble... in case of
insults... A woman alone is oft subject to those, even at the hands of
so-called gentlemen... and the official representative of my own country
becomes in such cases my most natural protector."

"I understand."

"You will receive him?"

"Certainly."

"Then may I present him to your ladyship?"

"Whenever you like."

"Now, and it please you."

"Now?"

"Yes. Here he comes, at your ladyship's service."

Desiree Candeille's almond-shaped eyes were fixed upon a distant part of
the tent, behind Lady Blakeney in the direction of the main entrance
to the booth. There was a slight pause after she had spoken and
then Marguerite slowly turned in order to see who this official
representative of France was, whom at the young actress' request she had
just agreed to receive in her house. In the doorway of the tent, framed
by its gaudy draperies, and with the streaming sunshine as a brilliant
background behind him, stood the sable-clad figure of Chauvelin.




Chapter VII: Premonition



Marguerite neither moved nor spoke. She felt two pairs of eyes fixed
upon her, and with all the strength of will at her command she forced
the very blood in her veins not to quit her cheeks, forced her eyelids
not to betray by a single quiver the icy pang of a deadly premonition
which at sight of Chauvelin seemed to have chilled her entire soul.

There he stood before her, dressed in his usual somber garments, a look
almost of humility in those keen grey eyes of his, which a year ago on
the cliffs of Calais had peered down at her with such relentless hate.

Strange that at this moment she should have felt an instinct of fear.
What cause had she to throw more than a pitiful glance at the man who
had tried so cruelly to wrong her, and who had so signally failed?

Having bowed very low and very respectfully, Chauvelin advanced towards
her, with all the airs of a disgraced courtier craving audience from his
queen.

As he approached she instinctively drew back.

"Would you prefer not to speak to me, Lady Blakeney?" he said humbly.

She could scarcely believe her ears, or trust her eyes. It seemed
impossible that a man could have so changed in a few months. He even
looked shorter than last year, more shrunken within himself. His hair,
which he wore free from powder, was perceptibly tinged with grey.

"Shall I withdraw?" he added after a pause, seeing that Marguerite made
no movement to return his salutation.

"It would be best, perhaps," she replied coldly. "You and I, Monsieur
Chauvelin, have so little to say to one another."

"Very little indeed," he rejoined quietly; "the triumphant and happy
have ever very little to say to the humiliated and the defeated. But
I had hoped that Lady Blakeney in the midst of her victory would have
spared one thought of pity and one of pardon."

"I did not know that you had need of either from me, Monsieur."

"Pity perhaps not, but forgiveness certainly."

"You have that, if you so desire it."

"Since I failed, you might try to forget."

"That is beyond my power. But believe me, I have ceased to think of the
infinite wrong which you tried to do to me."

"But I failed," he insisted, "and I meant no harm to YOU."

"To those I care for, Monsieur Chauvelin."

"I had to serve my country as best I could. I meant no harm to your
brother. He is safe in England now. And the Scarlet Pimpernel was
nothing to you."

She tried to read his face, tried to discover in those inscrutable eyes
of his, some hidden meaning to his words. Instinct had warned her of
course that this man could be nothing but an enemy, always and at all
times. But he seemed so broken, so abject now, that contempt for his
dejected attitude, and for the defeat which had been inflicted on him,
chased the last remnant of fear from her heart.

"I did not even succeed in harming that enigmatical personage,"
continued Chauvelin with the same self-abasement. "Sir Percy Blakeney,
you remember, threw himself across my plans, quite innocently of course.
I failed where you succeeded. Luck has deserted me. Our government
offered me a humble post, away from France. I look after the interests
of French subjects settled in England. My days of power are over. My
failure is complete. I do not complain, for I failed in a combat of
wits... but I failed... I failed... I failed... I am almost a fugitive
and I am quite disgraced. That is my present history, Lady Blakeney," he
concluded, taking once more a step towards her, "and you will understand
that it would be a solace if you extended your hand to me just once
more, and let me feel that although you would never willingly look upon
my face again, you have enough womanly tenderness in you to force your
heart to forgiveness and mayhap to pity."

Marguerite hesitated. He held out his hand and her warm, impulsive
nature prompted her to be kind. But instinct would not be gainsaid: a
curious instinct to which she refused to respond. What had she to fear
from this miserable and cringing little worm who had not even in him
the pride of defeat? What harm could he do to her, or to those whom she
loved? Her brother was in England! Her husband! Bah! not the enmity of
the entire world could make her fear for him!

Nay! That instinct, which caused her to draw away from Chauvelin, as
she would from a venomous asp, was certainly not fear. It was hate! She
hated this man! Hated him for all that she had suffered because of
him; for that terrible night on the cliffs of Calais! The peril to
her husband who had become so infinitely dear! The humiliations and
self-reproaches which he had endured.

Yes! it was hate! and hate was of all emotions the one she most
despised.

Hate? Does one hate a slimy but harmless toad or a stinging fly?
It seemed ridiculous, contemptible and pitiable to think of hate in
connection with the melancholy figure of this discomfited intriguer,
this fallen leader of revolutionary France.

He was holding out his hand to her. If she placed even the tips of
her fingers upon it, she would be making the compact of mercy and
forgiveness which he was asking of her. The woman Desiree Candeille
roused within her the last lingering vestige of her slumbering wrath.
False, theatrical and stagy--as Marguerite had originally suspected--she
appeared to have been in league with Chauvelin to bring about this
undesirable meeting.

Lady Blakeney turned from one to another, trying to conceal her contempt
beneath a mask of passionless indifference. Candeille was standing close
by, looking obviously distressed and not a little puzzled. An instant's
reflection was sufficient to convince Marguerite that the whilom actress
of the Varietes Theatre was obviously ignorant of the events to
which Chauvelin had been alluding: she was, therefore, of no serious
consequence, a mere tool, mayhap, in the ex-ambassador's hands. At the
present moment she looked like a silly child who does not understand the
conversation of the "grown-ups."

Marguerite had promised her help and protection, had invited her to her
house, and offered her a munificent gift in aid of a deserving cause.
She was too proud to go back now on that promise, to rescind the
contract because of an unexplainable fear. With regard to Chauvelin,
the matter stood differently: she had made him no direct offer of
hospitality: she had agreed to receive in her house the official
chaperone of an unprotected girl, but she was not called upon to show
cordiality to her own and her husband's most deadly enemy.

She was ready to dismiss him out of her life with a cursory word of
pardon and a half-expressed promise of oblivion: on that understanding
and that only she was ready to let her hand rest for the space of one
second in his.

She had looked upon her fallen enemy, seen his discomfiture and his
humiliation! Very well! Now let him pass out of her life, all the
more easily, since the last vision of him would be one of such utter
abjection as would even be unworthy of hate.

All these thoughts, feelings and struggles passed through her mind
with great rapidity. Her hesitation had lasted less than five seconds:
Chauvelin still wore the look of doubting entreaty with which he had
first begged permission to take her hand in his. With an impulsive toss
of the head, she had turned straight towards him, ready with the phrase
with which she meant to dismiss him from her sight now and forever, when
suddenly a well-known laugh broke in upon her ear, and a lazy, drawly
voice said pleasantly:

"La! I vow the air is fit to poison you! Your Royal Highness, I entreat,
let us turn our backs upon these gates of Inferno, where lost souls
would feel more at home than doth your humble servant."

The next moment His Royal Highness the Prince of Wales had entered the
tent, closely followed by Sir Percy Blakeney.




Chapter VIII: The Invitation



It was in truth a strange situation, this chance meeting between Percy
Blakeney and ex-Ambassador Chauvelin.

Marguerite looked up at her husband. She saw him shrug his broad
shoulders as he first caught sight of Chauvelin, and glance down in his
usual lazy, good-humoured manner at the shrunken figure of the silent
Frenchman. The words she meant to say never crossed her lips; she was
waiting to hear what the two men would say to one another.

The instinct of the grande dame in her, the fashionable lady accustomed
to the exigencies of society, just gave her sufficient presence of mind
to make the requisite low curtsey before His Royal Highness. But the
Prince, forgetting his accustomed gallantry, was also absorbed in the
little scene before him. He, too, was looking from the sable-clad figure
of Chauvelin to that of gorgeously arrayed Sir Percy. He, too, like
Marguerite, was wondering what was passing behind the low, smooth
forehead of that inimitable dandy, what behind the inscrutably
good-humoured expression of those sleepy eyes.

Of the five persons thus present in the dark and stuffy booth, certainly
Sir Percy Blakeney seemed the least perturbed. He had paused just long
enough to allow Chauvelin to become fully conscious of a feeling
of supreme irritation and annoyance, then he strolled up to the
ex-ambassador, with hand outstretched and the most engaging of smiles.

"Ha!" he said, with his usual half-shy, half-pleasant-tempered smile,
"my engaging friend from France! I hope, sir, that our demmed climate
doth find you well and hearty to-day."

The cheerful voice seemed to ease the tension. Marguerite sighed a sigh
of relief. After all, what was more natural than that Percy with his
amazing fund of pleasant irresponsibility should thus greet the man
who had once vowed to bring him to the guillotine? Chauvelin, himself,
accustomed by now to the audacious coolness of his enemy, was scarcely
taken by surprise. He bowed low to His Highness, who, vastly amused at
Blakeney's sally, was inclined to be gracious to everyone, even though
the personality of Chauvelin as a well-known leader of the regicide
government was inherently distasteful to him. But the Prince saw in
the wizened little figure before him an obvious butt for his friend
Blakeney's impertinent shafts, and although historians have been unable
to assert positively whether or no George Prince of Wales knew aught of
Sir Percy's dual life, yet there is no doubt that he was always ready
to enjoy a situation which brought about the discomfiture of any of the
Scarlet Pimpernel's avowed enemies.

"I, too, have not met M. Chauvelin for many a long month," said His
Royal Highness with an obvious show of irony. "And I mistake not, sir,
you left my father's court somewhat abruptly last year."

"Nay, your Royal Highness," said Percy gaily, "my friend Monsieur...
er... Chaubertin and I had serious business to discuss, which could only
be dealt with in France.... Am I not right, Monsieur?"

"Quite right, Sir Percy," replied Chauvelin curtly.

"We had to discuss abominable soup in Calais, had we not?" continued
Blakeney in the same tone of easy banter, "and wine that I vowed
was vinegar. Monsieur... er... Chaubertin... no, no, I beg pardon...
Chauvelin... Monsieur Chauvelin and I quite agreed upon that point.
The only matter on which we were not quite at one was the question of
snuff."

"Snuff?" laughed His Royal Highness, who seemed vastly amused.

"Yes, your Royal Highness... snuff... Monsieur Chauvelin here had--if I
may be allowed to say so--so vitiated a taste in snuff that he prefers
it with an admixture of pepper... Is that not so, Monsieur... er...
Chaubertin?"

"Chauvelin, Sir Percy," remarked the ex-ambassador drily.

He was determined not to lose his temper and looked urbane and pleasant,
whilst his impudent enemy was enjoying a joke at his expense. Marguerite
the while had not taken her eyes off the keen, shrewd face. Whilst the
three men talked, she seemed suddenly to have lost her sense of the
reality of things. The present situation appeared to her strangely
familiar, like a dream which she had dreamt oft times before.

Suddenly it became absolutely clear to her that the whole scene had been
arranged and planned: the booth with its flaring placard, Demoiselle
Candeille soliciting her patronage, her invitation to the young actress,
Chauvelin's sudden appearance, all, all had been concocted and arranged,
not here, not in England at all, but out there in Paris, in some dark
gathering of blood-thirsty ruffians, who had invented a final trap for
the destruction of the bold adventurer, who went by the name of the
Scarlet Pimpernel.

And she also was only a puppet, enacting a part which had been written
for her: she had acted just as THEY had anticipated, had spoken the very
words they had meant her to say: and when she looked at Percy, he seemed
supremely ignorant of it all, unconscious of this trap of the existence
of which everyone here present was aware, save indeed himself. She
would have fought against this weird feeling of obsession, of being a
mechanical toy would up to do certain things, but this she could not do;
her will appeared paralysed, her tongue even refused her service.

As in a dream she heard His Royal Highness ask for the name of the young
actress who was soliciting alms for the poor of Paris.

That also had been prearranged. His Royal Highness for the moment was
also a puppet, made to dance, to speak and to act as Chauvelin and his
colleagues over in France had decided that he should. Quite mechanically
Marguerite introduced Demoiselle Candeille to the Prince's gracious
notice.

"If your Highness will permit," she said, "Mademoiselle Candeille will
give us some of her charming old French songs at my rout to-morrow."

"By all means! By all means!" said the Prince. "I used to know some
in my childhood days. Charming and poetic.... I know.... I know.... We
shall be delighted to hear Mademoiselle sing, eh, Blakeney?" he added
good-humouredly, "and for your rout to-morrow will you not also invite
M. Chauvelin?"

"Nay! but that goes without saying, your Royal Highness," responded Sir
Percy, with hospitable alacrity and a most approved bow directed at his
arch-enemy. "We shall expect M. Chauvelin. He and I have not met for so
long, and he shall be made right welcome at Blakeney Manor."




Chapter IX: Demoiselle Candeille



Her origin was of the humblest, for her mother--so it was said--had
been kitchen-maid in the household of the Duc de Marny, but Desiree had
received some kind of education, and though she began life as a dresser
in one of the minor theatres of Paris, she became ultimately one of its
most popular stars.

She was small and dark, dainty in her manner and ways, and with a
graceful little figure, peculiarly supple and sinuous. Her humble
origin certainly did not betray itself in her hands and feet, which were
exquisite in shape and lilliputian in size.

Her hair was soft and glossy, always free from powder, and cunningly
arranged so as to slightly overshadow the upper part of her face.

The chin was small and round, the mouth extraordinarily red, the neck
slender and long. But she was not pretty: so said all the women. Her
skin was rather coarse in texture and darkish in colour, her eyes
were narrow and slightly turned upwards at the corners; no! she was
distinctly not pretty.

Yet she pleased the men! Perhaps because she was so artlessly determined
to please them. The women said that Demoiselle Candeille never left a
man alone until she had succeeded in captivating his fancy if only for
five minutes; an interval in a dance... the time to cross a muddy road.

But for five minutes she was determined to hold any man's complete
attention, and to exact his admiration. And she nearly always succeeded.

Therefore the women hated her. The men were amused. It is extremely
pleasant to have one's admiration compelled, one's attention so
determinedly sought after.

And Candeille could be extremely amusing, and as Madelon in Moliere's
"Les Precieuses" was quite inimitable.

This, however, was in the olden days, just before Paris went quite mad,
before the Reign of Terror had set in, and ci-devant Louis the King had
been executed.

Candeille had taken it into her frolicsome little head that she would
like to go to London. The idea was of course in the nature of an
experiment. Those dull English people over the water knew so little
of what good acting really meant. Tragedy? Well! passons! Their heavy,
large-boned actresses might manage one or two big scenes where a
commanding presence and a powerful voice would not come amiss, and where
prominent teeth would pass unnoticed in the agony of a dramatic climax.

But Comedy!

Ah! ca non, par example! Demoiselle Candeille had seen several English
gentlemen and ladies in those same olden days at the Tuileries, but
she really could not imagine any of them enacting the piquant scenes of
Moliere or Beaumarchais.

Demoiselle Candeille thought of every English-born individual as having
very large teeth. Now large teeth do not lend themselves to well-spoken
comedy scenes, to smiles, or to double entendre.

Her own teeth were exceptionally small and white, and very sharp, like
those of a kitten.

Yes! Demoiselle Candeille thought it would be extremely interesting to
go to London and to show to a nation of shopkeepers how daintily one can
be amused in a theatre.

Permission to depart from Paris was easy to obtain. In fact the fair
lady had never really found it difficult to obtain anything she very
much wanted.

In this case she had plenty of friends in high places. Marat was still
alive and a great lover of the theatre. Tallien was a personal admirer
of hers, Deputy Dupont would do anything she asked.

She wanted to act in London, at a theatre called Drury Lane. She wanted
to play Moliere in England in French, and had already spoken with
several of her colleagues, who were ready to join her. They would give
public representations in aid of the starving population of France;
there were plenty of Socialistic clubs in London quite Jacobin and
Revolutionary in tendency: their members would give her full support.

She would be serving her country and her countrymen and incidentally see
something of the world, and amuse herself. She was bored in Paris.

Then she thought of Marguerite St. Just, once of the Maison Moliere, who
had captivated an English milor of enormous wealth. Demoiselle Candeille
had never been of the Maison Moliere; she had been the leading star of
one of the minor--yet much-frequented--theatres of Paris, but she felt
herself quite able and ready to captivate some other unattached milor,
who would load her with English money and incidentally bestow an English
name upon her.

So she went to London.

The experiment, however, had not proved an unmitigated success. At first
she and her company did obtain a few engagements at one or two of the
minor theatres, to give representations of some of the French classical
comedies in the original language.

But these never quite became the fashion. The feeling against France
and all her doings was far too keen in that very set, which Demoiselle
Candeille had desired to captivate with her talents, to allow of the
English jeunesse doree to flock and see Moliere played in French, by a
French troupe, whilst Candeille's own compatriots resident in England
had given her but scant support.

One section of these--the aristocrats and emigres--looked upon the
actress who was a friend of all the Jacobins in Paris as nothing better
than canaille. They sedulously ignored her presence in this country, and
snubbed her whenever they had an opportunity.

The other section--chiefly consisting of agents and spies of the
Revolutionary Government--she would gladly have ignored. They had at
first made a constant demand on her purse, her talents and her time:
then she grew tired of them, and felt more and more chary of being
identified with a set which was in such ill-odour with that very same
jeunesse doree whom Candeille had desired to please.

In her own country she was and always had been a good republican: Marat
had given her her first start in life by his violent praises of her
talent in his widely-circulated paper; she had been associated in
Paris with the whole coterie of artists and actors: every one of them
republican to a man. But in London, although one might be snubbed by
the emigres and aristocrats--it did not do to be mixed up with the
sans-culotte journalists and pamphleteers who haunted the Socialistic
clubs of the English capital, and who were the prime organizers of all
those seditious gatherings and treasonable unions that caused Mr. Pitt
and his colleagues so much trouble and anxiety.

One by one, Desiree Candeille's comrades, male and female, who had
accompanied her to England, returned to their own country. When war was
declared, some of them were actually sent back under the provisions of
the Aliens Bill.

But Desiree had stayed on.

Her old friends in Paris had managed to advise her that she would not
be very welcome there just now. The sans-culotte journalists of England,
the agents and spies of the Revolutionary Government, had taken their
revenge of the frequent snubs inflicted upon them by the young actress,
and in those days the fact of being unwelcome in France was apt to have
a more lurid and more dangerous significant.

Candeille did not dare return: at any rate not for the present.

She trusted to her own powers of intrigue, and her well-known
fascinations, to re-conquer the friendship of the Jacobin clique, and
she once more turned her attention to the affiliated Socialistic clubs
of England. But between the proverbial two stools, Demoiselle Candeille
soon came to the ground. Her machinations became known in official
quarters, her connection with all the seditious clubs of London was soon
bruited abroad, and one evening Desiree found herself confronted with
a document addressed to her: "From the Office of His Majesty's Privy
Seal," wherein it was set forth that, pursuant to the statute 33 George
III. cap. 5, she, Desiree Candeille, a French subject now resident in
England, was required to leave this kingdom by order of His Majesty
within seven days, and that in the event of the said Desiree Candeille
refusing to comply with this order, she would be liable to commitment,
brought to trial and sentenced to imprisonment for a month, and
afterwards to removal within a limited time under pain of transportation
for life.

This meant that Demoiselle Candeille had exactly seven days in which to
make complete her reconciliation with her former friends who now ruled
Paris and France with a relentless and perpetually bloodstained hand.
No wonder that during the night which followed the receipt of this
momentous document, Demoiselle Candeille suffered gravely from insomnia.

She dared not go back to France, she was ordered out of England! What
was to become of her?

This was just three days before the eventful afternoon of the Richmond
Gala, and twenty-four hours after ex-Ambassador Chauvelin had landed in
England. Candeille and Chauvelin had since then met at the "Cercle des
Jacobins Francais" in Soho Street, and now fair Desiree found herself in
lodgings in Richmond, the evening of the day following the Gala, feeling
that her luck had not altogether deserted her.

One conversation with Citizen Chauvelin had brought the fickle jade
back to Demoiselle Candeilles' service. Nay, more, the young actress
saw before her visions of intrigue, of dramatic situations, of pleasant
little bits of revenge;--all of which was meat and drink and air to
breathe for Mademoiselle Desiree.

She was to sing in one of the most fashionable salons in England: that
was very pleasant. The Prince of Wales would hear and see her! that
opened out a vista of delightful possibilities! And all she had to do
was to act a part dictated to her by Citizen Chauvelin, to behave as
he directed, to move in the way he wished! Well! that was easy enough,
since the part which she would have to play was one peculiarly suited to
her talents.

She looked at herself critically in the glass. Her maid Fanchon--a
little French waif picked up in the slums of Soho--helped to readjust a
stray curl which had rebelled against the comb.

"Now for the necklace, Mademoiselle," said Fanchon with suppressed
excitement.

It had just arrived by messenger: a large morocco case, which now lay
open on the dressing table, displaying its dazzling contents.

Candeille scarcely dared to touch it, and yet it was for her. Citizen
Chauvelin had sent a note with it.

"Citizeness Candeille will please accept this gift from the government
of France in acknowledgment of useful services past and to come."

The note was signed with Robespierre's own name, followed by that of
Citizen Chauvelin. The morocco case contained a necklace of diamonds
worth the ransom of a king.

"For useful services past and to come!" and there were promises of still
further rewards, a complete pardon for all defalcations, a place
within the charmed circle of the Comedie Francaise, a grand pageant
and apotheosis with Citizeness Candeille impersonating the Goddess of
Reason, in the midst of a grand national fete, and the acclamations of
excited Paris: and all in exchange for the enactment of a part--simple
and easy--outlined for her by Chauvelin!...

How strange! how inexplicable! Candeille took the necklace up in her
trembling fingers and gazed musingly at the priceless gems. She had seen
the jewels before, long, long ago! round the neck of the Duchesse de
Marny, in whose service her own mother had been. She--as a child--had
often gazed at and admired the great lady, who seemed like a wonderful
fairy from an altogether world, to the poor little kitchen slut.

How wonderful are the vagaries of fortune! Desiree Candeille, the
kitchen-maid's daughter, now wearing her ex-mistress' jewels.
She supposed that these had been confiscated when the last of the
Marnys--the girl, Juliette--had escaped from France! confiscated and now
sent to her--Candeille--as a reward or as a bribe!

In either case they were welcome. The actress' vanity was soothed. She
knew Juliette Marny was in England, and that she would meet her to-night
at Lady Blakeney's. After the many snubs which she had endured from
French aristocrats settled in England, the actress felt that she was
about to enjoy an evening of triumph.

The intrigue excited her. She did not quite know what schemes Chauvelin
was aiming at, what ultimate end he had had in view when he commanded
her services and taught her the part which he wished her to play.

That the schemes were vast and the end mighty, she could not doubt. The
reward she had received was proof enough of that.

Little Fanchon stood there in speechless admiration, whilst her mistress
still fondly fingered the magnificent necklace.

"Mademoiselle will wear the diamond to-night?" she asked with evident
anxiety: she would have been bitterly disappointed to have seen the
beautiful thing once more relegated to its dark morocco case.

"Oh, yes, Fanchon!" said Candeille with a sigh of great satisfaction;
"see that they are fastened quite securely, my girl."

She put the necklace round her shapely neck and Fanchon looked to see
that the clasp was quite secure.

There came the sound of loud knocking at the street door.

"That is M. Chauvelin come to fetch me with the chaise. Am I quite
ready, Fanchon?" asked Desiree Candeille.

"Oh yes, Mademoiselle!" sighed the little maid; "and Mademoiselle looks
very beautiful to-night."

"Lady Blakeney is very beautiful too, Fanchon," rejoined the actress
naively, "but I wonder if she will wear anything as fine as the Marny
necklace?"

The knocking at the street door was repeated. Candeille took a final,
satisfied survey of herself in the glass. She knew her part and felt
that she had dressed well for it. She gave a final, affectionate
little tap to the diamonds round her neck, took her cloak and hood from
Fanchon, and was ready to go.




Chapter X: Lady Blakeney's Rout



There are several accounts extant, in the fashionable chronicles of the
time, of the gorgeous reception given that autumn by Lady Blakeney in
her magnificent riverside home.

Never had the spacious apartments of Blakeney Manor looked more
resplendent than on this memorable occasion--memorable because of the
events which brought the brilliant evening to a close.

The Prince of Wales had come over by water from Carlton House; the Royal
Princesses came early, and all fashionable London was there, chattering
and laughing, displaying elaborate gowns and priceless jewels dancing,
flirting, listening to the strains of the string band, or strolling
listlessly in the gardens, where the late roses and clumps of heliotrope
threw soft fragrance on the balmy air.

But Marguerite was nervous and agitated. Strive how she might, she
could not throw off that foreboding of something evil to come, which had
assailed her from the first moment when she met Chauvelin face to face.

That unaccountable feeling of unreality was still upon her, that sense
that she, and the woman Candeille, Percy and even His Royal Highness
were, for the time being, the actors in a play written and stage-managed
by Chauvelin. The ex-ambassador's humility, his offers of friendship,
his quietude under Sir Percy's good-humoured banter, everything was a
sham. Marguerite knew it; her womanly instinct, her passionate love, all
cried out to her in warning: but there was that in her husband's nature
which rendered her powerless in the face of such dangers, as, she felt
sure, were now threatening him.

Just before her guests had begun to assemble, she had been alone with
him for a few minutes. She had entered the room in which he sat, looking
radiantly beautiful in a shimmering gown of white and silver, with
diamonds in her golden hair and round her exquisite neck.

Moments like this, when she was alone with him, were the joy of her
life. Then and then only did she see him as he really was, with that
wistful tenderness in his deep-set eyes, that occasional flash
of passion from beneath the lazily-drooping lids. For a few
minutes--seconds, mayhap--the spirit of the reckless adventurer was laid
to rest, relegated into the furthermost background of this senses by the
powerful emotions of the lover.

Then he would seize her in his arms, and hold her to him, with a strange
longing to tear from out his heart all other thoughts, feelings and
passions save those which made him a slave to her beauty and her smiles.

"Percy!" she whispered to him to-night when freeing herself from his
embrace she looked up at him, and for this one heavenly second felt
him all her own. "Percy, you will do nothing rash, nothing foolhardy
to-night. That man had planned all that took place yesterday. He hates
you, and ..."

In a moment his face and attitude had changed, the heavy lids drooped
over the eyes, the rigidity of the mouth relaxed, and that quaint,
half-shy, half-inane smile played around the firm lips.

"Of course he does, m'dear," he said in his usual affected, drawly
tones, "of course he does, but that is so demmed amusing. He does not
really know what or how much he knows, or what I know.... In fact...
er... we none of us know anything... just at present...."

He laughed lightly and carelessly, then deliberately readjusted the set
of his lace tie.

"Percy!" she said reproachfully.

"Yes, m'dear."

"Lately when you brought Deroulede and Juliette Marny to England... I
endured agonies of anxiety... and..."

He sighed, a quick, short, wistful sigh, and said very gently:

"I know you did, m'dear, and that is where the trouble lies. I know that
you are fretting, so I have to be so demmed quick about the business,
so as not to keep you in suspense too long.... And now I can't take
Ffoulkes away from his young wife, and Tony and the others are so mighty
slow."

"Percy!" she said once more with tender earnestness.

"I know, I know," he said with a slight frown of self-reproach. "La!
but I don't deserve your solicitude. Heavens know what a brute I was for
years, whilst I neglected you, and ignored the noble devotion which I,
alas! do even now so little to deserve."

She would have said something more, but was interrupted by the entrance
of Juliette Marny into the room.

"Some of your guests have arrived, Lady Blakeney," said the young girl,
apologising for her seeming intrusion. "I thought you would wish to
know."

Juliette looked very young and girlish in a simple white gown, without
a single jewel on her arms or neck. Marguerite regarded her with
unaffected approval.

"You look charming to-night, Mademoiselle, does she not, Sir Percy?"

"Thanks to your bounty," smiled Juliette, a trifle sadly. "Whilst
I dressed to-night, I felt how I should have loved to wear my dear
mother's jewels, of which she used to be so proud."

"We must hope that you will recover them, dear, some day," said
Marguerite vaguely, as she led the young girl out of the small study
towards the larger reception rooms.

"Indeed I hope so," sighed Juliette. "When times became so troublous in
France after my dear father's death, his confessor and friend, the Abbe
Foucquet, took charge of all my mother's jewels for me. He said they
would be safe with the ornaments of his own little church at Boulogne.
He feared no sacrilege, and thought they would be most effectually
hidden there, for no one would dream of looking for the Marny diamonds
in the crypt of a country church."

Marguerite said nothing in reply. Whatever her own doubts might be upon
such a subject, it could serve no purpose to disturb the young girl's
serenity.

"Dear Abbe Foucquet," said Juliette after a while, "his is the kind of
devotion which I feel sure will never be found under the new regimes of
anarchy and of so-called equality. He would have laid down his life for
my father or for me. And I know that he would never part with the jewels
which I entrusted to his care, whilst he had breath and strength to
defend them."

Marguerite would have wished to pursue the subject a little further.
It was very pathetic to witness poor Juliette's hopes and confidences,
which she felt sure would never be realised.

Lady Blakeney knew so much of what was going on in France just now:
spoliations, confiscations, official thefts, open robberies, all in the
name of equality, of fraternity and of patriotism. She knew nothing,
of course, of the Abbe Foucquet, but the tender little picture of the
devoted old man, painted by Juliette's words, had appealed strongly to
her sympathetic heart.

Instinct and knowledge of the political aspect of France told her that
by entrusting valuable family jewels to the old Abbe, Juliette had most
unwittingly placed the man she so much trusted in danger of persecution
at the hands of a government which did not even admit the legality of
family possessions. However, there was neither time nor opportunity now
to enlarge upon the subject. Marguerite resolved to recur to it a little
later, when she would be alone with Mlle. de Marny, and above all
when she could take counsel with her husband as to the best means of
recovering the young girl's property for her, whilst relieving a devoted
old man from the dangerous responsibility which he had so selflessly
undertaken.

In the meanwhile the two women had reached the first of the long line
of state apartments wherein the brilliant fete was to take place.
The staircase and the hall below were already filled with the early
arrivals. Bidding Juliette to remain in the ballroom, Lady Blakeney now
took up her stand on the exquisitely decorated landing, ready to greet
her guests. She had a smile and a pleasant word for all, as, in a
constant stream, the elite of London fashionable society began to file
past her, exchanging the elaborate greetings which the stilted mode of
the day prescribed to this butterfly-world.

The lacqueys in the hall shouted the names of the guests as they passed
up the stairs: names celebrated in politics, in worlds of sport, of
science or of art, great historic names, humble, newly-made ones, noble
illustrious titles. The spacious rooms were filling fast. His Royal
Highness, so 'twas said, had just stepped out of his barge. The noise of
laughter and chatter was incessant, like unto a crowd of gaily-plumaged
birds. Huge bunches of apricot-coloured roses in silver vases made the
air heavy with their subtle perfume. Fans began to flutter. The string
band struck the preliminary cords of the gavotte.

At that moment the lacqueys at the foot of the stairs called out in
stentorian tones:

"Mademoiselle Desiree Candeille! and Monsieur Chauvelin!"

Marguerite's heart gave a slight flutter; she felt a sudden tightening
of the throat. She did not see Candeille at first, only the slight
figure of Chauvelin dressed all in black, as usual, with head bent
and hands clasped behind his back; he was slowly mounting the wide
staircase, between a double row of brilliantly attired men and women,
who looked with no small measure of curiosity at the ex-ambassador from
revolutionary France.

Demoiselle Candeille was leading the way up the stairs. She paused on
the landing in order to make before her hostess a most perfect and most
elaborate curtsey. She looked smiling and radiant, beautifully dressed,
a small wreath of wrought gold leaves in her hair, her only jewel an
absolutely regal one, a magnificent necklace of diamonds round her
shapely throat.




Chapter XI: The Challenge



It all occurred just before midnight, in one of the smaller rooms, which
lead in enfilade from the principal ballroom.

Dancing had been going on for some time, but the evening was close,
and there seemed to be a growing desire on the part of Lady Blakeney's
guests to wander desultorily through the gardens and glasshouses, or sit
about where some measure of coolness could be obtained.

There was a rumour that a new and charming French artiste was to sing a
few peculiarly ravishing songs, unheard in England before. Close to
the main ballroom was the octagon music-room which was brilliantly
illuminated, and in which a large number of chairs had been obviously
disposed for the comfort of an audience. Into this room many of
the guests had already assembled. It was quite clear that a
chamber-concert--select and attractive as were all Lady Blakeney's
entertainments--was in contemplation.

Marguerite herself, released for a moment from her constant duties near
her royal guests, had strolled through the smaller rooms, accompanied by
Juliette, in order to search for Mademoiselle Candeille and to suggest
the commencement of the improvised concert.

Desiree Candeille had kept herself very much aloof throughout the
evening, only talking to the one or two gentlemen whom her hostess had
presented to her on her arrival, and with M. Chauvelin always in close
attendance upon her every movement.

Presently, when dancing began, she retired to a small boudoir, and
there sat down, demurely waiting, until Lady Blakeney should require her
services.

When Marguerite and Juliette Marny entered the little room, she rose and
came forward a few steps.

"I am ready, Madame," she said pleasantly, "whenever you wish me to
begin. I have thought out a short programme,--shall I start with the gay
or the sentimental songs?"

But before Marguerite had time to utter a reply, she felt her arm
nervously clutched by a hot and trembling hand.

"Who... who is this woman?" murmured Juliette Marny close to her ear.

The young girl looked pale and very agitated, and her large eyes were
fixed in unmistakable wrath upon the French actress before her. A little
startled, not understanding Juliette's attitude, Marguerite tried to
reply lightly:

"This is Mademoiselle Candeille, Juliette dear," she said, affecting
the usual formal introduction, "of the Varietes Theatre of
Paris--Mademoiselle Desiree Candeille, who will sing some charming
French ditties for us to-night."

While she spoke she kept a restraining hand on Juliette's quivering
arm. Already, with the keen intuition which had been on the qui-vive the
whole evening, she scented some mystery in this sudden outburst on the
part of her young protegee.

But Juliette did not heed her: she felt surging up in her young,
overburdened heart all the wrath and the contempt of the persecuted,
fugitive aristocrat against the triumphant usurper. She had suffered so
much from that particular class of the risen kitchen-wench of which the
woman before her was so typical and example: years of sorrow, of poverty
were behind her: loss of fortune, of kindred, of friends--she, even now
a pauper, living on the bounty of strangers.

And all this through no fault of her own: the fault of her class mayhap!
but not hers!

She had suffered much, and was still overwrought and nerve-strung: for
some reason she could not afterwards have explained, she felt spiteful
and uncontrolled, goaded into stupid fury by the look of insolence and
of triumph with which Candeille calmly regarded her.

Afterwards she would willingly have bitten out her tongue for her
vehemence, but for the moment she was absolutely incapable of checking
the torrent of her own emotions.

"Mademoiselle Candeille, indeed?" she said in wrathful scorn, "Desiree
Candeille, you mean, Lady Blakeney! my mother's kitchen-maid, flaunting
shamelessly my dear mother's jewels which she has stolen mayhap..."

The young girl was trembling from head to foot, tears of anger obscured
her eyes; her voice, which fortunately remained low--not much above a
whisper--was thick and husky.

"Juliette! Juliette! I entreat you," admonished Marguerite, "you must
control yourself, you must, indeed you must. Mademoiselle Candeille, I
beg of you to retire...."

But Candeille--well-schooled in the part she had to play--had no
intention of quitting the field of battle. The more wrathful and excited
Mademoiselle de Marny became the more insolent and triumphant waxed
the young actress' whole attitude. An ironical smile played round the
corners of her mouth, her almond-shaped eyes were half-closed, regarding
through dropping lashed the trembling figure of the young impoverished
aristocrat. Her head was thrown well back, in obvious defiance of
the social conventions, which should have forbidden a fracas in Lady
Blakeney's hospitable house, and her fingers provocatively toyed with
the diamond necklace which glittered and sparkled round her throat.

She had no need to repeat the words of a well-learnt part: her own wit,
her own emotions and feelings helped her to act just as her employer
would have wished her to do. Her native vulgarity helped her to assume
the very bearing which he would have desired. In fact, at this moment
Desiree Candeille had forgotten everything save the immediate present: a
more than contemptuous snub from one of those penniless aristocrats, who
had rendered her own sojourn in London so unpleasant and unsuccessful.

She had suffered from these snubs before, but had never had the chance
of forcing an esclandre, as a result of her own humiliation. That spirit
of hatred for the rich and idle classes, which was so characteristic of
revolutionary France, was alive and hot within her: she had never had
an opportunity--she, the humble fugitive actress from a minor Paris
theatre--to retort with forcible taunts to the ironical remarks made at
and before her by the various poverty-stricken but haughty emigres who
swarmed in those very same circles of London society into which she
herself had vainly striven to penetrate.

Now at last, one of this same hated class, provoked beyond self-control,
was allowing childish and unreasoning fury to outstrip the usual calm
irony of aristocratic rebuffs.

Juliette had paused awhile, in order to check the wrathful tears which,
much against her will, were choking the words in her throat and blinding
her eyes.

"Hoity! toity!" laughed Candeille, "hark at the young baggage!"

But Juliette had turned to Marguerite and began explaining volubly:

"My mother's jewels!" she said in the midst of her tears, "ask her
how she came by them. When I was obliged to leave the home of my
fathers,--stolen from me by the Revolutionary Government--I contrived to
retain my mother's jewels... you remember, I told you just now.... The
Abbe Foucquet--dear old man! Saved them for me... that and a little
money which I had... he took charge of them... he said he would place
them in safety with the ornaments of his church, and now I see them
round that woman's neck... I know that he would not have parted with
them save with his life."

All the while that the young girl spoke in a voice half-choked with
sobs, Marguerite tried with all the physical and mental will at her
command to drag her out of the room and thus to put a summary ending to
this unpleasant scene. She ought to have felt angry with Juliette for
this childish and senseless outburst, were it not for the fact that
somehow she knew within her innermost heart that all this had been
arranged and preordained: not by Fate--not by a Higher Hand, but by the
most skilful intriguer present-day France had ever known.

And even now, as she was half succeeding in turning Juliette away from
the sight of Candeille, she was not the least surprised or startled
at seeing Chauvelin standing in the very doorway through which she had
hoped to pass. One glance at his face had made her fears tangible and
real: there was a look of satisfaction and triumph in his pale, narrow
eyes, a flash in them of approbation directed at the insolent attitude
of the French actress: he looked like the stage-manager of a play,
content with the effect his own well-arranged scenes were producing.

What he hoped to gain by this--somewhat vulgar--quarrel between the two
women, Marguerite of course could not guess: that something was lurking
in his mind, inimical to herself and to her husband, she did not for a
moment doubt, and at this moment she felt that she would have given
her very life to induce Candeille and Juliette to cease this passage of
arms, without further provocation on either side.

But though Juliette might have been ready to yield to Lady Blakeney's
persuasion, Desiree Candeille, under Chauvelin's eye, and fired by her
own desire to further humiliate this overbearing aristocrat, did not
wish the little scene to end so tamely just yet.

"Your old calotin was made to part with his booty, m'dear," she said,
with a contemptuous shrug of her bare shoulders. "Paris and France have
been starving these many years past: a paternal government seized all
it could with which to reward those that served it well, whilst all that
would have been brought bread and meat for the poor was being greedily
stowed away by shameless traitors!"

Juliette winced at the insult.

"Oh!" she moaned, as she buried her flaming face in her hands.

Too late now did she realise that she had deliberately stirred up a
mud-heap and sent noisome insects buzzing about her ears.

"Mademoiselle," said Marguerite authoritatively, "I must ask you to
remember that Mlle. de Marny is my friend and that you are a guest in my
house."

"Aye! I try not to forget it," rejoined Candeille lightly, "but of a
truth you must admit, Citizeness, that it would require the patience
of a saint to put up with the insolence of a penniless baggage, who but
lately has had to stand her trial in her own country for impurity of
conduct."

There was a moment's silence, whilst Marguerite distinctly heard a
short sigh of satisfaction escaping from the lips of Chauvelin. Then a
pleasant laugh broke upon the ears of the four actors who were enacting
the dramatic little scene, and Sir Percy Blakeney, immaculate in his
rich white satin coat and filmy lace ruffles, exquisite in manners and
courtesy, entered the little boudoir, and with his long back slightly
bent, his arm outstretched in a graceful and well-studied curve, he
approached Mademoiselle Desiree Candeille.

"May I have the honour," he said with his most elaborate air of courtly
deference, "of conducting Mademoiselle to her chaise?"

In the doorway just behind him stood His Royal Highness the Prince of
Wales chatting with apparent carelessness to Sir Andrew Ffoulkes and
Lord Anthony Dewhurst. A curtain beyond the open door was partially
drawn aside, disclosing one or two brilliantly dressed groups, strolling
desultorily through the further rooms.

The four persons assembled in the little boudoir had been so absorbed
by their own passionate emotions and the violence of their quarrel
that they had not noticed the approach of Sir Percy Blakeney and of his
friends. Juliette and Marguerite certainly were startled and Candeille
was evidently taken unawares. Chauvelin alone seemed quite indifferent
and stood back a little when Sir Percy advanced, in order to allow him
to pass.

But Candeille recovered quickly enough from her surprise: without
heeding Blakeney's proffered arm, she turned with all the airs of an
insulted tragedy queen towards Marguerite.

"So 'tis I," she said with affected calm, "who am to bear every insult
in a house in which I was bidden as a guest. I am turned out like some
intrusive and importunate beggar, and I, the stranger in this land, am
destined to find that amidst all these brilliant English gentlemen there
is not one man of honour.

"M. Chauvelin," she added loudly, "our beautiful country has, meseems,
deputed you to guard the honour as well as the worldly goods of your
unprotected compatriots. I call upon you, in the name of France, to
avenge the insults offered to me to-night."

She looked round defiantly from one to the other of the several faces
which were now turned towards her, but no one, for the moment, spoke or
stirred. Juliette, silent and ashamed, had taken Marguerite's hand in
hers, and was clinging to it as if wishing to draw strength of character
and firmness of purpose through the pores of the other woman's delicate
skin.

Sir Percy with backbone still bent in a sweeping curve had not relaxed
his attitude of uttermost deference. The Prince of Wales and his friends
were viewing the scene with slightly amused aloofness.

For a moment--seconds at most--there was dead silence in the room,
during which time it almost seemed as if the beating of several hearts
could be distinctly heard.

Then Chauvelin, courtly and urbane, stepped calmly forward.

"Believe me, Citizeness," he said, addressing Candeille directly and
with marked emphasis, "I am entirely at your command, but am I not
helpless, seeing that those who have so grossly insulted you are of your
own irresponsible, if charming, sex?"

Like a great dog after a nap, Sir Percy Blakeney straightened his long
back and stretched it out to its full length.

"La!" he said pleasantly, "my ever engaging friend from Calais. Sir,
your servant. Meseems we are ever destined to discuss amiable matters,
in an amiable spirit.... A glass of punch, Monsieur... er... Chauvelin?"

"I must ask you, Sir Percy," rejoined Chauvelin sternly, "to view this
matter with becoming seriousness."

"Seriousness is never becoming, sir," said Blakeney, politely smothering
a slight yawn, "and it is vastly unbecoming in the presence of ladies."

"Am I to understand then, Sir Percy," said Chauvelin, "that you are
prepared to apologize to Mademoiselle Candeille for this insult offered
to her by Lady Blakeney?"

Sir Percy again tried to smother that tiresome little yawn, which seemed
most distressing, when he desired to be most polite. Then he flicked
off a grain of dust from his immaculate lace ruffle and buried his long,
slender hands in the capacious pockets of his white satin breeches;
finally he said with the most good-natured of smiles:

"Sir, have you seen the latest fashion in cravats? I would wish to
draw your attention to the novel way in which we in England tie a
Mechlin-edged bow."

"Sir Percy," retorted Chauvelin firmly, "since you will not offer
Mademoiselle Candeille the apology which she has the right to expect
from you, are you prepared that you and I should cross swords like
honourable gentlemen?"

Blakeney laughed his usual pleasant, somewhat shy laugh, shook his
powerful frame and looked from his altitude of six feet three inches
down on the small, sable-clad figure of ex-Ambassador Chauvelin.

"The question is, sir," he said slowly, "should we then be two
honourable gentlemen crossing swords?"

"Sir Percy..."

"Sir?"

Chauvelin, who for one moment had seemed ready to lose his temper,
now made a sudden effort to resume a calm and easy attitude and said
quietly:

"Of course, if one of us is coward enough to shirk the contest..."

He did not complete the sentence, but shrugged his shoulders expressive
of contempt. The other side of the curtained doorway a little crowd had
gradually assembled, attracted hither by the loud and angry voices which
came from that small boudoir. Host and hostess had been missed from the
reception rooms for some time, His Royal Highness, too, had not been
seen for the quarter of an hour: like flies attracted by the light, one
by one, or in small isolated groups, some of Lady Blakeney's quests had
found their way to the room adjoining the royal presence.

As His Highness was standing in the doorway itself, no one could of
course cross the threshold, but everyone could see into the room, and
could take stock of the various actors in the little comedy. They were
witnessing a quarrel between the French envoy and Sir Percy Blakeney
wherein the former was evidently in deadly earnest and the latter merely
politely bored. Amused comments flew to and fro: laughter and a babel of
irresponsible chatter made an incessant chirruping accompaniment to the
duologue between the two men.

But at this stage, the Prince of Wales, who hitherto had seemingly kept
aloof from the quarrel, suddenly stepped forward and abruptly interposed
the weight of his authority and of his social position between the
bickering adversaries.

"Tush, man!" he said impatiently, turning more especially towards
Chauvelin, "you talk at random. Sir Percy Blakeney is an English
gentleman, and the laws of this country do not admit of duelling, as you
understand it in France; and I for one certainly could not allow..."

"Pardon, your Royal Highness," interrupted Sir Percy with irresistible
bonhomie, "your Highness does not understand the situation. My engaging
friend here does not propose that I should transgress the laws of this
country, but that I should go over to France with him, and fight him
there, where duelling and... er... other little matters of that sort are
allowed."

"Yes! quite so!" rejoined the Prince, "I understand M. Chauvelin's
desire. ... But what about you, Blakeney?"

"Oh!" replied Sir Percy lightly, "I have accepted his challenge, of
course!"




Chapter XII: Time--Place--Conditions



It would be very difficult indeed to say why--at Blakeney's lightly
spoken words--an immediate silence should have fallen upon all those
present. All the actors in the little drawing-room drama, who had played
their respective parts so unerringly up to now, had paused a while, just
as if an invisible curtain had come down, marking the end of a scene,
and the interval during which the players might recover strength and
energy to resume their roles. The Prince of Wales as foremost spectator
said nothing for the moment, and beyond the doorway, the audience there
assembled seemed suddenly to be holding its breath, waiting--eager,
expectant, palpitation--for what would follow now.

Only here and there the gentle frou-frou of a silk skirt, the rhythmic
flutter of a fan, broke those few seconds' deadly, stony silence.

Yet it was all simple enough. A fracas between two ladies, the gentlemen
interposing, a few words of angry expostulation, then the inevitable
suggestion of Belgium or of some other country where the childish and
barbarous custom of settling such matters with a couple of swords had
not been as yet systematically stamped out.

The whole scene--with but slight variations--had occurred scores of
times in London drawing-rooms, English gentlemen had scores of times
crossed the Channel for the purpose of settling similar quarrels in
continental fashion.

Why should the present situation appear so abnormal? Sir Percy
Blakeney--an accomplished gentleman--was past master in the art of
fence, and looked more than a match in strength and dexterity for the
meagre, sable-clad little opponent who had so summarily challenged him
to cross over to France, in order to fight a duel.

But somehow everyone had a feeling at this moment that this proposed
duel would be unlike any other combat every fought between two
antagonists. Perhaps it was the white, absolutely stony and unexpressive
face of Marguerite which suggested a latent tragedy: perhaps it was the
look of unmistakable horror in Juliette's eyes, or that of triumph
in those of Chauvelin, or even that certain something in His Royal
Highness' face, which seemed to imply that the Prince, careless man of
the world as he was, would have given much to prevent this particular
meeting from taking place.

Be that as it may, there is no doubt that a certain wave of electrical
excitement swept over the little crowd assembled there, the while
the chief actor in the little drama, the inimitable dandy, Sir Percy
Blakeney himself, appeared deeply engrossed in removing a speck of
powder from the wide black satin ribbon which held his gold-rimmed
eyeglass.

"Gentlemen!" said His Royal Highness suddenly, "we are forgetting the
ladies. My lord Hastings," he added, turning to one of the gentlemen
who stood close to him, "I pray you to remedy this unpardonable neglect.
Men's quarrels are not fit for ladies' dainty ears."

Sir Percy looked up from his absorbing occupation. His eyes met those
of his wife; she was like a marble statue, hardly conscious of what was
going on round her. But he, who knew every emotion which swayed that
ardent and passionate nature, guessed that beneath that stony calm there
lay a mad, almost unconquerable impulse: and that was to shout to all
these puppets here, the truth, the awful, the unanswerable truth, to
tell them what this challenge really meant; a trap wherein one man
consumed with hatred and desire for revenge hoped to entice a brave and
fearless foe into a death-dealing snare.

Full well did Percy Blakeney guess that for the space of one second
his most cherished secret hovered upon his wife's lips, one turn of
the balance of Fate, one breath from the mouth of an unseen sprite, and
Marguerite was ready to shout:

"Do not allow this monstrous thing to be! The Scarlet Pimpernel, whom
you all admire for his bravery, and love for his daring, stands before
you now, face to face with his deadliest enemy, who is here to lure him
to his doom!"

For that momentous second therefore Percy Blakeney held his wife's
gaze with the magnetism of his own; all there was in him of love, of
entreaty, of trust, and of command went out to her through that look
with which he kept her eyes riveted upon his face.

Then he saw the rigidity of her attitude relax. She closed her eyes in
order to shut out the whole world from her suffering soul. She seemed
to be gathering all the mental force of which her brain was capable, for
one great effort of self-control. Then she took Juliette's hand in hers,
and turned to go out of the room; the gentlemen bowed as she swept past
them, her rich silken gown making a soft hush-sh-sh as she went. She
nodded to some, curtseyed to the Prince, and had at the last moment
the supreme courage and pride to turn her head once more towards her
husband, in order to reassure him finally that his secret was as safe
with her now, in this hour of danger, as it had been in the time of
triumph.

She smiled and passed out of his sight, preceded by Desiree Candeille,
who, escorted by one of the gentlemen, had become singularly silent and
subdued.

In the little room now there only remained a few men. Sir Andrew
Ffoulkes had taken the precaution of closing the door after the ladies
had gone.

Then His Royal Highness turned once more to Monsieur Chauvelin and said
with an obvious show of indifference:

"Faith, Monsieur! meseems we are all enacting a farce, which can have
no final act. I vow that I cannot allow my friend Blakeney to go over to
France at your bidding. Your government now will not allow my father's
subjects to land on your shores without a special passport, and then
only for a specific purpose."

"La, your Royal Highness," interposed Sir Percy, "I pray you have no
fear for me on that score. My engaging friend here has--an I mistake
not--a passport ready for me in the pocket of his sable-hued coat, and
as we are hoping effectually to spit one another over there... gadzooks!
but there's the specific purpose.... Is it not true, sir," he added,
turning once more to Chauvelin, "that in the pocket of that exquisitely
cut coat of yours, you have a passport--name in blank perhaps--which you
had specially designed for me?"

It was so carelessly, so pleasantly said, that no one save Chauvelin
guessed the real import of Sir Percy's words. Chauvelin, of course, knew
their inner meaning: he understood that Blakeney wished to convey to him
the fact that he was well aware that the whole scene to-night had been
prearranged, and that it was willingly and with eyes wide open that he
walked into the trap which the revolutionary patriot had so carefully
laid for him.

"The passport will be forthcoming in due course, sir," retorted
Chauvelin evasively, "when our seconds have arranged all formalities."

"Seconds be demmed, sir," rejoined Sir Percy placidly, "you do not
propose, I trust, that we travel a whole caravan to France."

"Time, place and conditions must be settled, Sir Percy," replied
Chauvelin; "you are too accomplished a cavalier, I feel sure, to wish to
arrange such formalities yourself."

"Nay! neither you nor I, Monsieur... er... Chauvelin," quoth Sir Percy
blandly, "could, I own, settle such things with persistent good-humour;
and good-humour in such cases is the most important of all formalities.
Is it not so?"

"Certainly, Sir Percy."

"As for seconds? Perish the thought. One second only, I entreat, and
that one a lady--the most adorable--the most detestable--the most
true--the most fickle amidst all her charming sex.... Do you agree,
sir?"

"You have not told me her name, Sir Percy?"

"Chance, Monsieur, Chance.... With His Royal Highness' permission let
the wilful jade decide."

"I do not understand."

"Three throws of the dice, Monsieur.... Time... Place... Conditions, you
said--three throws and the winner names them.... Do you agree?"

Chauvelin hesitated. Sir Percy's bantering mood did not quite fit
in with his own elaborate plans, moreover the ex-ambassador feared
a pitfall of some sort, and did not quite like to trust to this
arbitration of the dice-box.

He turned, quite involuntarily, in appeal to the Prince of Wales and the
other gentlemen present.

But the Englishman of those days was a born gambler. He lived with the
dice-box in one pocket and a pack of cards in the other. The Prince
himself was no exception to this rule, and the first gentleman in
England was the most avowed worshipper of Hazard in the land.

"Chance, by all means," quoth His Highness gaily.

"Chance! Chance!" repeated the others eagerly.

In the midst of so hostile a crowd, Chauvelin felt it unwise to resist.
Moreover, one second's reflection had already assured him that this
throwing of the dice could not seriously interfere with the success of
his plans. If the meeting took place at all--and Sir Percy now had gone
too far to draw back--then of necessity it would have to take place in
France.

The question of time and conditions of the fight, which at best would
be only a farce--only a means to an end--could not be of paramount
importance.

Therefore he shrugged his shoulders with well-marked indifference, and
said lightly:

"As you please."

There was a small table in the centre of the room with a settee and two
or three chairs arranged close to it. Around this table now an eager
little group had congregated: the Prince of Wales in the forefront,
unwilling to interfere, scarce knowing what madcap plans were floating
through Blakeney's adventurous brain, but excited in spite of himself at
this momentous game of hazard the issues of which seemed so nebulous,
so vaguely fraught with dangers. Close to him were Sir Andrew Ffoulkes,
Lord Anthony Dewhurst, Lord Grenville and perhaps a half score
gentlemen, young men about town mostly, gay and giddy butterflies of
fashion, who did not even attempt to seek in this strange game of chance
any hidden meaning save that it was one of Blakeney's irresponsible
pranks.

And in the centre of the compact group, Sir Percy Blakeney in his
gorgeous suit of shimmering white satin, one knee bent upon a chair, and
leaning with easy grace--dice-box in hand--across the small gilt-legged
table; beside him ex-Ambassador Chauvelin, standing with arms folded
behind his back, watching every movement of his brilliant adversary like
some dark-plumaged hawk hovering near a bird of paradise.

"Place first, Monsieur?" suggested Sir Percy.

"As you will, sir," assented Chauvelin.

He took up a dice-box which one of the gentlemen handed to him and the
two men threw.

"'Tis mine, Monsieur," said Blakeney carelessly, "mine to name the place
where shall occur this historic encounter, 'twixt the busiest man
in France and the most idle fop that e'er disgraced these three
kingdoms.... Just for the sake of argument, sir, what place would you
suggest?"

"Oh! the exact spot is immaterial, Sir Percy," replied Chauvelin coldly,
"the whole of France stands at your disposal."

"Aye! I thought as much, but could not be quite sure of such boundless
hospitality," retorted Blakeney imperturbably.

"Do you care for the woods around Paris, sir?"

"Too far from the coast, sir. I might be sea-sick crossing over the
Channel, and glad to get the business over as soon as possible.... No,
not Paris, sir--rather let us say Boulogne.... Pretty little place,
Boulogne... do you not think so...?"

"Undoubtedly, Sir Percy."

"Then Boulogne it is.. the ramparts, an you will, on the south side of
the town."

"As you please," rejoined Chauvelin drily. "Shall we throw again?"

A murmur of merriment had accompanied this brief colloquy between the
adversaries, and Blakeney's bland sallies were received with shouts of
laughter. Now the dice rattled again and once more the two men threw.

"'Tis yours this time, Monsieur Chauvelin," said Blakeney, after a rapid
glance at the dice. "See how evenly Chance favours us both. Mine, the
choice of place... admirably done you'll confess.... Now yours the
choice of time. I wait upon your pleasure, sir.... The southern ramparts
at Boulogne--when?"

"The fourth day from this, sir, at the hour when the Cathedral bell
chimes the evening Angelus," came Chauvelin's ready reply.

"Nay! but methought that your demmed government had abolished
Cathedrals, and bells and chimes.... The people of France have now to
go to hell their own way... for the way to heaven has been barred by
the National Convention.... Is that not so?... Methought the Angelus was
forbidden to be rung."

"Not at Boulogne, I think, Sir Percy," retorted Chauvelin drily, "and
I'll pledge you my word that the evening Angelus shall be rung that
night."

"At what hour is that, sir?"

"One hour after sundown."

"But why four days after this? Why not two or three?"

"I might have asked, why the southern ramparts, Sir Percy; why not the
western? I chose the fourth day--does it not suit you?" asked Chauvelin
ironically.

"Suit me! Why, sir, nothing could suit me better," rejoined Blakeney
with his pleasant laugh. "Zounds! but I call it marvellous... demmed
marvellous... I wonder now," he added blandly, "what made you think of
the Angelus?"

Everyone laughed at this, a little irrelevantly perhaps.

"Ah!" continued Blakeney gaily, "I remember now.... Faith! to think that
I was nigh forgetting that when last you and I met, sir, you had just
taken or were about to take Holy Orders.... Ah! how well the thought
of the Angelus fits in with your clerical garb.... I recollect that the
latter was mightily becoming to you, sir..."

"Shall we proceed to settle the conditions of the fight, Sir Percy?"
said Chauvelin, interrupting the flow of his antagonist's gibes, and
trying to disguise his irritation beneath a mask of impassive reserve.

"The choice of weapons you mean," here interposed His Royal Highness,
"but I thought that swords had already been decided on."

"Quite so, your Highness," assented Blakeney, "but there are various
little matters in connection with this momentous encounter which are of
vast importance.... Am I not right, Monsieur?... Gentlemen, I appeal to
you.... Faith! one never knows... my engaging opponent here might desire
that I should fight him in green socks, and I that he should wear a
scarlet flower in his coat."

"The Scarlet Pimpernel, Sir Percy?"

"Why not, Monsieur? It would look so well in your buttonhole, against
the black of the clerical coat, which I understand you sometime affect
in France... and when it is withered and quite dead you would find that
it would leave an overpowering odour in your nostrils, far stronger than
that of incense."

There was general laughter after this. The hatred which every member of
the French revolutionary government--including, of course, ex-Ambassador
Chauvelin--bore to the national hero was well known.

"The conditions then, Sir Percy," said Chauvelin, without seeming to
notice the taunt conveyed in Blakeney's last words. "Shall we throw
again?"

"After you, sir," acquiesced Sir Percy.

For the third and last time the two opponents rattled the dice-box and
threw. Chauvelin was now absolutely unmoved. These minor details quite
failed to interest him. What mattered the conditions of the fight which
was only intended as a bait with which to lure his enemy in the open?
The hour and place were decided on and Sir Percy would not fail to come.
Chauvelin knew enough of his opponent's boldly adventurous spirit not
to feel in the least doubtful on that point. Even now, as he gazed with
grudging admiration at the massive, well-knit figure of his arch-enemy,
noted the thin nervy hands and square jaw, the low, broad forehead and
deep-set, half-veiled eyes, he knew that in this matter wherein Percy
Blakeney was obviously playing with his very life, the only emotion that
really swayed him at this moment was his passionate love of adventure.

The ruling passion strong in death!

Yes! Sir Percy would be on the southern ramparts of Boulogne one
hour after sunset on the day named, trusting, no doubt, in his usual
marvellous good-fortune, his own presence of mind and his great physical
and mental strength, to escape from the trap into which he was so ready
to walk.

That remained beyond a doubt! Therefore what mattered details?

But even at this moment, Chauvelin had already resolved on one great
thing: namely, that on that eventful day, nothing whatever should be
left to Chance; he would meet his cunning enemy not only with cunning,
but also with power, and if the entire force of the republican army
then available in the north of France had to be requisitioned for the
purpose, the ramparts of Boulogne would be surrounded and no chance of
escape left for the daring Scarlet Pimpernel.

His wave of meditation, however, was here abruptly stemmed by Blakeney's
pleasant voice.

"Lud! Monsieur Chauvelin," he said, "I fear me your luck has deserted
you. Chance, as you see, has turned to me once more."

"Then it is for you, Sir Percy," rejoined the Frenchman, "to name the
conditions under which we are to fight."

"Ah! that is so, is it not, Monsieur?" quoth Sir Percy lightly. "By my
faith! I'll not plague you with formalities.... We'll fight with our
coats on if it be cold, in our shirtsleeves if it be sultry.... I'll
not demand either green socks or scarlet ornaments. I'll even try and
be serious for the space of two minutes, sir, and confine my whole
attention--the product of my infinitesimal brain--to thinking out some
pleasant detail for this duel, which might be acceptable to you. Thus,
sir, the thought of weapons springs to my mind.... Swords you said, I
think. Sir! I will e'en restrict my choice of conditions to that of the
actual weapons with which we are to fight.... Ffoulkes, I pray you," he
added, turning to his friend, "the pair of swords which lie across the
top of my desk at this moment....

"We'll not ask a menial to fetch them, eh, Monsieur?" he continued
gaily, as Sir Andrew Ffoulkes at a sign from him had quickly left the
room. "What need to bruit our pleasant quarrel abroad? You will like the
weapons, sir, and you shall have your own choice from the pair.... You
are a fine fencer, I feel sure... and you shall decide if a scratch or
two or a more serious wound shall be sufficient to avenge Mademoiselle
Candeille's wounded vanity."

Whilst he prattled so gaily on, there was dead silence among all
those present. The Prince had his shrewd eyes steadily fixed upon him,
obviously wondering what this seemingly irresponsible adventurer held
at the back of his mind. There is no doubt that everyone felt oppressed,
and that a strange murmur of anticipatory excitement went round the
little room, when, a few seconds later, Sir Andrew Ffoulkes returned,
with two sheathed swords in his hand.

Blakeney took them from his friend and placed them on the little table
in front of ex-Ambassador Chauvelin. The spectators strained their necks
to look at the two weapons. They were exactly similar one to the
other: both encased in plain black leather sheaths, with steel ferrules
polished to shine like silver; the handles too were of plain steel,
with just the grip fashioned in a twisted basket pattern of the same
highly-tempered metal.

"What think you of these weapons, Monsieur?" asked Blakeney, who was
carelessly leaning against the back of a chair.

Chauvelin took up one of the two swords and slowly drew it from out its
scabbard, carefully examining the brilliant, narrow steel blade as he
did so.

"A little old-fashioned in style and make, Sir Percy," he said, closely
imitating his opponent's easy demeanour, "a trifle heavier, perhaps,
than we in France have been accustomed to lately, but, nevertheless, a
beautifully tempered piece of steel."

"Of a truth there's not much the matter with the tempering, Monsieur,"
quoth Blakeney, "the blades were fashioned at Toledo just two hundred
years ago."

"Ah! here I see an inscription," said Chauvelin, holding the sword close
to his eyes, the better to see the minute letters engraved in the steel.

"The name of the original owner. I myself bought them--when I travelled
in Italy--from one of his descendants."

"Lorenzo Giovanni Cenci," said Chauvelin, spelling the Italian names
quite slowly.

"The greatest blackguard that ever trod this earth. You, no doubt,
Monsieur, know his history better than we do. Rapine, theft, murder,
nothing came amiss to Signor Lorenzo... neither the deadly drug in the
cup nor the poisoned dagger."

He had spoken lightly, carelessly, with that same tone of easy banter
which he had not forsaken throughout the evening, and the same drawly
manner which was habitual to him. But at these last words of his,
Chauvelin gave a visible start, and then abruptly replaced the
sword--which he had been examining--upon the table.

He threw a quick, suspicious glance at Blakeney, who, leaning back
against the chair and one knee resting on the cushioned seat, was
idly toying with the other blade, the exact pair to the one which the
ex-ambassador had so suddenly put down.

"Well, Monsieur," quoth Sir Percy after a slight pause, and meeting
with a swift glance of lazy irony his opponent's fixed gaze. "Are you
satisfied with the weapons? Which of the two shall be yours, and which
mine?"

"Of a truth, Sir Percy..." murmured Chauvelin, still hesitating.

"Nay, Monsieur," interrupted Blakeney with pleasant bonhomie, "I know
what you would say... of a truth, there is no choice between this pair
of perfect twins: one is as exquisite as the other.... And yet you must
take one and I the other... this or that, whichever you prefer....
You shall take it home with you to-night and practise thrusting at a
haystack or at a bobbin, as you please... The sword is yours to command
until you have used it against my unworthy person... yours until you
bring it out four days hence--on the southern ramparts of Boulogne, when
the cathedral bells chime the evening Angelus; then you shall cross
it against its faithless twin.... There, Monsieur--they are of equal
length... of equal strength and temper... a perfect pair... Yet I pray
you choose."

He took up both the swords in his hands and carefully balancing them by
the extreme tip of their steel-bound scabbards, he held them out towards
the Frenchman. Chauvelin's eyes were fixed upon him, and he from his
towering height was looking down at the little sable-clad figure before
him.

The Terrorist seemed uncertain what to do. Though he was one of
those men whom by the force of their intellect, the strength of their
enthusiasm, the power of their cruelty, had built a new anarchical
France, had overturned a throne and murdered a king, yet now, face to
face with this affected fop, this lazy and debonnair adventurer, he
hesitated--trying in vain to read what was going on behind that low,
smooth forehead or within the depth of those lazy, blue eyes.

He would have given several years of his life at this moment for one
short glimpse into the innermost brain cells of this daring mind, to see
the man start, quiver but for the fraction of a second, betray himself
by a tremor of the eyelid. What counterplan was lurking in Percy
Blakeney's head, as he offered to his opponent the two swords which had
once belonged to Lorenzo Cenci?

Did any thought of foul play, of dark and deadly poisonings linger in
the fastidious mind of this accomplished gentleman?

Surely not!

Chauvelin tried to chide himself for such fears. It seemed madness even
to think of Italian poisons, of the Cencis or the Borgias in the midst
of this brilliantly lighted English drawing-room.

But because he was above all a diplomatist, a fencer with words and with
looks, the envoy of France determined to know, to probe and to read. He
forced himself once more to careless laughter and nonchalance of manner
and schooled his lips to smile up with gentle irony at the good-humoured
face of his arch-enemy.

He tapped one of the swords with his long pointed finger.

"Is this the one you choose, sir?" asked Blakeney.

"Nay! which do you advise, Sir Percy," replied Chauvelin lightly. "Which
of those two blades think you is most like to hold after two hundred
years the poison of the Cenci?"

But Blakeney neither started nor winced. He broke into a laugh, his own
usual pleasant laugh, half shy and somewhat inane, then said in tones of
lively astonishment:

"Zounds! sir, but you are full of surprises.... Faith! I never would
have thought of that....Marvellous, I call it... demmed marvellous....
What say you, gentlemen?... Your Royal Highness, what think you?... Is
not my engaging friend here of a most original turn of mind.... Will you
have this sword or that, Monsieur?... Nay, I must insist--else we shall
weary our friends if we hesitate too long.... This one then, sir, since
you have chosen it," he continued, as Chauvelin finally took one of
the swords in his hand. "And now for a bowl of punch.... Nay, Monsieur,
'twas demmed smart what you said just now... I must insist on your
joining us in a bowl.... Such wit as yours, Monsieur, must need whetting
at times. ... I pray you repeat that same sally again..."

Then finally turning to the Prince and to his friends, he added:

"And after that bowl, gentlemen, shall we rejoin the ladies?"




Chapter XIII: Reflections



It seemed indeed as if the incident were finally closed, the chief
actors in the drama having deliberately vacated the centre of the stage.

The little crowd which had stood in a compact mass round the table,
began to break up into sundry small groups: laughter and desultory talk,
checked for a moment by that oppressive sense of unknown danger, which
had weighed on the spirits of those present, once more became general.
Blakeney's light-heartedness had put everyone into good-humour; since he
evidently did not look upon the challenge as a matter of serious moment,
why then, no one else had any cause for anxiety, and the younger men
were right glad to join in that bowl of punch which their genial host
had offered with so merry a grace.

Lacqueys appeared, throwing open the doors. From a distance the sound of
dance music once more broke upon the ear.

A few of the men only remained silent, deliberately holding aloof from
the renewed mirthfulness. Foremost amongst these was His Royal Highness,
who was looking distinctly troubled, and who had taken Sir Percy by
the arm, and was talking to him with obvious earnestness. Lord Anthony
Dewhurst and Lord Hastings were holding converse in a secluded corner of
the room, whilst Sir Andrew Ffoulkes, as being the host's most intimate
friend, felt it incumbent on him to say a few words to ex-Ambassador
Chauvelin.

The latter was desirous of effecting a retreat. Blakeney's invitation to
join in the friendly bowl of punch could not be taken seriously, and the
Terrorist wanted to be alone, in order to think out the events of the
past hour.

A lacquey waited on him, took the momentous sword from his hand, found
his hat and cloak and called his coach for him: Chauvelin having taken
formal leave of his host and acquaintances, quickly worked his way to
the staircase and hall, through the less frequented apartments.

He sincerely wished to avoid meeting Lady Blakeney face to face. Not
that the slightest twinge of remorse disturbed his mind, but he feared
some impulsive action on her part, which indirectly might interfere with
his future plans. Fortunately no one took much heed of the darkly-clad,
insignificant little figure that glided so swiftly by, obviously
determined to escape attention.

In the hall he found Demoiselle Candeille waiting for him. She, too, had
evidently been desirous of leaving Blakeney Manor as soon as possible.
He saw her to her chaise; then escorted her as far as her lodgings,
which were close by: there were still one or two things which he wished
to discuss with her, one or two final instructions which he desired to
give.

One the whole, he was satisfied with his evening's work: the young
actress had well supported him, and had played her part so far with
marvellous sang-froid and skill. Sir Percy, whether willingly or
blindly, had seemed only too ready to walk into the trap which was being
set for him.

This fact alone disturbed Chauvelin not a little, and as half an hour
or so later, having taken final leave of his ally, he sat alone in the
coach, which was conveying him back to town, the sword of Lorenzo Cenci
close to his hand, he pondered very seriously over it.

That the adventurous Scarlet Pimpernel should have guessed all along,
that sooner or later the French Revolutionary Government--whom he had
defrauded of some of its most important victims,--would desire to be
even with him, and to bring him to the scaffold, was not to be wondered
at. But that he should be so blind as to imagine that Chauvelin's
challenge was anything else but a lure to induce him to go to France,
could not possibly be supposed. So bold an adventurer, so keen an
intriguer was sure to have scented the trap immediately, and if he
appeared ready to fall into it, it was because there had already sprung
up in his resourceful mind some bold coup or subtle counterplan, with
which he hoped to gratify his own passionate love of sport, whilst once
more bringing his enemies to discomfiture and humiliation.

Undoubtedly Sir Percy Blakeney, as an accomplished gentleman of the
period, could not very well under the circumstances which had been so
carefully stage-managed and arranged by Chauvelin, refuse the latter's
challenge to fight him on the other side of the Channel. Any hesitation
on the part of the leader of that daring Scarlet Pimpernel League would
have covered him with a faint suspicion of pusillanimity, and a subtle
breath of ridicule, and in a moment the prestige of the unknown and
elusive hero would have vanished forever.

But apart from the necessity of the fight, Blakeney seemed to enter
into the spirit of the plot directed against his own life, with such
light-hearted merriment, such zest and joy, that Chauvelin could not
help but be convinced that the capture of the Scarlet Pimpernel at
Boulogne or elsewhere would not prove quite so easy a matter as he had
at first anticipated.

That same night he wrote a long and circumstantial letter to his
colleague, Citizen Robespierre, shifting thereby, as it were, some of
the responsibility of coming events from his own shoulders on to the
executive of the Committee of Public Safety.

"I guarantee to you, Citizen Robespierre," he wrote, "and to the members
of the Revolutionary Government who have entrusted me with the delicate
mission, that four days from this date at one hour after sunset, the man
who goes by the mysterious name of the Scarlet Pimpernel, will be on the
ramparts of Boulogne on the south side of the town. I have done what has
been asked of me. On that day and at that hour, I shall have brought
the enemy of the Revolution, the intriguer against the policy of the
republic, within the power of the government which he has flouted and
outraged. Now look to it, citizens all, that the fruits of my diplomacy
and of my skill be not lost to France again. The man will be there at my
bidding, 'tis for you to see that he does not escape this time."

This letter he sent by special courier which the National Convention
had placed at his disposal in case of emergency. Having sealed it and
entrusted it to the man, Chauvelin felt at peace with the world and with
himself. Although he was not so sure of success as he would have wished,
he yet could not see _how_ failure could possibly come about: and the
only regret which he felt to-night, when he finally in the early dawn
sought a few hours' troubled rest, was that that momentous fourth day
was still so very far distant.




Chapter XIV: The Ruling Passion



In the meanwhile silence had fallen over the beautiful old manorial
house. One by one the guests had departed, leaving that peaceful sense
of complete calm and isolation which follows the noisy chatter of any
great throng bent chiefly on enjoyment.

The evening had been universally acknowledged to have been brilliantly
successful. True, the much talked of French artiste had not sung the
promised ditties, but in the midst of the whirl and excitement of
dances, of the inspiring tunes of the string band, the elaborate supper
and recherche wines, no one had paid much heed to this change in the
programme of entertainments.

And everyone had agreed that never had Lady Blakeney looked more
radiantly beautiful than on this night. She seemed absolutely
indefatigable; a perfect hostess, full of charming little attentions
towards every one, although more than ordinarily absorbed by her duties
towards her many royal guests.

The dramatic incidents which had taken place in the small boudoir had
not been much bruited abroad. It was always considered bad form in
those courtly days to discuss men's quarrels before ladies, and in this
instance, those who were present when it all occurred instinctively felt
that their discretion would be appreciated in high circles, and held
their tongues accordingly.

Thus the brilliant evening was brought to a happy conclusion without a
single cloud to mar the enjoyment of the guests. Marguerite performed a
veritable miracle of fortitude, forcing her very smiles to seem natural
and gay, chatting pleasantly, even wittily, upon every known fashionable
topic of the day, laughing merrily the while her poor, aching heart was
filled with unspeakable misery.

Now, when everybody had gone, when the last of her guests had bobbed
before her the prescribed curtsey, to which she had invariably responded
with the same air of easy self-possession, now at last she felt free to
give rein to her thoughts, to indulge in the luxury of looking her own
anxiety straight in the face and to let the tension of her nerves relax.

Sir Andrew Ffoulkes had been the last to leave and Percy had strolled
out with him as far as the garden gate, for Lady Ffoulkes had left in
her chaise some time ago, and Sir Andrew meant to walk to his home, not
many yards distant from Blakeney Manor.

In spite of herself Marguerite felt her heartstrings tighten as she
thought of this young couple so lately wedded. People smiled a
little when Sir Andrew Ffoulkes' name was mentioned, some called him
effeminate, others uxorious, his fond attachment for his pretty little
wife was thought to pass the bounds of decorum. There was no doubt that
since his marriage the young man had greatly changed. His love of sport
and adventure seemed to have died out completely, yielding evidently to
the great, more overpowering love, that for his young wife.

Suzanne was nervous for her husband's safety. She had sufficient
influence over him to keep him at home, when other members of the brave
little League of The Scarlet Pimpernel followed their leader with mad
zest, on some bold adventure.

Marguerite too at first had smiled in kindly derision when Suzanne
Ffoulkes, her large eyes filled with tears, had used her wiles to keep
Sir Andrew tied to her own dainty apronstrings. But somehow, lately,
with that gentle contempt which she felt for the weaker man, there had
mingled a half-acknowledged sense of envy.

How different 'twixt her and her husband.

Percy loved her truly and with a depth of passion proportionate to his
own curious dual personality: it were sacrilege, almost, to doubt the
intensity of his love. But nevertheless she had at all times a feeling
as if he were holding himself and his emotions in check, as if his love,
as if she, Marguerite, his wife, were but secondary matters in his life;
as if her anxieties, her sorrow when he left her, her fears for his
safety were but small episodes in the great book of life which he had
planned out and conceived for himself.

Then she would hate herself for such thoughts: they seemed like doubts
of him. Did any man ever love a woman, she asked herself, as Percy loved
her? He was difficult to understand, and perhaps--oh! that was an awful
"perhaps"--perhaps there lurked somewhere in his mind a slight mistrust
of her. She had betrayed him once! unwittingly 'tis true! did he fear
she might do so again?

And to-night after her guests had gone she threw open the great windows
that gave on the beautiful terrace, with its marble steps leading down
to the cool river beyond. Everything now seemed so peaceful and still;
the scent of the heliotrope made the midnight air swoon with its
intoxicating fragrance: the rhythmic murmur of the waters came gently
echoing from below, and from far away there came the melancholy cry of a
night-bird on the prowl.

That cry made Marguerite shudder: her thoughts flew back to the
episodes of this night and to Chauvelin, the dark bird of prey with his
mysterious death-dealing plans, his subtle intrigues which all tended
towards the destruction of one man: his enemy, the husband whom
Marguerite loved.

Oh! how she hated these wild adventures which took Percy away from her
side. Is not a woman who loves--be it husband or child--the most truly
selfish, the most cruelly callous creature in the world, there, where
the safety and the well-being of the loved one is in direct conflict
with the safety and well-being of others.

She would right gladly have closed her eyes to every horror perpetrated
in France, she would not have known what went on in Paris, she wanted
her husband! And yet month after month, with but short intervals, she
saw him risk that precious life of his, which was the very essence of
her own soul, for others! for others! always for others!

And she! she! Marguerite, his wife, was powerless to hold him back!
powerless to keep him beside her, when that mad fit of passion seized
him to go on one of those wild quests, wherefrom she always feared he
could not return alive: and this, although she might use every noble
artifice, every tender wile of which a loving and beautiful wife is
capable.

At times like those her own proud heart was filled with hatred and with
envy towards everything that took him away from her: and to-night all
these passionate feelings which she felt were quite unworthy of her and
of him seemed to surge within her soul more tumultuously than ever. She
was longing to throw herself in his arms, to pour out into his loving
ear all that she suffered, in fear and anxiety, and to make one more
appeal to his tenderness and to that passion which had so often made him
forget the world at her feet.

And so instinctively she walked along the terrace towards that more
secluded part of the garden just above the river bank, where she had
so oft wandered hand in hand with him, in the honeymoon of their
love. There great clumps of old-fashioned cabbage roses grew in untidy
splendour, and belated lilies sent intoxicating odours into the air,
whilst the heavy masses of Egyptian and Michaelmas daisies looked like
ghostly constellations in the gloom.

She thought Percy must soon be coming this way. Though it was so late,
she knew that he would not go to bed. After the events of the night, his
ruling passion, strong in death, would be holding him in its thrall.

She too felt wide awake and unconscious of fatigue; when she reached
the secluded path beside the river, she peered eagerly up and down, and
listened for a sound.

Presently it seemed to her that above the gentle clapper of the waters
she could hear a rustle and the scrunching of the fine gravel under
carefully measured footsteps. She waited a while. The footsteps seemed
to draw nearer, and soon, although the starlit night was very dark, she
perceived a cloaked and hooded figure approaching cautiously toward her.

"Who goes there?" she called suddenly.

The figure paused: then came rapidly forward, and a voice said timidly:

"Ah! Lady Blakeney!"

"Who are you?" asked Marguerite peremptorily.

"It is I... Desiree Candeille," replied the midnight prowler.

"Demoiselle Candeille!" ejaculated Marguerite, wholly taken by surprise.
"What are you doing here? alone? and at this hour?"

"Sh-sh-sh..." whispered Candeille eagerly, as she approached quite close
to Marguerite and drew her hood still lower over her eyes. "I am all
alone ... I wanted to see someone--you if possible, Lady Blakeney... for
I could not rest... I wanted to know what had happened."

"What had happened? When? I don't understand."

"What happened between Citizen Chauvelin and your husband?" asked
Candeille.

"What is that to you?" replied Marguerite haughtily.

"I pray you do not misunderstand me..." pleaded Candeille eagerly. "I
know my presence in your house... the quarrel which I provoked must have
filled your heart with hatred and suspicion towards me... but oh! how
can I persuade you?... I acted unwillingly... will you not believe
me?... I was that man's tool... and... Oh God!" she added with sudden,
wild vehemence, "if only you could know what tyranny that accursed
government of France exercises over poor helpless women or men who
happen to have fallen within reach of its relentless clutches..."

Her voice broke down in a sob. Marguerite hardly knew what to say or
think. She had always mistrusted this woman with her theatrical ways and
stagy airs, from the very first moment she saw her in the tent on the
green: and she did not wish to run counter against her instinct, in
anything pertaining to the present crisis. And yet in spite of her
mistrust the actress' vehement words found an echo in the depths of her
own heart. How well she knew that tyranny of which Candeille spoke with
such bitterness! Had she not suffered from it, endured terrible sorrow
and humiliation, when under the ban of that same appalling tyranny
she had betrayed the identity--then unknown to her--of the Scarlet
Pimpernel?

Therefore when Candeille paused after those last excited words, she said
with more gentleness than she had shown hitherto, though still quite
coldly:

"But you have not yet told me why you came back here to-night? If
Citizen Chauvelin was your taskmaster, then you must know all that has
occurred."

"I had a vague hope that I might see you."

"For what purpose?"

"To warn you if I could."

"I need no warning."

"Or are too proud to take one.... Do you know, Lady Blakeney, that
Citizen Chauvelin has a personal hatred against your husband?"

"How do you know that?" asked Marguerite, with her suspicions once more
on the qui-vive. She could not understand Candeille's attitude. This
midnight visit, the vehemence of her language, the strange mixture of
knowledge and ignorance which she displayed. What did this woman know of
Chauvelin's secret plans? Was she his open ally, or his helpless tool?
And was she even now playing a part taught her or commanded her by that
prince of intriguers?

Candeille, however, seemed quite unaware of the spirit of antagonism
and mistrust which Marguerite took but little pains now to disguise. She
clasped her hands together, and her voice shook with the earnestness of
her entreaty.

"Oh!" she said eagerly, "have I not seen that look of hatred in
Chauvelin's cruel eyes?... He hates your husband, I tell you.... Why I
know not... but he hates him.. and means that great harm shall come to
Sir Percy through this absurd duel.... Oh! Lady Blakeney, do not let him
go... I entreat you, do not let him go!"

But Marguerite proudly drew back a step or two, away from the reach of
those hands, stretched out towards her in such vehement appeal.

"You are overwrought, Mademoiselle," she said coldly. "Believe me, I
have no need either of your entreaties or of your warning.... I should
like you to think that I have no wish to be ungrateful... that I
appreciate any kind thought you may have harboured for me in your
mind.... But beyond that... please forgive me if I say it somewhat
crudely--I do not feel that the matter concerns you in the least.... The
hour is late," she added more gently, as if desiring to attenuate the
harshness of her last words. "Shall I send my maid to escort you home?
She is devoted and discreet..."

"Nay!" retorted the other in tones of quiet sadness, "there is no need
of discretion... I am not ashamed of my visit to you to-night.... You
are very proud, and for your sake I will pray to God that sorrow and
humiliation may not come to you, as I feared.... We are never likely
to meet again, Lady Blakeney... you will not wish it, and I shall have
passed out of your life as swiftly as I had entered into it.... But
there was another thought lurking in my mind when I came to-night....
In case Sir Percy goes to France... the duel is to take place in or near
Boulogne... this much I do know... would you not wish to go with him?"

"Truly, Mademoiselle, I must repeat to you..."

"That 'tis no concern of mine... I know... I own that.... But, you see
when I came back here to-night in the silence and the darkness--I had
not guessed that you would be so proud... I thought that I, a woman,
would know how to touch your womanly heart.... I was clumsy, I
suppose.... I made so sure that you would wish to go with your husband,
in case... in case he insisted on running his head into the noose, which
I feel sure Chauvelin has prepared for him.... I myself start for France
shortly. Citizen Chauvelin has provided me with the necessary passport
for myself and my maid, who was to have accompanied me.... Then, just
now, when I was all alone... and thought over all the mischief which
that fiend had forced me to do for him, it seemed to me that perhaps..."

She broke off abruptly, and tried to read the other woman's face in
the gloom. But Marguerite, who was taller than the Frenchwoman, was
standing, very stiff and erect, giving the young actress neither
discouragement nor confidence. She did not interrupt Candeille's long
and voluble explanation: vaguely she wondered what it was all about,
and even now when the Frenchwoman paused, Marguerite said nothing, but
watched her quietly as she took a folded paper from the capacious pocked
of her cloak and then held it out with a look of timidity towards Lady
Blakeney.

"My maid need not come with me," said Desiree Candeille humbly. "I would
far rather travel alone... this is her passport and... Oh! you need not
take it out of my hand," she added in tones of bitter self-deprecation,
as Marguerite made no sign of taking the paper from her. "See! I will
leave it here among the roses!... You mistrust me now... it is only
natural... presently, perhaps, calmer reflection will come... you will
see that my purpose now is selfless... that I only wish to serve you and
him."

She stooped and placed the folded paper in the midst of a great clump of
centifolium roses, and then without another word she turned and went her
way. For a few moments, whilst Marguerite still stood there, puzzled and
vaguely moved, she could hear the gentle frou-frou of the other woman's
skirts against the soft sand of the path, and then a long-drawn sigh
that sounded like a sob.

Then all was still again. The gentle midnight breeze caressed the tops
of the ancient oaks and elms behind her, drawing murmurs from their
dying leaves like unto the whisperings of ghosts.

Marguerite shuddered with a slight sense of cold. Before her, amongst
the dark clump of leaves and the roses, invisible in the gloom, there
fluttered with a curious, melancholy flapping, the folded paper placed
there by Candeille. She watched it for awhile, as, disturbed by the
wind, it seemed ready to take its flight towards the river. Anon it fell
to the ground, and Marguerite with sudden overpowering impulse, stooped
and picked it up. Then clutching it nervously in her hand, she walked
rapidly back towards the house.




Chapter XV: Farewell



As she neared the terrace, she became conscious of several forms moving
about at the foot of the steps, some few feet below where she was
standing. Soon she saw the glimmer of lanthorns, heard whispering
voices, and the lapping of the water against the side of a boat.

Anon a figure, laden with cloaks and sundry packages, passed down the
steps close beside her. Even in the darkness Marguerite recognized
Benyon, her husband's confidential valet. Without a moment's hesitation,
she flew along the terrace towards the wing of the house occupied by Sir
Percy. She had not gone far before she discerned his tall figure walking
leisurely along the path which here skirted part of the house.

He had on his large caped coat, which was thrown open in front,
displaying a grey travelling suit of fine cloth; his hands were as
usual buried in the pockets of his breeches, and on his head he wore the
folding chapeau-bras which he habitually affected.

Before she had time to think, or to realize that he was going, before
she could utter one single word, she was in his arms, clinging to him
with passionate intensity, trying in the gloom to catch every expression
of his eyes, every quiver of the face now bent down so close to her.

"Percy, you cannot go... you cannot go!..." she pleaded.

She had felt his strong arms closing round her, his lips seeking hers,
her eyes, her hair, her clinging hands, which dragged at his shoulders
in a wild agony of despair.

"If you really loved me, Percy," she murmured, "you would not go, you
would not go..."

He would not trust himself to speak; it well-nigh seemed as if his
sinews cracked with the violent effort at self-control. Oh! how she
loved him, when she felt in him the passionate lover, the wild, untamed
creature that he was at heart, on whom the frigid courtliness of manner
sat but as a thin veneer. This was his own real personality, and there
was little now of the elegant and accomplished gentleman of fashion,
schooled to hold every emotion in check, to hide every thought, every
desire save that for amusement or for display.

She--feeling her power and his weakness now--gave herself wholly to his
embrace, not grudging one single, passionate caress, yielding her lips
to him, the while she murmured:

"You cannot go... you cannot... why should you go?... It is madness to
leave me... I cannot let you go..."

Her arms clung tenderly round him, her voice was warm and faintly shaken
with suppressed tears, and as he wildly murmured: "Don't! for pity's
sake!" she almost felt that her love would be triumphant.

"For pity's sake, I'll go on pleading, Percy!" she whispered. "Oh! my
love, my dear! do not leave me!... we have scarce had time to savour our
happiness.. we have such arrears of joy to make up.... Do not go,
Percy... there's so much I want to say to you.... Nay! you shall not!
you shall not!" she added with sudden vehemence. "Look me straight in
the eyes, my dear, and tell me if you can leave now?"

He did not reply, but, almost roughly, he placed his hand over her
tear-dimmed eyes, which were turned up to his, in an agony of tender
appeal. Thus he blindfolded her with that wild caress. She should
not see--no, not even she!--that for the space of a few seconds stern
manhood was well-nigh vanquished by the magic of her love.

All that was most human in him, all that was weak in this strong and
untamed nature, cried aloud for peace and luxury and idleness: for long
summer afternoons spent in lazy content, for the companionship of horses
and dogs and of flowers, with no thought or cares save those for the
next evening's gavotte, no graver occupation save that of sitting at HER
feet.

And during these few seconds, whilst his hand lay across her eyes, the
lazy, idle fop of fashionable London was fighting a hand-to-hand fight
with the bold leader of a band of adventurers: and his own passionate
love for his wife ranged itself with fervent intensity on the side of
his weaker self. Forgotten were the horrors of the guillotine, the
calls of the innocent, the appeal of the helpless; forgotten the daring
adventures, the excitements, the hair's-breadth escapes; for those few
seconds, heavenly in themselves, he only remembered her--his wife--her
beauty and her tender appeal to him.

She would have pleaded again, for she felt that she was winning in this
fight: her instinct--that unerring instinct of the woman who loves and
feels herself beloved--told her that for the space of an infinitesimal
fraction of time, his iron will was inclined to bend; but he checked her
pleading with a kiss.

Then there came a change.

Like a gigantic wave carried inwards by the tide, his turbulent emotion
seemed suddenly to shatter itself against a rock of self-control. Was
it a call from the boatmen below? a distant scrunching of feet upon the
gravel?--who knows, perhaps only a sigh in the midnight air, a ghostly
summons from the land of dreams that recalled him to himself.

Even as Marguerite was still clinging to him, with the ardent fervour of
her own passion, she felt the rigid tension of his arms relax, the power
of his embrace weaken, the wild love-light become dim in his eyes.

He kissed her fondly, tenderly, and with infinite gentleness smoothed
away the little damp curls from her brow. There was a wistfulness now in
his caress, and in his kiss there was the finality of a long farewell.

"'Tis time I went," he said, "or we shall miss the tide."

These were the first coherent words he had spoken since first she
had met him here in this lonely part of the garden, and his voice
was perfectly steady, conventional and cold. An icy pang shot through
Marguerite's heart. It was as if she had been abruptly wakened from a
beautiful dream.

"You are not going, Percy!" she murmured, and her own voice now sounded
hollow and forced. "Oh! if you loved me you would not go!"

"If I love you!"

Nay! in this at least there was no dream! no coldness in his voice when
he repeated those words with such a sigh of tenderness, such a world of
longing, that the bitterness of her great pain vanished, giving place to
tears. He took her hand in his. The passion was momentarily conquered,
forced within his innermost soul, by his own alter ego, that second
personality in him, the cold-blooded and coolly-calculating adventurer
who juggled with his life and tossed it recklessly upon the sea of
chance 'twixt a doggerel and a smile. But the tender love lingered on,
fighting the enemy a while longer, the wistful desire was there for her
kiss, the tired longing for the exquisite repose of her embrace.

He took her hand in his, and bent his lips to it, and with the warmth of
his kiss upon it, she felt a moisture like a tear.

"I must go, dear," he said, after a little while.

"Why? Why?" she repeated obstinately. "Am I nothing then? Is my life
of no account? My sorrows? My fears? My misery? Oh!" she added with
vehement bitterness, "why should it always be others? What are others
to you and to me, Percy?... Are we not happy here?... Have you not
fulfilled to its uttermost that self-imposed duty to people who can be
nothing to us?... Is not your life ten thousand times more precious to
me than the lives of ten thousand others?"

Even through the darkness, and because his face was so close to hers,
she could see a quaint little smile playing round the corners of his
mouth.

"Nay, m'dear," he said gently, "'tis not ten thousand lives that call to
me to-day... only one at best.... Don't you hate to think of that poor
little old cure sitting in the midst of his ruined pride and hopes:
the jewels so confidently entrusted to his care, stolen from him, he
waiting, perhaps, in his little presbytery for the day when those brutes
will march him to prison and to death.... Nay! I think a little sea
voyage and English country air would suit the Abbe Foucquet, m'dear, and
I only mean to ask him to cross the Channel with me!..."

"Percy!" she pleaded.

"Oh! I know! I know!" he rejoined with that short deprecatory sigh of
his, which seemed always to close any discussion between them on that
point, "you are thinking of that absurd duel..." He laughed lightly,
good-humouredly, and his eyes gleamed with merriment.

"La, m'dear!" he said gaily, "will you not reflect a moment? Could
I refuse the challenge before His Royal Highness and the ladies? I
couldn't. ... Faith! that was it.... Just a case of couldn't.... Fate
did it all... the quarrel... my interference... the challenge.... HE had
planned it all of course.... Let us own that he is a brave man, seeing
that he and I are not even yet, for that beating he gave me on the
Calais cliffs."

"Yes! he has planned it all," she retorted vehemently. "The quarrel
to-night, your journey to France, your meeting with him face to face at
a given hour and place where he can most readily, most easily close the
death-trap upon you."

This time he broke into a laugh. A good, hearty laugh, full of the joy
of living, of the madness and intoxication of a bold adventure, a laugh
that had not one particle of anxiety or of tremor in it.

"Nay! m'dear!" he said, "but your ladyship is astonishing.... Close a
death-trap upon your humble servant?... Nay! the governing citizens
of France will have to be very active and mighty wide-awake ere they
succeed in stealing a march on me.... Zounds! but we'll give them an
exciting chase this time.... Nay! little woman, do not fear!" he said
with sudden infinite gentleness, "those demmed murderers have not got me
yet."

Oh! how often she had fought with him thus: with him, the adventurer,
the part of his dual nature that was her bitter enemy, and which took
him, the lover, away from her side. She knew so well the finality of
it all, the amazing hold which that unconquerable desire for these mad
adventures had upon him. Impulsive, ardent as she was, Marguerite
felt in her very soul an overwhelming fury against herself for her
own weakness, her own powerlessness in the face of that which forever
threatened to ruin her life and her happiness.

Yes! and his also! for he loved her! he loved her! he loved her! the
thought went on hammering in her mind, for she knew of its great truth!
He loved her and went away! And she, poor, puny weakling, was unable to
hold him back; the tendrils which fastened his soul to hers were not
so tenacious as those which made him cling to suffering humanity, over
there in France, where men and women were in fear of death and torture,
and looked upon the elusive and mysterious Scarlet Pimpernel as a
heaven-born hero sent to save them from their doom. To them at these
times his very heartstrings seemed to turn with unconquerable force, and
when, with all the ardour of her own passion, she tried to play upon
the cords of his love for her, he could not respond, for they--the
strangers--had the stronger claim.

And yet through it all she knew that this love of humanity, this mad
desire to serve and to help, in no way detracted from his love for her.
Nay, it intensified it, made it purer and better, adding to the joy of
perfect intercourse the poetic and subtle fragrance of ever-recurring
pain.

But now at last she felt weary of the fight: her heart was aching,
bruised and sore. An infinite fatigue seemed to weigh like lead upon
her very soul. This seemed so different to any other parting, that had
perforce been during the past year. The presence of Chauvelin in her
house, the obvious planning of this departure for France, had filled
her with a foreboding, nay, almost a certitude of a gigantic and deadly
cataclysm.

Her senses began to reel; she seemed not to see anything very
distinctly: even the loved form took on a strange and ghostlike shape.
He now looked preternaturally tall, and there was a mist between her and
him.

She thought that he spoke to her again, but she was not quite sure,
for his voice sounded like some weird and mysterious echo. A bosquet
of climbing heliotrope close by threw a fragrance into the evening air,
which turned her giddy with its overpowering sweetness.

She closed her eyes, for she felt as if she must die, if she held them
open any longer; and as she closed them it seemed to her as if he folded
her in one last, long, heavenly embrace.

He felt her graceful figure swaying in his arms like a tall and slender
lily bending to the wind. He saw that she was but half-conscious, and
thanked heaven for this kindly solace to his heart-breaking farewell.

There was a sloping, mossy bank close by, there where the marble terrace
yielded to the encroaching shrubbery: a tangle of pale pink monthly
roses made a bower overhead. She was just sufficiently conscious to
enable him to lead her to this soft green couch. There he laid her
amongst the roses, kissed the dear, tired eyes, her hands, her lips, her
tiny feet, and went.




Chapter XVI: The Passport



The rhythmic clapper of oars roused Marguerite from this trance-like
swoon.

In a moment she was on her feet, all her fatigue gone, her numbness
of soul and body vanished as in a flash. She was fully conscious now!
conscious that he had gone! that according to every probability under
heaven and every machination concocted in hell, he would never return
from France alive, and that she had failed to hear the last words which
he spoke to her, had failed to glean his last look or to savour his
final kiss.

Though the night was starlit and balmy it was singularly dark, and
vainly did Marguerite strain her eyes to catch sight of that boat which
was bearing him away so swiftly now: she strained her ears, vaguely
hoping to catch one last, lingering echo of his voice. But all was
silence, save that monotonous clapper, which seemed to beat against her
heart like a rhythmic knell of death.

She could hear the oars distinctly: there were six or eight, she
thought: certainly no fewer. Eight oarsmen probably, which meant the
larger boat, and undoubtedly the longer journey... not to London only
with a view to posting to Dover, but to Tilbury Fort, where the "Day
Dream" would be in readiness to start with a favourable tide.

Thought was returning to her, slowly and coherently: the pain of the
last farewell was still there, bruising her very senses with its dull
and heavy weight, but it had become numb and dead, leaving her,
herself, her heart and soul, stunned and apathetic, whilst her brain was
gradually resuming its activity.

And the more she thought it over, the more certain she grew that her
husband was going as far as Tilbury by river and would embark on the
"Day Dream" there. Of course he would go to Boulogne at once. The duel
was to take place there, Candeille had told her that... adding that she
thought she, Marguerite, would wish to go with him.

To go with him!

Heavens above! was not that the only real, tangible thought in that
whirling chaos which was raging in her mind?

To go with him! Surely there must be some means of reaching him yet!
Fate, Nature, God Himself would never permit so monstrous a thing as
this: that she should be parted from her husband, now when his life was
not only in danger, but forfeited already... lost... a precious thing
all but gone from this world.

Percy was going to Boulogne... she must go too. By posting at once to
Dover, she could get the tidal boat on the morrow and reach the French
coast quite as soon as the "Day Dream." Once at Boulogne, she would have
no difficulty in finding her husband, of that she felt sure. She would
have but to dog Chauvelin's footsteps, find out something of his plans,
of the orders he gave to troops or to spies,--oh! she would find him! of
that she was never for a moment in doubt!

How well she remembered her journey to Calais just a year ago, in
company with Sir Andrew Ffoulkes! Chance had favoured her then, had
enabled her to be of service to her husband if only by distracting
Chauvelin's attention for awhile to herself. Heaven knows! she had but
little hope of being of use to him now: an aching sense was in her that
fate had at last been too strong! that the daring adventurer had staked
once too often, had cast the die and had lost.

In the bosom of her dress she felt the sharp edge of the paper left for
her by Desiree Candeille among the roses in the park. She had picked it
up almost mechanically then, and tucked it away, hardly heeding what she
was doing. Whatever the motive of the French actress had been in placing
the passport at her disposal, Marguerite blessed her in her heart for
it. To the woman she had mistrusted, she would owe the last supreme
happiness of her life.

Her resolution never once wavered. Percy would not take her with him:
that was understandable. She could neither expect it nor think it. But
she, on the other hand, could not stay in England, at Blakeney Manor,
whilst any day, any hour, the death-trap set by Chauvelin for the
Scarlet Pimpernel might be closing upon the man whom she worshipped. She
would go mad if she stayed. As there could be no chance of escape for
Percy now, as he had agreed to meet his deadly enemy face to face at a
given place, and a given hour, she could not be a hindrance to him: and
she knew enough subterfuge, enough machinations and disguises by now, to
escape Chauvelin's observation, unless... unless Percy wanted her, and
then she would be there.

No! she could not be a hindrance. She had a passport in her pocket,
everything en regle, nobody could harm her, and she could come and go as
she pleased. There were plenty of swift horses in the stables, plenty of
devoted servants to do her bidding quickly and discreetly: moreover, at
moments like these, conventionalities and the possible conjectures
and surmises of others became of infinitesimally small importance.
The household of Blakeney Manor were accustomed to the master's sudden
journeys and absences of several days, presumably on some shooting
or other sporting expeditions, with no one in attendance on him, save
Benyon, his favourite valet. These passed without any comments now! Bah!
let everyone marvel for once at her ladyship's sudden desire to go to
Dover, and let it all be a nine days' wonder; she certainly did not
care. Skirting the house, she reached the stables beyond. One or two
men were astir. To these she gave the necessary orders for her coach and
four, then she found her way back to the house.

Walking along the corridor, she went past the room occupied by Juliette
de Marny. For a moment she hesitated, then she turned and knocked at the
door.

Juliette was not yet in bed, for she went to the door herself and opened
it. Obviously she had been quite unable to rest, her hair was falling
loosely over her shoulders, and there was a look of grave anxiety on her
young face.

"Juliette," said Marguerite in a hurried whisper, the moment she had
closed the door behind her and she and the young girl were alone, "I am
going to France to be near my husband. He has gone to meet that fiend in
a duel which is nothing but a trap, set to capture him, and lead him
to his death. I want you to be of help to me, here in my house, in my
absence."

"I would give my life for you, Lady Blakeney," said Juliette simply, "is
it not HIS since he saved it?"

"It is only a little presence of mind, a little coolness and patience,
which I will ask of you, dear," said Marguerite. "You of course know
who your rescuer was, therefore you will understand my fears. Until
to-night, I had vague doubts as to how much Chauvelin really knew,
but now these doubts have naturally vanished. He and the French
Revolutionary Government know that the Scarlet Pimpernel and Percy
Blakeney are one and the same. The whole scene to-night was prearranged:
you and I and all the spectators, and that woman Candeille--we were all
puppets piping to that devil's tune. The duel, too, was prearranged!...
that woman wearing your mother's jewels!... Had you not provoked her, a
quarrel between her and me, or one of my guests would have been forced
somehow... I wanted to tell you this, lest you should fret, and think
that you were in any way responsible for what has happened.... You were
not.... He had arranged it all.... You were only the tool... just as I
was. ... You must understand and believe that.... Percy would hate
to think that you felt yourself to blame... you are not that, in any
way.... The challenge was bound to come.... Chauvelin had arranged that
it should come, and if you had failed him as a tool, he soon would have
found another! Do you believe that?"

"I believe that you are an angel of goodness, Lady Blakeney," replied
Juliette, struggling with her tears, "and that you are the only woman in
the world worthy to be his wife."

"But," insisted Marguerite firmly, as the young girl took her cold hand
in her own, and gently fondling it, covered it with grateful kisses,
"but if... if anything happens... anon... you will believe firmly that
you were in no way responsible?... that you were innocent.. and merely a
blind tool?..."

"God bless you for that!"

"You will believe it?"

"I will."

"And now for my request," rejoined Lady Blakeney in a more quiet, more
matter-of-fact tone of voice. "You must represent me, here, when I am
gone: explain as casually and as naturally as you can, that I have
gone to join my husband on his yacht for a few days. Lucie, my maid, is
devoted and a tower of secrecy; she will stand between you and the rest
of the household, in concocting some plausible story. To every friend
who calls, to anyone of our world whom you may meet, you must tell the
same tale, and if you note an air of incredulity in anyone, if you hear
whispers of there being some mystery, well! let the world wag its busy
tongue--I care less than naught: it will soon tire of me and my doings,
and having torn my reputation to shreds will quickly leave me in peace.
But to Sir Andrew Ffoulkes," she added earnestly, "tell the whole truth
from me. He will understand and do as he thinks right."

"I will do all you ask, Lady Blakeney, and am proud to think that I
shall be serving you, even in so humble and easy a capacity. When do you
start?"

"At once. Good-bye, Juliette."

She bent down to the young girl and kissed her tenderly on the forehead,
then she glided out of the room as rapidly as she had come. Juliette, of
course, did not try to detain her, or to force her help of companionship
on her when obviously she would wish to be alone.

Marguerite quickly reached her room. Her maid Lucie was already waiting
for her. Devoted and silent as she was, one glance at her mistress' face
told her that trouble--grave and imminent--had reached Blakeney Manor.

Marguerite, whilst Lucie undressed her, took up the passport and
carefully perused the personal description of one, Celine Dumont, maid
to Citizeness Desiree Candeille, which was given therein: tall, blue
eyes, light hair, age about twenty-five. It all might have been vaguely
meant for her. She had a dark cloth gown, and long black cloak with hood
to come well over the head. These she now donned, with some thick shoes,
and a dark-coloured handkerchief tied over her head under the hood, so
as to hide the golden glory of her hair.

She was quite calm and in no haste. She made Lucie pack a small hand
valise with some necessaries for the journey, and provided herself
plentifully with money--French and English notes--which she tucked well
away inside her dress.

Then she bade her maid, who was struggling with her tears, a kindly
farewell, and quickly went down to her coach.




Chapter XVII: Boulogne



During the journey Marguerite had not much leisure to think. The
discomforts and petty miseries incidental on cheap travelling had
the very welcome effect of making her forget, for the time being, the
soul-rendering crisis through which she was now passing.

For, of necessity, she had to travel at the cheap rate, among the crowd
of poorer passengers who were herded aft the packet boat, leaning up
against one another, sitting on bundles and packages of all kinds; that
part of the deck, reeking with the smell of tar and sea-water, damp,
squally and stuffy, was an abomination of hideous discomfort to
the dainty, fastidious lady of fashion, yet she almost welcomed the
intolerable propinquity, the cold douches of salt water, which every now
and then wetted her through and through, for it was the consequent
sense of physical wretchedness that helped her to forget the intolerable
anguish of her mind.

And among these poorer travellers she felt secure from observation. No
one took much notice of her. She looked just like one of the herd, and
in the huddled-up little figure, in the dark bedraggled clothes, no
one would for a moment have recognized the dazzling personality of Lady
Blakeney.

Drawing her hood well over her head, she sat in a secluded corner of the
deck, upon the little black valise which contained the few belongings
she had brought with her. Her cloak and dress, now mud-stained and dank
with splashings of salt-water, attracted no one's attention. There was
a keen northeasterly breeze, cold and penetrating, but favourable to a
rapid crossing. Marguerite, who had gone through several hours of
weary travelling by coach, before she had embarked at Dover in the late
afternoon, was unspeakably tired. She had watched the golden sunset
out at sea until her eyes were burning with pain, and as the dazzling
crimson and orange and purple gave place to the soft grey tones of
evening, she descried the round cupola of the church of Our Lady of
Boulogne against the dull background of the sky.

After that her mind became a blank. A sort of torpor fell over her
sense: she was wakeful and yet half-asleep, unconscious of everything
around her, seeing nothing but the distant massive towers of old
Boulogne churches gradually detaching themselves one by one from out the
fast gathering gloom.

The town seemed like a dream city, a creation of some morbid
imagination, presented to her mind's eye as the city of sorrow and
death.

When the boat finally scraped her sides along the rough wooden jetty,
Marguerite felt as if she were forcibly awakened. She was numb and stiff
and thought she must have fallen asleep during the last half hour of the
journey. Everything round her was dark. The sky was overcast, and the
night seemed unusually sombre. Figures were moving all around her, there
was noise and confusion of voices, and a general pushing and shouting
which seemed strangely weird in this gloom. Here among the poorer
passengers, there had not been thought any necessity for a light, one
solitary lantern fixed to a mast only enhanced the intense blackness of
everything around. Now and then a face would come within range of this
meagre streak of yellow light, looking strangely distorted, with
great, elongated shadows across the brow and chin, a grotesque, ghostly
apparition which quickly vanished again, scurrying off like some
frightened gnome, giving place other forms, other figures all equally
grotesque and equally weird.

Marguerite watched them all half stupidly and motionlessly for awhile.
She did not quite know what she ought to do, and did not like to ask any
questions: she was dazed and the darkness blinded her. Then gradually
things began to detach themselves more clearly. On looking straight
before her, she began to discern the landing place, the little wooden
bridge across which the passengers walked one by one from the boat onto
the jetty. The first-class passengers were evidently all alighting now:
the crowd of which Marguerite formed a unit, had been pushed back in a
more compact herd, out of the way for the moment, so that their betters
might get along more comfortably.

Beyond the landing stage a little booth had been erected, a kind of
tent, open in front and lighted up within by a couple of lanthorns.
Under this tent there was a table, behind which sat a man dressed in
some sort of official looking clothes, and wearing the tricolour scarf
across his chest.

All the passengers from the boat had apparently to file past this tent.
Marguerite could see them now quite distinctly, the profiles of the
various faces, as they paused for a moment in front of the table, being
brilliantly illuminated by one of the lanterns. Two sentinels wearing
the uniform of the National Guard stood each side of the table. The
passengers one by one took out their passport as they went by, handed
it to the man in the official dress, who examined it carefully, very
lengthily, then signed it and returned the paper to its owner: but at
times, he appeared doubtful, folded the passport and put it down in
front of him: the passenger would protest; Marguerite could not hear
what was said, but she could see that some argument was attempted,
quickly dismissed by a peremptory order from the official. The doubtful
passport was obviously put on one side for further examination, and the
unfortunate owner thereof detained, until he or she had been able
to give more satisfactory references to the representatives of the
Committee of Public Safety, stationed at Boulogne.

This process of examination necessarily took a long time. Marguerite
was getting horribly tired, her feet ached and she scarcely could hold
herself upright: yet she watched all these people mechanically, making
absurd little guesses in her weary mind as to whose passport would find
favour in the eyes of the official, and whose would be found suspect and
inadequate.

Suspect! a terrible word these times! since Merlin's terrible law
decreed now that every man, woman or child, who was suspected by the
Republic of being a traitor was a traitor in fact.

How sorry she felt for those whose passports were detained: who tried
to argue--so needlessly!--and who were finally led off by a soldier,
who had stepped out from somewhere in the dark, and had to await further
examination, probably imprisonment and often death.

As to herself, she felt quite safe: the passport given to her by
Chauvelin's own accomplice was sure to be quite en regle.

Then suddenly her heart seemed to give a sudden leap and then to stop in
its beating for a second or two. In one of the passengers, a man who
was just passing in front of the tent, she had recognized the form and
profile of Chauvelin.

He had no passport to show, but evidently the official knew who he
was, for he stood up and saluted, and listened deferentially whilst
the ex-ambassador apparently gave him a few instructions. It seemed to
Marguerite that these instructions related to two women who were close
behind Chauvelin at the time, and who presently seemed to file past
without going through the usual formalities of showing their passports.
But of this she could not be quite sure. The women were closely hooded
and veiled and her own attention had been completely absorbed by this
sudden appearance of her deadly enemy.

Yet what more natural than that Chauvelin should be here now? His object
accomplished, he had no doubt posted to Dover, just as she had done.
There was no difficulty in that, and a man of his type and importance
would always have unlimited means and money at his command to accomplish
any journey he might desire to undertake.

There was nothing strange or even unexpected in the man's presence here;
and yet somehow it had made the whole, awful reality more tangible, more
wholly unforgettable. Marguerite remembered his abject words to her,
when first she had seen him at the Richmond fete: he said that he
had fallen into disgrace, that, having failed in his service to the
Republic, he had been relegated to a subordinate position, pushed aside
with contumely to make room for better, abler men.

Well! all that was a lie, of course, a cunning method of gaining access
into her house; of that she had already been convinced, when Candeille
provoked the esclandre which led to the challenge.

That on French soil he seemed in anything but a subsidiary position,
that he appeared to rule rather than to obey, could in no way appear to
Marguerite in the nature of surprise.

As the actress had been a willing tool in the cunning hands of
Chauvelin, so were probably all these people around her. Where others
cringed in the face of officialism, the ex-ambassador had stepped forth
as a master: he had shown a badge, spoken a word mayhap, and the man in
the tent who had made other people tremble, stood up deferentially and
obeyed all commands.

It was all very simple and very obvious: but Marguerite's mind had been
asleep, and it was the sight of the sable-clad little figure which had
roused it from its happy torpor.

In a moment now her brain was active and alert, and presently it seemed
to her as if another figure--taller than those around--had crossed the
barrier immediately in the wake of Chauvelin. Then she chided herself
for her fancies!

It could not be her husband. Not yet! He had gone by water, and would
scarce be in Boulogne before the morning!

Ah! now at last came the turn of the second-class passengers! There was
a general bousculade and the human bundle began to move. Marguerite lost
sight of the tent and its awe-inspiring appurtenances: she was a mere
unit again in this herd on the move. She too progressed along slowly,
one step at a time; it was wearisome and she was deadly tired. She was
beginning to form plans now that she had arrived in France. All along
she had made up her mind that she would begin by seeking out the Abbe
Foucquet, for he would prove a link 'twixt her husband and herself. She
knew that Percy would communicate with the abbe; had he not told
her that the rescue of the devoted old man from the clutches of the
Terrorists would be one of the chief objects of his journey? It had
never occurred to her what she would do if she found the Abbe Foucquet
gone from Boulogne.

"He! la mere! your passport!"

The rough words roused her from her meditations. She had moved forward,
quite mechanically, her mind elsewhere, her thoughts not following the
aim of her feet. Thus she must have crossed the bridge along with some
of the crowd, must have landed on the jetty, and reached the front of
the tent, without really knowing what she was doing.

Ah yes! her passport! She had quite forgotten that! But she had it
by her, quite in order, given to her in a fit of tardy remorse by
Demoiselle Candeille, the intimate friend of one of the most influential
members of the Revolutionary Government of France.

She took the passport from the bosom of her dress and handed it to the
man in the official dress.

"Your name?" he asked peremptorily.

"Celine Dumont," she replied unhesitatingly, for had she not rehearsed
all this in her mind dozens of times, until her tongue could rattle off
the borrowed name as easily as it could her own; "servitor to Citizeness
Desiree Candeille!"

The man who had very carefully been examining the paper the while,
placed it down on the table deliberately in front of him, and said:

"Celine Dumont! Eh! la mere! what tricks are you up to now?"

"Tricks? I don't understand!" she said quietly, for she was not afraid.
The passport was en regle: she knew she had nothing to fear.

"Oh! but I think you do!" retorted the official with a sneer, "and
'tis a mighty clever one, I'll allow. Celine Dumont, ma foi! Not badly
imagined, ma petite mere: and all would have passed off splendidly;
unfortunately, Celine Dumont, servitor to Citizeness Desiree Candeille,
passed through these barriers along with her mistress not half an hour
ago."

And with long, grimy finger he pointed to an entry in the large book
which lay open before him, and wherein he had apparently been busy
making notes of the various passengers who had filed past him.

Then he looked up with a triumphant leer at the calm face of Marguerite.
She still did not feel really frightened, only puzzled and perturbed;
but all the blood had rushed away from her face, leaving her cheeks
ashen white, and pressing against her heart, until it almost choked her.

"You are making a mistake, Citizen," she said very quietly. "I am
Citizeness Candeille's maid. She gave me the passport herself, just
before I left for England; if you will ask her the question, she will
confirm what I say, and she assured me that it was quite en regle."

But the man only shrugged his shoulders and laughed derisively. The
incident evidently amused him, yet he must have seen many of the same
sort; in the far corner of the tent Marguerite seemed to discern a few
moving forms, soldiers, she thought, for she caught sight of a glint
like that of steel. One or two men stood close behind the official at
the desk, and the sentinels were to the right and left of the tent.

With an instinctive sense of appeal, Marguerite looked round from one
face to the other: but each looked absolutely impassive and stolid,
quite uninterested in this little scene, the exact counterpart of a
dozen others, enacted on this very spot within the last hour.

"He! la! la! petite mere!" said the official in the same tone of easy
persiflage which he had adopted all along, "but we do know how to
concoct a pretty lie, aye! and so circumstantially too! Unfortunately
it was Citizeness Desiree Candeille herself who happened to be standing
just where you are at the present moment, along with her maid, Celine
Dumont, both of whom were specially signed for and recommended as
perfectly trustworthy, by no less a person than Citoyen Chauvelin of the
Committee of Public Safety."

"But I assure you that there is a mistake," pleaded Marguerite
earnestly, "'Tis the other woman who lied, I have my passport and..."

"A truce on this," retorted the man peremptorily. "If everything is
as you say, and if you have nothing to hide, you'll be at liberty to
continue your journey to-morrow, after you have explained yourself
before the citizen governor. Next one now, quick!"

Marguerite tried another protest, just as those others had done, whom
she had watched so mechanically before. But already she knew that that
would be useless, for she had felt that a heavy hand was being placed on
her shoulder, and that she was being roughly led away.

In a flash she had understood and seen the whole sequel of the awful
trap which had all along been destined to engulf her as well as her
husband.

What a clumsy, blind fool she had been!

What a miserable antagonist the subtle schemes of a past master of
intrigue as was Chauvelin. To have enticed the Scarlet Pimpernel to
France was a great thing! The challenge was clever, the acceptance of
it by the bold adventurer a forgone conclusion, but the master stroke of
the whole plan was done, when she, the wife, was enticed over too with
the story of Candeille's remorse and the offer of the passport.

Fool! fool that she was!

And how well did Chauvelin know feminine nature! How cleverly he had
divined her thoughts, her feelings, the impulsive way in which she would
act; how easily he had guessed that, knowing her husband's danger, she,
Marguerite, would immediately follow him.

Now the trap had closed on her--and she saw it all, when it was too
late.

Percy Blakeney in France! His wife a prisoner! Her freedom and safety in
exchange for his life!

The hopelessness of it all struck her with appalling force, and her
senses reeled with the awful finality of the disaster.

Yet instinct in her still struggled for freedom. Ahead of her, and all
around, beyond the tent and in the far distance there was a provocative
alluring darkness: if she only could get away, only could reach the
shelter of that remote and sombre distance, she would hide, and wait,
not blunder again, oh no! she would be prudent and wary, if only she
could get away!

One woman's struggles, against five men! It was pitiable, sublime,
absolutely useless.

The man in the tent seemed to be watching her with much amusement for a
moment or two, as her whole graceful body stiffened for that absurd and
unequal physical contest. He seemed vastly entertained at the sight of
this good-looking young woman striving to pit her strength against five
sturdy soldiers of the Republic.

"Allons! that will do now!" he said at last roughly. "We have no time
to waste! Get the jade away, and let her cool her temper in No. 6, until
the citizen governor gives further orders.

"Take her away!" he shouted more loudly, banging a grimy fist down on
the table before him, as Marguerite still struggled on with the blind
madness of despair. "Pardi! can none of you rid us of that turbulent
baggage?"

The crowd behind were pushing forward: the guard within the tent were
jeering at those who were striving to drag Marguerite away: these latter
were cursing loudly and volubly, until one of them, tired out, furious
and brutal, raised his heavy fist and with an obscene oath brought it
crashing down upon the unfortunate woman's head.

Perhaps, though it was the work of a savage and cruel creature, the blow
proved more merciful than it had been intended: it had caught Marguerite
full between the eyes; her aching senses, wearied and reeling already,
gave way beneath this terrible violence; her useless struggles ceased,
her arms fell inert by her side: and losing consciousness completely,
her proud, unbendable spirit was spared the humiliating knowledge of her
final removal by the rough soldiers, and of the complete wreckage of her
last, lingering hopes.




Chapter XVIII: No. 6



Consciousness returned very slowly, very painfully.

It was night when last Marguerite had clearly known what was going on
around her; it was daylight before she realized that she still lived,
that she still knew and suffered.

Her head ached intolerably: that was the first conscious sensation which
came to her; then she vaguely perceived a pale ray of sunshine, very
hazy and narrow, which came from somewhere in front of her and struck
her in the face. She kept her eyes tightly shut, for that filmy light
caused her an increase of pain.

She seemed to be lying on her back, and her fingers wandering restlessly
around felt a hard paillasse, beneath their touch, then a rough pillow,
and her own cloak laid over her: thought had not yet returned, only the
sensation of great suffering and of infinite fatigue.

Anon she ventured to open her eyes, and gradually one or two objects
detached themselves from out the haze which still obscured her vision.

Firstly, the narrow aperture--scarcely a window--filled in with tiny
squares of coarse, unwashed glass, through which the rays of the morning
sun were making kindly efforts to penetrate, then the cloud of dust
illumined by those same rays, and made up--so it seemed to the poor
tired brain that strove to perceive--of myriads of abnormally large
molecules, over-abundant, and over-active, for they appeared to be
dancing a kind of wild saraband before Marguerite's aching eyes,
advancing and retreating, forming themselves into groups and taking on
funny shapes of weird masques and grotesque faces which grinned at the
unconscious figure lying helpless on the rough paillasse.

Through and beyond them Marguerite gradually became aware of three walls
of a narrow room, dank and grey, half covered with whitewash and half
with greenish mildew! Yes! and there, opposite to her and immediately
beneath that semblance of a window, was another paillasse, and on it
something dark, that moved.

The words: "Liberte, Egalite, Fraternite ou la Mort!" stared out at her
from somewhere beyond those active molecules of dust, but she also saw
just above the other paillasse the vague outline of a dark crucifix.

It seemed a terrible effort to co-ordinate all these things, and to
try and realize what the room was, and what was the meaning of the
paillasse, the narrow window and the stained walls, too much altogether
for the aching head to take in save very slowly, very gradually.

Marguerite was content to wait and to let memory creep back as
reluctantly as it would.

"Do you think, my child, you could drink a little of this now?"

It was a gentle, rather tremulous voice which struck upon her ear.
She opened her eyes, and noticed that the dark something which had
previously been on the opposite paillasse was no longer there, and
that there appeared to be a presence close to her only vaguely defined,
someone kindly and tender who had spoken to her in French, with that
soft sing-song accent peculiar to the Normandy peasants, and who now
seemed to be pressing something cool and soothing to her lips.

"They gave me this for you!" continued the tremulous voice close to her
ear. "I think it would do you good, if you tried to take it."

A hand and arm was thrust underneath the rough pillow, causing her to
raise her head a little. A glass was held to her lips and she drank.

The hand that held the glass was all wrinkled, brown and dry, and
trembled slightly, but the arm which supported her head was firm and
very kind.

"There! I am sure you feel better now. Close your eyes and try to go to
sleep."

She did as she was bid, and was ready enough to close her eyes. It
seemed to her presently as if something had been interposed between her
aching head and that trying ray of white September sun.

Perhaps she slept peacefully for a little while after that, for though
her head was still very painful, her mouth and throat felt less parched
and dry. Through this sleep or semblance of sleep, she was conscious of
the same pleasant voice softly droning Paters and Aves close to her ear.

Thus she lay, during the greater part of the day. Not quite fully
conscious, not quite awake to the awful memories which anon would crowd
upon her thick and fast.

From time to time the same kind and trembling hands would with gentle
pressure force a little liquid food through her unwilling lips: some
warm soup, or anon a glass of milk. Beyond the pain in her head, she
was conscious of no physical ill; she felt at perfect peace, and an
extraordinary sense of quiet and repose seemed to pervade this small
room, with its narrow window through which the rays of the sun came
gradually in more golden splendour as the day drew towards noon, and
then they vanished altogether.

The drony voice close beside her acted as a soporific upon her nerves.
In the afternoon she fell into a real and beneficent sleep....

But after that, she woke to full consciousness!

Oh! the horror, the folly of it all!

It came back to her with all the inexorable force of an appalling
certainty.

She was a prisoner in the hands of those who long ago had sworn to bring
The Scarlet Pimpernel to death!

She! his wife, a hostage in their hands! her freedom and safety offered
to him as the price of his own! Here there was no question of dreams
or of nightmares: no illusions as to the ultimate intentions of her
husband's enemies. It was all a reality, and even now, before she had
the strength fully to grasp the whole nature of this horrible situation,
she knew that by her own act of mad and passionate impulse, she had
hopelessly jeopardized the life of the man she loved.

For with that sublime confidence in him begotten of her love, she never
for a moment doubted which of the two alternatives he would choose, when
once they were placed before him. He would sacrifice himself for her; he
would prefer to die a thousand deaths so long as they set her free.

For herself, her own sufferings, her danger or humiliation she cared
nothing! Nay! at this very moment she was conscious of a wild passionate
desire for death.... In this sudden onrush of memory and of thought she
wished with all her soul and heart and mind to die here suddenly, on
this hard paillasse, in this lonely and dark prison... so that she
should be out of the way once and for all... so that she should NOT be
the hostage to be bartered against his precious life and freedom.

He would suffer acutely, terribly at her loss, because he loved her
above everything else on earth, he would suffer in every fibre of his
passionate and ardent nature, but he would not then have to endure
the humiliations, the awful alternatives, the galling impotence and
miserable death, the relentless "either--or" which his enemies were even
now preparing for him.

And then came a revulsion of feeling. Marguerite's was essentially a
buoyant and active nature, a keen brain which worked and schemed and
planned, rather than one ready to accept the inevitable.

Hardly had these thoughts of despair and of death formulated themselves
in her mind, than with brilliant swiftness, a new train of ideas began
to take root.

What if matters were not so hopeless after all?

Already her mind had flown instinctively to thoughts of escape. Had she
the right to despair? She, the wife and intimate companion of the man
who had astonished the world with his daring, his prowess, his amazing
good luck, she to imagine for a moment that in this all-supreme moment
of adventurous life the Scarlet Pimpernel would fail!

Was not English society peopled with men, women and children whom his
ingenuity had rescued from plights quite as seemingly hopeless as her
own, and would not all the resources of that inventive brain be brought
to bear upon this rescue which touched him nearer and more deeply than
any which he had attempted hitherto.

Now Marguerite was chiding herself for her doubts and for her fears.
Already she remembered that amongst the crowd on the landing stage
she had perceived a figure--unusually tall--following in the wake of
Chauvelin and his companions. Awakened hope had already assured her that
she had not been mistaken, that Percy, contrary to her own surmises,
had reached Boulogne last night: he always acted so differently to what
anyone might expect, that it was quite possible that he had crossed over
in the packet-boat after all unbeknown to Marguerite as well as to his
enemies.

Oh yes! the more she thought about it all, the more sure was she that
Percy was already in Boulogne, and that he knew of her capture and her
danger.

What right had she to doubt even for a moment that he would know how to
reach her, how--when the time came--to save himself and her?

A warm glow began to fill her veins, she felt excited and alert,
absolutely unconscious now of pain or fatigue, in this radiant joy of
reawakened hope.

She raised herself slightly, leaning on her elbow: she was still very
weak and the slight movement had made her giddy, but soon she would
be strong and well... she must be strong and well and ready to do his
bidding when the time for escape would have come.

"Ah! you are better, my child, I see..." said that quaint, tremulous
voice again, with its soft sing-song accent, "but you must not be so
venturesome, you know. The physician said that you had received a cruel
blow. The brain has been rudely shaken... and you must lie quite still
all to-day, or your poor little head will begin to ache again."

Marguerite turned to look at the speaker, and in spite of her
excitement, of her sorrow and of her anxieties, she could not help
smiling at the whimsical little figure which sat opposite to her, on a
very rickety chair, solemnly striving with slow and measured movement
of hand and arm, and a large supply of breath, to get up a polish on the
worn-out surface of an ancient pair of buckled shoes.

The figure was slender and almost wizened, the thin shoulders round
with an habitual stoop, the lean shanks were encased in a pair of
much-darned, coarse black stockings. It was the figure of an old man,
with a gentle, clear-cut face furrowed by a forest of wrinkles, and
surmounted by scanty white locks above a smooth forehead which looked
yellow and polished like an ancient piece of ivory.

He had looked across at Marguerite as he spoke, and a pair of innately
kind and mild blue eyes were fixed with tender reproach upon her.
Marguerite thought that she had never seen quite so much goodness and
simple-heartedness portrayed on any face before. It literally beamed out
of those pale blue eyes, which seemed quite full of unshed tears.

The old man wore a tattered garment, a miracle of shining cleanliness,
which had once been a soutane of smooth black cloth, but was now a
mass of patches and threadbare at shoulders and knees. He seemed deeply
intent in the task of polishing his shoes, and having delivered himself
of his little admonition, he very solemnly and earnestly resumed his
work.

Marguerite's first and most natural instinct had, of course, been one of
dislike and mistrust of anyone who appeared to be in some way on guard
over her. But when she took in every detail of the quaint figure of the
old man, his scrupulous tidiness of apparel, the resigned stoop of his
shoulders, and met in full the gaze of those moist eyes, she felt that
the whole aspect of the man, as he sat there polishing his shoes, was
infinitely pathetic and, in its simplicity, commanding of respect.

"Who are you?" asked Lady Blakeney at last, for the old man after
looking at her with a kind of appealing wonder, seemed to be waiting for
her to speak.

"A priest of the good God, my dear child," replied the old man with a
deep sigh and a shake of his scanty locks, "who is not allowed to serve
his divine Master any longer. A poor old fellow, very harmless and very
helpless, who had been set here to watch over you.

"You must not look upon me as a jailer because of what I say, my child,"
he added with a quaint air of deference and apology. "I am very old and
very small, and only take up a very little room. I can make myself very
scarce; you shall hardly know that I am here. They forced me to it much
against my will.... But they are strong and I am weak, how could I deny
them since they put me here. After all," he concluded naively, "perhaps
it is the will of le bon Dieu, and He knows best, my child, He knows
best."

The shoes evidently refused to respond any further to the old man's
efforts at polishing them. He contemplated them now, with a whimsical
look of regret on his furrowed face, then set them down on the floor and
slipped his stockinged feet into them.

Marguerite was silently watching him, still leaning on her elbow.
Evidently her brain was still numb and fatigued, for she did not seem
able to grasp all that the old man said. She smiled to herself too as
she watched him. How could she look upon him as a jailer? He did not
seem at all like a Jacobin or a Terrorist, there was nothing of the
dissatisfied democrat, of the snarling anarchist ready to lend his hand
to any act of ferocity directed against a so-called aristocrat, about
this pathetic little figure in the ragged soutane and worn shoes.

He seemed singularly bashful too and ill at ease, and loath to meet
Marguerite's great, ardent eyes, which were fixed questioningly upon
him.

"You must forgive me, my daughter," he said shyly, "for concluding my
toilet before you. I had hoped to be quite ready before you woke, but I
had some trouble with my shoes; except for a little water and soap the
prison authorities will not provide us poor captives with any means of
cleanliness and tidiness, and le bon Dieu does love a tidy body as well
as a clean soul.

"But there, there," he added fussily, "I must not continue to gossip
like this. You would like to get up, I know, and refresh your face and
hands with a little water. Oh! you will see how well I have thought it
out. I need not interfere with you at all, and when you make your little
bit of toilette, you will feel quite alone... just as if the old man was
not there."

He began busying himself about the room, dragging the rickety,
rush-bottomed chairs forward. There were four of these in the room, and
he began forming a kind of bulwark with them, placing two side by side,
then piling the two others up above.

"You will see, my child, you will see!" he kept repeating at intervals
as the work of construction progressed. It was no easy matter, for
he was of low stature, and his hands were unsteady from apparently
uncontrollable nervousness.

Marguerite, leaning slightly forward, her chin resting in her hand, was
too puzzled and anxious to grasp the humour of this comical situation.
She certainly did not understand. This old man had in some sort of way,
and for a hitherto unexplained reason, been set as a guard over her; it
was not an unusual device on the part of the inhuman wretches who now
ruled France, to add to the miseries and terrors of captivity, where a
woman of refinement was concerned, the galling outrage of never leaving
her alone for a moment.

That peculiar form of mental torture, surely the invention of brains
rendered mad by their own ferocious cruelty, was even now being
inflicted on the hapless, dethroned Queen of France. Marguerite, in
far-off England, had shuddered when she heard of it, and in her heart
had prayed, as indeed every pure-minded woman did then, that proud,
unfortunate Marie Antoinette might soon find release from such torments
in death.

There was evidently some similar intention with regard to Marguerite
herself in the minds of those who now held her prisoner. But this old
man seemed so feeble and so helpless, his very delicacy of thought as
he built up a screen to divide the squalid room in two, proved him to be
singularly inefficient for the task of a watchful jailer.

When the four chairs appeared fairly steady, and in comparatively little
danger of toppling, he dragged the paillasse forward and propped it
up against the chairs. Finally he drew the table along, which held the
cracked ewer and basin, and placed it against this improvised partition:
then he surveyed the whole construction with evident gratification and
delight.

"There now!" he said, turning a face beaming with satisfaction to
Marguerite, "I can continue my prayers on the other side of the
fortress. Oh! it is quite safe..." he added, as with a fearsome hand he
touched his engineering feat with gingerly pride, "and you will be quite
private.... Try and forget that the old abbe is in the room.... He does
not count... really he does not count... he has ceased to be of any
moment these many months now that Saint Joseph is closed and he may no
longer say Mass."

He was obviously prattling on in order to hide his nervous bashfulness.
He ensconced himself behind his own finely constructed bulwark, drew a
breviary from his pocket and having found a narrow ledge on one of
the chairs, on which he could sit, without much danger of bringing the
elaborate screen onto the top of his head, he soon became absorbed in
his orisons.

Marguerite watched him for a little while longer: he was evidently
endeavouring to make her think that he had become oblivious of her
presence, and his transparent little manoeuvers amused and puzzled her
not a little.

He looked so comical with his fussy and shy ways, yet withal so gentle
and so kindly that she felt completely reassured and quite calm.

She tried to raise herself still further and found the process
astonishingly easy. Her limbs still ached and the violent, intermittent
pain in her head certainly made her feel sick and giddy at times, but
otherwise she was not ill. She sat up on the paillasse, then put
her feet to the ground and presently walked up to the improvised
dressing-room and bathed her face and hands. The rest had done her good,
and she felt quite capable of co-ordinating her thoughts, of moving
about without too much pain, and of preparing herself both mentally and
physically for the grave events which she knew must be imminent.

While she busied herself with her toilet her thoughts dwelt on the one
all-absorbing theme: Percy was in Boulogne, he knew that she was here,
in prison, he would reach her without fail, in fact he might communicate
with her at any moment now, and had without a doubt already evolved a
plan of escape for her, more daring and ingenious than any which he had
conceived hitherto; therefore, she must be ready, and prepared for any
eventuality, she must be strong and eager, in no way despondent, for if
he were here, would he not chide her for her want of faith?

By the time she had smoothed her hair and tidied her dress, Marguerite
caught herself singing quite cheerfully to herself.

So full of buoyant hope was she.




Chapter XIX: The Strength of the Weak



"M. L'Abbe!..." said Marguerite gravely.

"Yes, mon enfant."

The old man looked up from his breviary, and saw Marguerite's great
earnest eyes fixed with obvious calm and trust upon him. She had
finished her toilet as well as she could, had shaken up and tidied the
paillasse, and was now sitting on the edge of it, her hands clasped
between her knees. There was something which still puzzled her, and
impatient and impulsive as she was, she had watched the abbe as he
calmly went on reading the Latin prayers for the last five minutes, and
now she could contain her questionings no longer.

"You said just now that they set you to watch over me..."

"So they did, my child, so they did..." he replied with a sigh, as he
quietly closed his book and slipped it back into his pocket. "Ah! they
are very cunning... and we must remember that they have the power. No
doubt," added the old man, with his own, quaint philosophy, "no doubt le
bon Dieu meant them to have the power, or they would not have it, would
they?"

"By 'they' you mean the Terrorists and Anarchists of France,
M. L'Abbe.... The Committee of Public Safety who pillage and murder,
outrage women, and desecrate religion.... Is that not so?"

"Alas! my child!" he sighed.

"And it is 'they' who have set you to watch over me?... I confess I
don't understand..."

She laughed, quite involuntarily indeed, for in spite of the reassurance
in her heart her brain was still in a whirl of passionate anxiety.

"You don't look at all like one of 'them,' M. l'Abbe," she said.

"The good God forbid!" ejaculated the old man, raising protesting hands
up toward the very distant, quite invisible sky. "How could I, a humble
priest of the Lord, range myself with those who would flout and defy
Him."

"Yet I am a prisoner of the Republic and you are my jailer, M. l'Abbe."

"Ah, yes!" he sighed. "But I am very helpless. This was my cell. I had
been here with Francois and Felicite, my sister's children, you know.
Innocent lambs, whom those fiends would lead to slaughter. Last night,"
he continued, speaking volubly, "the soldiers came in and dragged
Francois and Felicite out of this room, where, in spite of the danger
before us, in spite of what we suffered, we had contrived to be quite
happy together. I could read the Mass, and the dear children would say
their prayers night and morning at my knee."

He paused awhile. The unshed tears in his mild blue eyes struggled
for freedom now, and one or two flowed slowly down his wrinkled cheek.
Marguerite, though heartsore and full of agonizing sorrow herself, felt
her whole noble soul go out to this kind old man, so pathetic, so high
and simple-minded in his grief.

She said nothing, however, and the Abbe continued after a few seconds'
silence.

"When the children had gone, they brought you in here, mon enfant, and
laid you on the paillasse where Felicite used to sleep. You looked
very white, and stricken down, like one of God's lambs attacked by
the ravening wolf. Your eyes were closed and you were blissfully
unconscious. I was taken before the governor of the prison, and he told
me that you would share the cell with me for a time, and that I was to
watch you night and day, because..."

The old man paused again. Evidently what he had to say was very
difficult to put into words. He groped in his pockets and brought out
a large bandana handkerchief, red and yellow and green, with which
he began to mop his moist forehead. The quaver in his voice and the
trembling of his hands became more apparent and pronounced.

"Yes, M. l'Abbe? Because?..." queried Marguerite gently.

"They said that if I guarded you well, Felicite and Francois would
be set free," replied the old man after a while, during which he made
vigorous efforts to overcome his nervousness, "and that if you escaped
the children and I would be guillotined the very next day."

There was silence in the little room now. The Abbe was sitting quite
still, clasping his trembling fingers, and Marguerite neither moved nor
spoke. What the old man had just said was very slowly finding its way to
the innermost cells of her brain. Until her mind had thoroughly grasped
the meaning of it all, she could not trust herself to make a single
comment.

It was some seconds before she fully understood it all, before she
realized what it meant not only to her, but indirectly to her husband.
Until now she had not been fully conscious of the enormous wave of hope
which almost in spite of herself had risen triumphant above the dull,
grey sea of her former despair; only now when it had been shattered
against this deadly rock of almost superhuman devilry and cunning did
she understand what she had hoped, and what she must now completely
forswear.

No bolts and bars, no fortified towers or inaccessible fortresses could
prove so effectual a prison for Marguerite Blakeney as the dictum which
morally bound her to her cell.

"If you escape the children and I would be guillotined the very next
day."

This meant that even if Percy knew, even if he could reach her, he
could never set her free, since her safety meant death to two innocent
children and to this simple hearted man.

It would require more than the ingenuity of the Scarlet Pimpernel
himself to untie this Gordian knot.

"I don't mind for myself, of course," the old man went on with gentle
philosophy. "I have lived my life. What matters if I die to-morrow, or
if I linger on until my earthly span is legitimately run out? I am ready
to go home whenever my Father calls me. But it is the children, you
see. I have to think of them. Francois is his mother's only son, the
bread-winner of the household, a good lad and studious too, and Felicite
has always been very delicate. She is blind from birth and..."

"Oh! don't... for pity's sake, don't..." moaned Marguerite in an agony
of helplessness. "I understand... you need not fear for your children,
M. l'Abbe: no harm shall come to them through me."

"It is as the good God wills!" replied the old man quietly.

Then, as Marguerite had once more relapsed into silence, he fumbled
for his beads, and his gentle voice began droning the Paters and Aves
wherein no doubt his child-like heart found peace and solace.

He understood that the poor woman would not wish to speak, he knew as
well as she did the overpowering strength of his helpless appeal. Thus
the minutes sped on, the jailer and the captive, tied to one another by
the strongest bonds that hand of man could forge, had nothing to say
to one another: he, the old priest, imbued with the traditions of his
calling, could pray and resign himself to the will of the Almighty, but
she was young and ardent and passionate, she loved and was beloved,
and an impassable barrier was built up between her and the man she
worshipped!

A barrier fashioned by the weak hands of children, one of whom was
delicate and blind. Outside was air and freedom, reunion with her
husband, an agony of happy remorse, a kiss from his dear lips, and
trembling held her back from it all, because of Francois who was the
bread-winner and of Felicite who was blind.

Mechanically now Marguerite rose again, and like an automaton--lifeless
and thoughtless--she began putting the dingy, squalid room to rights.
The Abbe helped her demolish the improvised screen; with the same gentle
delicacy of thought which had caused him to build it up, he refrained
from speaking to her now: he would not intrude himself on her grief and
her despair.

Later on, she forced herself to speak again, and asked the old man his
name.

"My name is Foucquet," he replied, "Jean Baptiste Marie Foucquet,
late parish priest of the Church of Saint Joseph, the patron saint of
Boulogne."

Foucquet! This was l'Abbe Foucquet! the faithful friend and servant of
the de Marny family.

Marguerite gazed at him with great, questioning eyes.

What a wealth of memories crowded in on her mind at sound of that name!
Her beautiful home at Richmond, her brilliant array of servants and
guests, His Royal Highness at her side! life in free, joyous happy
England--how infinitely remote it now seemed. Her ears were filled with
the sound of a voice, drawly and quaint and gentle, a voice and a laugh
half shy, wholly mirthful, and oh! so infinitely dear:

"I think a little sea voyage and English country air would suit the Abbe
Foucquet, m'dear, and I only mean to ask him to cross the Channel with
me..."

Oh! the joy and confidence expressed in those words! the daring, the
ambition! the pride! and the soft, languorous air of the old-world
garden round her then, the passion of his embrace! the heavy scent of
late roses and of heliotrope, which caused her to swoon in his arms!

And now a narrow prison cell, and that pathetic, tender little creature
there, with trembling hands and tear-dimmed eyes, the most powerful and
most relentless jailer which the ferocious cunning of her deadly enemies
could possible have devised.

Then she talked to him of Juliette Marny.

The Abbe did not know that Mlle. de Marny had succeeded in reaching
England safely and was overjoyed to hear it.

He recounted to Marguerite the story of the Marny jewels: how he had put
them safely away in the crypt of his little church, until the Assembly
of the Convention had ordered the closing of the churches, and placed
before every minister of le bon Dieu the alternative of apostasy or
death.

"With me it has only been prison so far," continued the old man simply,
"but prison has rendered me just as helpless as the guillotine would
have done, for the enemies of le bon Dieu have ransacked the Church of
Saint Joseph and stolen the jewels which I should have guarded with my
life."

But it was obvious joy for the Abbe to talk of Juliette Marny's
happiness. Vaguely, in his remote little provincial cure, he had heard
of the prowess and daring of the Scarlet Pimpernel and liked to think
that Juliette owed her safety to him.

"The good God will reward him and those whom he cares for," added Abbe
Foucquet with that earnest belief in divine interference which seemed so
strangely pathetic under these present circumstances.

Marguerite sighed, and for the first time in this terrible soul-stirring
crisis through which she was passing so bravely, she felt a beneficent
moisture in her eyes: the awful tension of her nerves relaxed. She went
up to the old man took his wrinkled hand in hers and falling on her
knees beside him she eased her overburdened heart in a flood of tears.




Chapter XX: Triumph



The day that Citizen Chauvelin's letter was received by the members of
the Committee of Public Safety was indeed one of great rejoicing.

The Moniteur tells us that in the Seance of September 22nd, 1793, or
Vendemiaire 1st of the Year I. it was decreed that sixty prisoners,
not absolutely proved guilty of treason against the Republic--only
suspected--were to be set free.

Sixty!... at the mere news of the possible capture of the Scarlet
Pimpernel.

The Committee was inclined to be magnanimous. Ferocity yielded for the
moment to the elusive joy of anticipatory triumph.

A glorious prize was about to fall into the hands of those who had the
welfare of the people at heart.

Robespierre and his decemvirs rejoiced, and sixty persons had cause
to rejoice with them. So be it! There were plans evolved already as to
national fetes and wholesale pardons when that impudent and meddlesome
Englishman at last got his deserts.

Wholesale pardons which could easily be rescinded afterwards. Even
with those sixty it was a mere respite. Those of le Salut Public only
loosened their hold for a while, were nobly magnanimous for a day, quite
prepared to be doubly ferocious the next.

In the meanwhile let us heartily rejoice!

The Scarlet Pimpernel is in France or will be very soon, and on an
appointed day he will present himself conveniently to the soldiers of
the Republic for capture and for subsequent guillotine. England is at
war with us, there is nothing therefore further to fear from her. We
might hang every Englishman we can lay hands on, and England could do no
more than she is doing at the present moment: bombard our ports, bluster
and threaten, join hands with Flanders, and Austria and Sardinia, and
the devil if she choose.

Allons! vogue la galere! The Scarlet Pimpernel is perhaps on our shores
at this very moment! Our most stinging, most irritating foe is about to
be delivered into our hands.

Citizen Chauvelin's letter is very categorical:

"I guarantee to you, Citizen Robespierre, and to the Members of the
Revolutionary Government who have entrusted me with the delicate
mission..."

Robespierre's sensuous lips curl into a sarcastic smile. Citizen
Chauvelin's pen was ever florid in its style: "entrusted me with the
delicate mission," is hardly the way to describe an order given under
penalty of death.

But let it pass.

"... that four days from this date, at one hour after sunset, the man
who goes by the mysterious name of the Scarlet Pimpernel will be on the
southern ramparts of Boulogne, at the extreme southern corner of the
town."

"Four days from this date..." and Citizen Chauvelin's letter is dated
the nineteenth of September, 1793.

"Too much of an aristocrat--Monsieur le Marquis Chauvelin..." sneers
Merlin, the Jacobin. "He does not know that all good citizens had called
that date the 28th Fructidor, Year I. of the Republic."

"No matter," retorts Robespierre with impatient frigidity, "whatever we
may call the day it was forty-eight hours ago, and in forty-eight hours
more that damned Englishman will have run his head into a noose, from
which, an I mistake not, he'll not find it easy to extricate himself."

"And you believe in Citizen Chauvelin's assertion," commented Danton
with a lazy shrug of the shoulders.

"Only because he asks for help from us," quoth Robespierre drily; "he is
sure that the man will be there, but not sure if he can tackle him."

But many were inclined to think that Chauvelin's letter was an idle
boast. They knew nothing of the circumstances which had caused that
letter to be written: they could not conjecture how it was that the
ex-ambassador could be so precise in naming the day and hour when the
enemy of France would be at the mercy of those whom he had outraged and
flouted.

Nevertheless Citizen Chauvelin asks for help, and help must not be
denied him. There must be no shadow of blame upon the actions of the
Committee of Public Safety.

Chauvelin had been weak once, had allowed the prize to slip through his
fingers; it must not occur again. He has a wonderful head for devising
plans, but he needs a powerful hand to aid him, so that he may not fail
again.

Collot d'Herbois, just home from Lyons and Tours, is the right man in
an emergency like this. Citizen Collot is full of ideas; the inventor
of the "Noyades" is sure to find a means of converting Boulogne into one
gigantic prison out of which the mysterious English adventurer will find
it impossible to escape.

And whilst the deliberations go on, whilst this committee of butchers
are busy slaughtering in imagination the game they have not yet
succeeded in bringing down, there comes another messenger from Citizen
Chauvelin.

He must have ridden hard on the other one's heels, and something very
unexpected and very sudden must have occurred to cause the Citizen to
send this second note.

This time it is curt and to the point. Robespierre unfolds it and reads
it to his colleagues.

"We have caught the woman--his wife--there may be murder attempted
against my person, send me some one at once who will carry out my
instructions in case of my sudden death."

Robespierre's lips curl in satisfaction, showing a row of yellowish
teeth, long and sharp like the fangs of a wolf. A murmur like unto the
snarl of a pack of hyenas rises round the table, as Chauvelin's letter
is handed round.

Everyone has guessed the importance of this preliminary capture:
"the woman--his wife." Chauvelin evidently thinks much of it, for he
anticipates an attempt against his life, nay! he is quite prepared for
it, ready to sacrifice it for the sake of his revenge.

Who had accused him of weakness?

He only thinks of his duty, not of his life; he does not fear for
himself, only that the fruits of his skill might be jeopardized through
assassination.

Well! this English adventurer is capable of any act of desperation to
save his wife and himself, and Citizen Chauvelin must not be left in the
lurch.

Thus, Citizen Collot d'Herbois is despatched forthwith to Boulogne to be
a helpmeet and counsellor to Citizen Chauvelin.

Everything that can humanly be devised must be done to keep the woman
secure and to set the trap for that elusive Pimpernel.

Once he is caught the whole of France shall rejoice, and Boulogne, who
had been instrumental in running the quarry to earth, must be specially
privileged on that day.

A general amnesty for all prisoners the day the Scarlet Pimpernel is
captured. A public holiday and a pardon for all natives of Boulogne who
are under sentence of death: they shall be allowed to find their way to
the various English boats--trading and smuggling craft--that always lie
at anchor in the roads there.

The Committee of Public Safety feel amazingly magnanimous towards
Boulogne; a proclamation embodying the amnesty and the pardon is at once
drawn up and signed by Robespierre and his bloodthirsty Council of Ten,
it is entrusted to Citizen Collot d'Herbois to be read out at every
corner of the ramparts as an inducement to the little town to do its
level best. The Englishman and his wife--captured in Boulogne--will
both be subsequently brought to Paris, formally tried on a charge of
conspiring against the Republic and guillotined as English spies, but
Boulogne shall have the greater glory and shall reap the first and
richest reward.

And armed with the magnanimous proclamation, the orders for general
rejoicings and a grand local fete, armed also with any and every power
over the entire city, its municipality, its garrisons, its forts, for
himself and his colleague Chauvelin, Citizen Collot d'Herbois starts for
Boulogne forthwith.

Needless to tell him not to let the grass grow under his horse's
hoofs. The capture of the Scarlet Pimpernel, though not absolutely an
accomplished fact, is nevertheless a practical certainty, and no one
rejoices over this great event more than the man who is to be present
and see all the fun.

Riding and driving, getting what relays of horses or waggons from
roadside farms that he can, Collot is not likely to waste much time on
the way.

It is 157 miles to Boulogne by road, and Collot, burning with ambition
to be in at the death, rides or drives as no messenger of good tidings
has ever ridden or driven before.

He does not stop to eat, but munches chunks of bread and cheese in the
recess of the lumbering chaise or waggon that bears him along whenever
his limbs refuse him service and he cannot mount a horse.

The chronicles tell us that twenty-four hours after he left Paris,
half-dazed with fatigue, but ferocious and eager still, he is borne
to the gates of Boulogne by an old cart horse requisitioned from some
distant farm, and which falls down, dead, at the Porte Gayole, whilst
its rider, with a last effort, loudly clamours for admittance into the
town "in the name of the Republic."




Chapter XXI: Suspense



In his memorable interview with Robespierre, the day before he left for
England, Chauvelin had asked that absolute power be given him, in
order that he might carry out the plans for the capture of the Scarlet
Pimpernel, which he had in his mind. Now that he was back in France he
had no cause to complain that the revolutionary government had grudged
him this power for which he had asked.

Implicit obedience had followed whenever he had commanded.

As soon as he heard that a woman had been arrested in the act of
uttering a passport in the name of Celine Dumont, he guessed at once
that Marguerite Blakeney had, with characteristic impulse, fallen into
the trap which, with the aid of the woman Candeille, he had succeeded in
laying for her.

He was not the least surprised at that. He knew human nature, feminine
nature, far too well, ever to have been in doubt for a moment that
Marguerite would follow her husband without calculating either costs or
risks.

Ye gods! the irony of it all! Had she not been called the cleverest
woman in Europe at one time? Chauvelin himself had thus acclaimed her,
in those olden days, before she and he became such mortal enemies, and
when he was one of the many satellites that revolved round brilliant
Marguerite St. Just. And to-night, when a sergeant of the town guards
brought him news of her capture, he smiled grimly to himself; the
cleverest woman in Europe had failed to perceive the trap laid
temptingly open for her.

Once more she had betrayed her husband into the hands of those who would
not let him escape a second time. And now she had done it with her eyes
open, with loving, passionate heart which ached for self-sacrifice, and
only succeeded in imperilling the loved one more hopelessly than before.

The sergeant was waiting for orders. Citizen Chauvelin had come to
Boulogne, armed with more full and more autocratic powers than any
servant of the new republic had ever been endowed with before.
The governor of the town, the captain of the guard, the fort and
municipality were all as abject slaves before him.

As soon as he had taken possession of the quarters organized for him in
the town hall, he had asked for a list of prisoners who for one cause or
another were being detained pending further investigations.

The list was long and contained many names which were of not the
slightest interest to Chauvelin: he passed them over impatiently.

"To be released at one," he said curtly.

He did not want the guard to be burdened with unnecessary duties, nor
the prisons of the little sea-port town to be inconveniently encumbered.
He wanted room, space, air, the force and intelligence of the entire
town at his command for the one capture which meant life and revenge to
him.

"A woman--name unknown--found in possession of a forged passport in
the name of Celine Dumont, maid to the Citizeness Desiree
Candeille--attempted to land--was interrogated and failed to give
satisfactory explanation of herself--detained in room No. 6 of the
Gayole prison."

This was one of the last names on the list, the only one of any
importance to Citizen Chauvelin. When he read it he nearly drove his
nails into the palms of his hands, so desperate an effort did he make
not to betray before the sergeant by look or sigh the exultation which
he felt.

For a moment he shaded his eyes against the glare of the lamp, but it
was not long before he had formulated a plan and was ready to give his
orders.

He asked for a list of prisoners already detained in the various forts.
The name of l'Abbe Foucquet with those of his niece and nephew attracted
his immediate attention. He asked for further information respecting
these people, heard that the boy was a widow's only son, the sole
supporter of his mother's declining years: the girl was ailing,
suffering from incipient phthisis, and was blind.

Pardi! the very thing! L'Abbe himself, the friend of Juliette Marny, the
pathetic personality around which this final adventure of the Scarlet
Pimpernel was intended to revolve! and these two young people! his
sister's children! one of them blind and ill, the other full of vigour
and manhood.

Citizen Chauvelin had soon made up his mind.

A few quick orders to the sergeant of the guard, and l'Abbe Foucquet,
weak, helpless and gentle, became the relentless jailer who would guard
Marguerite more securely than a whole regiment of loyal soldiers could
have done.

Then, having despatched a messenger to the Committee of Public Safety,
Chauvelin laid himself down to rest. Fate had not deceived him. He
had thought and schemed and planned, and events had shaped themselves
exactly as foreseen, and the fact that Marguerite Blakeney was at the
present moment a prisoner in his hands was merely the result of his own
calculations.

As for the Scarlet Pimpernel, Chauvelin could not very well conceive
what he would do under these present circumstances. The duel on the
southern ramparts had of course become a farce, not likely to be enacted
now that Marguerite's life was at stake. The daring adventurer was
caught in a network at last, from which all his ingenuity, all his wit,
his impudence and his amazing luck could never extricate him.

And in Chauvelin's mind there was still something more. Revenge was the
sweetest emotion his bruised and humbled pride could know: he had not
yet tasted its complete intoxicating joy: but every hour now his cup of
delight became more and more full: in a few days it would overflow.

In the meanwhile he was content to wait. The hours sped by and there
was no news yet of that elusive Pimpernel. Of Marguerite he knew nothing
save that she was well guarded; the sentry who passed up and down
outside room No. 6 had heard her voice and that of the Abbe Foucquet, in
the course of the afternoon.

Chauvelin had asked the Committee of Public Safety for aid in his
difficult task, but forty-eight hours at least must elapse before such
aid could reach him. Forty-eight hours, during which the hand of an
assassin might be lurking for him, and might even reach him ere his
vengeance was fully accomplished.

That was the only thought which really troubled him. He did not want to
die before he had seen the Scarlet Pimpernel a withered abject creature,
crushed in fame and honour, too debased to find glorification even in
death.

At this moment he only cared for his life because it was needed for the
complete success of his schemes. No one else he knew would have that
note of personal hatred towards the enemy of France which was necessary
now in order to carry out successfully the plans which he had formed.

Robespierre and all the others only desired the destruction of a man who
had intrigued against the reign of terror which they had established;
his death on the guillotine, even if it were surrounded with the halo
of martyrdom, would have satisfied them completely. Chauvelin looked
further than that. He hated the man! He had suffered humiliation through
him individually. He wished to see him as an object of contempt rather
than of pity. And because of the anticipation of this joy, he was
careful of his life, and throughout those two days which elapsed
between the capture of Marguerite and the arrival of Collot d'Herbois at
Boulogne, Chauvelin never left his quarters at the Hotel de Ville, and
requisitioned a special escort consisting of proved soldiers of the town
guard to attend his every footstep.

On the evening of the 22nd, after the arrival of Citizen Collot in
Boulogne, he gave orders that the woman from No. 6 cell be brought
before him in the ground floor room of the Fort Gayole.




Chapter XXII: Not Death



Two days of agonizing suspense, of alternate hope and despair, had told
heavily on Marguerite Blakeney.

Her courage was still indomitable, her purpose firm and her faith
secure, but she was without the slightest vestige of news, entirely shut
off from the outside world, left to conjecture, to scheme, to expect and
to despond alone.

The Abbe Foucquet had tried in his gentle way to be of comfort to her,
and she in her turn did her very best not to render his position more
cruel than it already was.

A message came to him twice during those forty-eight hours from Francois
and Felicite, a little note scribbled by the boy, or a token sent by the
blind girl, to tell the Abbe that the children were safe and well, that
they would be safe and well so long as the Citizeness with the name
unknown remained closely guarded by him in room No. 6.

When these messages came, the old man would sigh and murmur something
about the good God: and hope, which perhaps had faintly risen in
Marguerite's heart within the last hour or so, would once more sink back
into the abyss of uttermost despair.

Outside the monotonous walk of the sentry sounded like the perpetual
thud of a hammer beating upon her bruised temples.

"What's to be done? My God? what's to be done?"

Where was Percy now?

"How to reach him!... Oh, God! grant me light!"

The one real terror which she felt was that she would go mad. Nay! that
she was in a measure mad already. For hours now,--or was it days?... or
years?... she had heard nothing save that rhythmic walk of the sentinel,
and the kindly, tremulous voice of the Abbe whispering consolations,
or murmuring prayers in her ears, she had seen nothing save that prison
door, of rough deal, painted a dull grey, with great old-fashioned lock,
and hinges rusty with the damp of ages.

She had kept her eyes fixed on that door until they burned and ached
with well-nigh intolerable pain; yet she felt that she could not look
elsewhere, lest she missed the golden moment when the bolts would be
drawn, and that dull, grey door would swing slowly on its rusty hinges.

Surely, surely, that was the commencement of madness!

Yet for Percy's sake, because he might want her, because he might have
need of her courage and of her presence of mind, she tried to keep her
wits about her. But it was difficult! oh! terribly difficult! especially
when the shade of evening began to gather in, and peopled the squalid,
whitewashed room with innumerable threatening ghouls.

Then when the moon came up, a silver ray crept in through the tiny
window and struck full upon that grey door, making it look weird and
spectral like the entrance to a house of ghosts.

Even now as there was a distinct sound of the pushing of bolts and bars,
Marguerite thought that she was the prey of hallucinations. The Abbe
Foucquet was sitting in the remote and darkest corner of the room,
quietly telling his beads. His serene philosophy and gentle placidity
could in no way be disturbed by the opening or shutting of a door, or by
the bearer of good or evil tidings.

The room now seemed strangely gloomy and cavernous, with those deep,
black shadows all around and that white ray of the moon which struck so
weirdly on the door.

Marguerite shuddered with one of those unaccountable premonitions of
something evil about to come, which ofttimes assail those who have a
nervous and passionate temperament.

The door swung slowly open upon its hinges: there was a quick word of
command, and the light of a small oil lamp struck full into the gloom.
Vaguely Marguerite discerned a group of men, soldiers no doubt, for
there was a glint of arms and the suggestion of tricolour cockades and
scarves. One of the men was holding the lamp aloft, another took a few
steps forward into the room. He turned to Marguerite, entirely ignoring
the presence of the old priest, and addressed her peremptorily.

"Your presence is desired by the citizen governor," he said curtly;
"stand up and follow me."

"Whither am I to go?" she asked.

"To where my men will take you. Now then, quick's the word. The citizen
governor does not like to wait."

At a word of command from him, two more soldiers now entered the room
and placed themselves one on each side of Marguerite, who, knowing that
resistance was useless, had already risen and was prepared to go.

The Abbe tried to utter a word of protest and came quickly forward
towards Marguerite, but he was summarily and very roughly pushed aside.

"Now then, calotin," said the first soldier with an oath, "this is none
of your business. Forward! march!" he added, addressing his men, "and
you, Citizeness, will find it wiser to come quietly along and not to
attempt any tricks with me, or the gag and manacles will have to be
used."

But Marguerite had no intention of resisting. She was too tired even to
wonder as to what they meant to do with her or whither they were going;
she moved as in a dream and felt a hope within her that she was being
led to death: summary executions were the order of the day, she knew
that, and sighed for this simple solution of the awful problem which had
been harassing her these past two days.

She was being led along a passage, stumbling ever and anon as she
walked, for it was but dimly lighted by the same little oil lamp, which
one of the soldiers was carrying in front, holding it high up above his
head: then they went down a narrow flight of stone steps, until she and
her escort reached a heavy oak door.

A halt was ordered at this point: and the man in command of the little
party pushed the door open and walked in. Marguerite caught sight of
a room beyond, dark and gloomy-looking, as was her own prison cell.
Somewhere on the left there was obviously a window; she could not see
it but guessed that it was there because the moon struck full upon the
floor, ghost-like and spectral, well fitting in with the dream-like
state in which Marguerite felt herself to be.

In the centre of the room she could discern a table with a chair close
beside it, also a couple of tallow candles, which flickered in the
draught caused no doubt by that open window which she could not see.

All these little details impressed themselves on Marguerite's mind, as
she stood there, placidly waiting until she should once more be told to
move along. The table, the chair, that unseen window, trivial objects
though they were, assumed before her overwrought fancy an utterly
disproportionate importance. She caught herself presently counting up
the number of boards visible on the floor, and watching the smoke of the
tallow-candles rising up towards the grimy ceiling.

After a few minutes' weary waiting which seemed endless to Marguerite,
there came a short word of command from within and she was roughly
pushed forward into the room by one of the men. The cool air of a late
September's evening gently fanned her burning temples. She looked round
her and now perceived that someone was sitting at the table, the other
side of the tallow-candles--a man, with head bent over a bundle of
papers and shading his face against the light with his hand.

He rose as she approached, and the flickering flame of the candles
played weirdly upon the slight, sable-clad figure, illumining the keen,
ferret-like face, and throwing fitful gleams across the deep-set eyes
and the narrow, cruel mouth.

It was Chauvelin.

Mechanically Marguerite took the chair which the soldier drew towards
her, ordering her curtly to sit down. She seemed to have but
little power to move. Though all her faculties had suddenly become
preternaturally alert at sight of this man, whose very life now was
spent in doing her the most grievous wrong that one human being can do
to another, yet all these faculties were forcefully centred in the one
mighty effort not to flinch before him, not to let him see for a moment
that she was afraid.

She compelled her eyes to look at him fully and squarely, her lips not
to tremble, her very heart to stop its wild, excited beating. She felt
his keen eyes fixed intently upon her, but more in curiosity than in
hatred or satisfied vengeance.

When she had sat down he came round the table and moved towards her.
When he drew quite near, she instinctively recoiled. It had been an
almost imperceptible action on her part and certainly an involuntary
one, for she did not wish to betray a single thought or emotion, until
she knew what he wished to say.

But he had noted her movement--a sort of drawing up and stiffening of
her whole person as he approached. He seemed pleased to see it, for
he smiled sarcastically but with evident satisfaction, and--as if his
purpose was now accomplished--he immediately withdrew and went back to
his former seat on the other side of the table. After that he ordered
the soldiers to go.

"But remain at attention outside, you and your men," he added, "ready to
enter if I call."

It was Marguerite's turn to smile at this obvious sign of a lurking fear
on Chauvelin's part, and a line of sarcasm and contempt curled her full
lips.

The soldiers having obeyed and the oak door having closed upon them,
Marguerite was now alone with the man whom she hated and loathed beyond
every living thing on earth.

She wondered when he would begin to speak and why he had sent for her.
But he seemed in no hurry to begin. Still shading his face with his
hand, he was watching her with utmost attention: she, on the other hand,
was looking through and beyond him, with contemptuous indifference, as
if his presence here did not interest her in the least.

She would give him no opening for this conversation which he had
sought and which she felt would prove either purposeless or else deeply
wounding to her heart and to her pride. She sat, therefore, quite still
with the flickering and yellow light fully illumining her delicate face,
with its child-like curves, and delicate features, the noble, straight
brow, the great blue eyes and halo of golden hair.

"My desire to see you here to-night, must seem strange to you, Lady
Blakeney," said Chauvelin at last.

Then, as she did not reply, he continued, speaking quite gently, almost
deferentially:

"There are various matters of grave importance, which the events of the
next twenty-four hours will reveal to your ladyship: and believe me
that I am actuated by motives of pure friendship towards you in this
my effort to mitigate the unpleasantness of such news as you might hear
to-morrow perhaps, by giving you due warning of what its nature might
be."

She turned great questioning eyes upon him, and in their expression she
tried to put all the contempt which she felt, all the bitterness, all
the defiance and the pride.

He quietly shrugged his shoulders.

"Ah! I fear me," he said, "that your ladyship, as usual doth me grievous
wrong. It is but natural that you should misjudge me, yet believe me..."

"A truce on this foolery, M. Chauvelin," she broke in, with sudden
impatient vehemence, "pray leave your protestations of friendship and
courtesy alone, there is no one here to hear them. I pray you proceed
with what you have to say."

"Ah!" It was a sigh of satisfaction on the part of Chauvelin. Her
anger and impatience even at this early stage of the interview proved
sufficiently that her icy restraint was only on the surface.

And Chauvelin always knew how to deal with vehemence. He loved to play
with the emotions of a passionate fellow-creature: it was only the
imperturbable calm of a certain enemy of his that was wont to shake his
own impenetrable armour of reserve.

"As your ladyship desires," he said, with a slight and ironical bow of
the head. "But before proceeding according to your wish, I am compelled
to ask your ladyship just one question."

"And that is?"

"Have you reflected what your present position means to that inimitable
prince of dandies, Sir Percy Blakeney?"

"Is it necessary for your present purpose, Monsieur, that you should
mention my husband's name at all?" she asked.

"It is indispensable, fair lady," he replied suavely, "for is not the
fate of your husband so closely intertwined with yours, that his actions
will inevitably be largely influenced by your own."

Marguerite gave a start of surprise, and as Chauvelin had paused she
tried to read what hidden meaning lay behind these last words of his.
Was it his intention then to propose some bargain, one of those terrible
"either-or's" of which he seemed to possess the malignant secret? Oh!
if that was so, if indeed he had sent for her in order to suggest one of
those terrible alternatives of his, then--be it what it may, be it the
wildest conception which the insane brain of a fiend could invent, she
would accept it, so long as the man she loved were given one single
chance of escape.

Therefore she turned to her arch-enemy in a more conciliatory spirit
now, and even endeavoured to match her own diplomatic cunning against
his.

"I do not understand," she said tentatively. "How can my actions
influence those of my husband? I am a prisoner in Boulogne: he probably
is not aware of that fact yet and..."

"Sir Percy Blakeney may be in Boulogne at any moment now," he
interrupted quietly. "An I mistake not, few places can offer such great
attractions to that peerless gentleman of fashion than doth this humble
provincial town of France just at this present.... Hath it not the
honour of harbouring Lady Blakeney within its gates?... And your
ladyship may indeed believe me when I say that the day that Sir Percy
lands in our hospitable port, two hundred pairs of eyes will be fixed
upon him, lest he should wish to quit it again."

"And if there were two thousand, sir," she said impulsively, "they would
not stop his coming or going as he pleased."

"Nay, fair lady," he said, with a smile, "are you then endowing Sir
Percy Blakeney with the attributes which, as popular fancy has it,
belong exclusively to that mysterious English hero, the Scarlet
Pimpernel?"

"A truce to your diplomacy, Monsieur Chauvelin," she retorted, goaded by
his sarcasm, "why should we try to fence with one another? What was the
object of your journey to England? of the farce which you enacted in
my house, with the help of the woman Candeille? of that duel and
that challenge, save that you desired to entice Sir Percy Blakeney to
France?"

"And also his charming wife," he added with an ironical bow.

She bit her lip, and made no comment.

"Shall we say that I succeeded admirably?" he continued, speaking with
persistent urbanity and calm, "and that I have strong cause to hope that
the elusive Pimpernel will soon be a guest on our friendly shores?...
There! you see I too have laid down the foils.... As you say, why should
we fence? Your ladyship is now in Boulogne, soon Sir Percy will come to
try and take you away from us, but believe me, fair lady, that it would
take more than the ingenuity and the daring of the Scarlet Pimpernel
magnified a thousandfold to get him back to England again... unless..."

"Unless?..."

Marguerite held her breath. She felt now as if the whole universe must
stand still during the next supreme moment, until she had heard what
Chauvelin's next words would be.

There was to be an "unless" then? An "either-or" more terrible no doubt
than the one he had formulated before her just a year ago.

Chauvelin, she knew, was past master in the art of putting a knife at
his victim's throat and of giving it just the necessary twist with his
cruel and relentless "unless"!

But she felt quite calm, because her purpose was resolute. There is no
doubt that during this agonizing moment of suspense she was absolutely
firm in her determination to accept any and every condition which
Chauvelin would put before her as the price of her husband's safety.
After all, these conditions, since he placed them before HER, could
resolve themselves into questions of her own life against her husband's.

With that unreasoning impulse which was one of her most salient
characteristics, she never paused to think that, to Chauvelin, her own
life or death were only the means to the great end which he had in view:
the complete annihilation of the Scarlet Pimpernel.

That end could only be reached by Percy Blakeney's death--not by her
own.

Even now as she was watching him with eyes glowing and lips tightly
closed, lest a cry of impatient agony should escape her throat,
he,--like a snail that has shown its slimy horns too soon, and is not
ready to face the enemy as yet,--seemed suddenly to withdraw within his
former shell of careless suavity. The earnestness of his tone vanished,
giving place to light and easy conversation, just as if he were
discussing social topics with a woman of fashion in a Paris
drawing-room.

"Nay!" he said pleasantly, "is not your ladyship taking this matter in
too serious a spirit? Of a truth you repeated my innocent word 'unless'
even as if I were putting knife at your dainty throat. Yet I meant
naught that need disturb you yet. Have I not said that I am your friend?
Let me try and prove it to you."

"You will find that a difficult task, Monsieur," she said drily.

"Difficult tasks always have had a great fascination for your humble
servant. May I try?"

"Certainly."

"Shall we then touch at the root of this delicate matter? Your ladyship,
so I understand, is at this moment under the impression that I desire
to encompass--shall I say?--the death of an English gentleman for whom,
believe me, I have the greatest respect. That is so, is it not?"

"What is so, M. Chauvelin?" she asked almost stupidly, for truly she had
not even begun to grasp his meaning. "I do not understand."

"You think that I am at this moment taking measures for sending the
Scarlet Pimpernel to the guillotine? Eh?"

"I do."

"Never was so great an error committed by a clever woman. Your ladyship
must believe me when I say that the guillotine is the very last place
in the world where I would wish to see that enigmatic and elusive
personage."

"Are you trying to fool me, M. Chauvelin? If so, for what purpose? And
why do you lie to me like that?"

"On my honour, 'tis the truth. The death of Sir Percy Blakeney--I may
call him that, may I not?--would ill suit the purpose which I have in
view."

"What purpose? You must pardon me, Monsieur Chauvelin," she added with
a quick, impatient sigh, "but of a truth I am getting confused, and my
wits must have become dull in the past few days. I pray to you to add
to your many protestations of friendship a little more clearness in your
speech and, if possible, a little more brevity. What then is the purpose
which you had in view when you enticed my husband to come over to
France?"

"My purpose was the destruction of the Scarlet Pimpernel, not the death
of Sir Percy Blakeney. Believe me, I have a great regard for Sir Percy.
He is a most accomplished gentleman, witty, brilliant, an inimitable
dandy. Why should he not grace with his presence the drawing-rooms of
London or of Brighton for many years to come?"

She looked at him with puzzled inquiry. For one moment the thought
flashed through her mind that, after all, Chauvelin might be still in
doubt as to the identity of the Scarlet Pimpernel.... But no! that hope
was madness.... It was preposterous and impossible.... But then, why?
why? why?... Oh God! for a little more patience!

"What I have just said may seem a little enigmatic to your ladyship," he
continued blandly, "but surely so clever a woman as yourself, so great
a lady as is the wife of Sir Percy Blakeney, Baronet, will be aware
that there are other means of destroying an enemy than the taking of his
life."

"For instance, Monsieur Chauvelin?"

"There is the destruction of his honour," he replied slowly.

A long, bitter laugh, almost hysterical in its loud outburst, broke from
the very depths of Marguerite's convulsed heart.

"The destruction of his honour!... ha! ha! ha! ha!... of a truth,
Monsieur Chauvelin, your inventive powers have led you beyond the bounds
of dreamland!... Ha! ha! ha! ha!... It is in the land of madness
that you are wandering, sir, when you talk in one breath of Sir Percy
Blakeney and the possible destruction of his honour!"

But he remained apparently quite unruffled, and when her laughter had
somewhat subsided, he said placidly:

"Perhaps!..."

Then he rose from his chair, and once more approached her. This time she
did not shrink from him. The suggestion which he had made just now, this
talk of attacking her husband's honour rather than his life, seemed so
wild and preposterous--the conception truly of a mind unhinged--that she
looked upon it as a sign of extreme weakness on his part, almost as an
acknowledgement of impotence.

But she watched him as he moved round the table more in curiosity now
than in fright. He puzzled her, and she still had a feeling at the back
of her mind that there must be something more definite and more evil
lurking at the back of that tortuous brain.

"Will your ladyship allow me to conduct you to yonder window?" he said,
"the air is cool, and what I have to say can best be done in sight of
yonder sleeping city."

His tone was one of perfect courtesy, even of respectful deference
through which not the slightest trace of sarcasm could be discerned, and
she, still actuated by curiosity and interest, not in any way by fear,
quietly rose to obey him. Though she ignored the hand which he was
holding out towards her, she followed him readily enough as he walked up
to the window.

All through this agonizing and soul-stirring interview she had felt
heavily oppressed by the close atmosphere of the room, rendered nauseous
by the evil smell of the smoky tallow-candles which were left to spread
their grease and smoke abroad unchecked. Once or twice she had gazed
longingly towards the suggestion of pure air outside.

Chauvelin evidently had still much to say to her: the torturing, mental
rack to which she was being subjected had not yet fully done its work.
It still was capable of one or two turns, a twist or so which might
succeed in crushing her pride and her defiance. Well! so be it! she
was in the man's power: had placed herself therein through her own
unreasoning impulse. This interview was but one of the many soul-agonies
which she had been called upon to endure, and if by submitting to it all
she could in a measure mitigate her own faults and be of help to the
man she loved, she would find the sacrifice small and the mental torture
easy to bear.

Therefore when Chauvelin beckoned to her to draw near, she went up to
the window, and leaning her head against the deep stone embrasure, she
looked out into the night.




Chapter XXIII The Hostage



Chauvelin, without speaking, extended his hand out towards the city as
if to invite Marguerite to gaze upon it.

She was quite unconscious what hour of the night it might be, but it
must have been late, for the little town, encircled by the stony arms
of its forts, seemed asleep. The moon, now slowly sinking in the west,
edged the towers and spires with filmy lines of silver. To the right
Marguerite caught sight of the frowning Beffroi, which even as she gazed
out began tolling its heavy bell. It sounded like the tocsin, dull and
muffled. After ten strokes it was still.

Ten o'clock! At this hour in far-off England, in fashionable London, the
play was just over, crowds of gaily dressed men and women poured out of
the open gates of the theatres calling loudly for attendant or chaise.
Thence to balls or routs, gaily fluttering like so many butterflies,
brilliant and irresponsible....

And in England also, in the beautiful gardens of her Richmond home,
ofttimes at ten o'clock she had wandered alone with Percy, when he was
at home, and the spirit of adventure in him momentarily laid to rest.
Then, when the night was very dark and the air heavy with the scent of
roses and lilies, she lay quiescent in his arms in that little arbour
beside the river. The rhythmic lapping of the waves was the only sound
that stirred the balmy air. He seldom spoke then, for his voice would
shake whenever he uttered a word: but his impenetrable armour of
flippancy was pierced through and he did not speak because his lips were
pressed to hers, and his love had soared beyond the domain of speech.

A shudder of intense mental pain went through her now as she gazed on
the sleeping city, and sweet memories of the past turned to bitterness
in this agonizing present. One by one as the moon gradually disappeared
behind a bank of clouds, the towers of Boulogne were merged in the
gloom. In front of her far, far away, beyond the flat sand dunes, the
sea seemed to be calling to her with a ghostly and melancholy moan.

The window was on the ground floor of the Fort, and gave direct onto the
wide and shady walk which runs along the crest of the city walls; from
where she stood Marguerite was looking straight along the ramparts, some
thirty metres wide at this point, flanked on either side by the granite
balustrade, and adorned with a double row of ancient elms stunted and
twisted into grotesque shapes by the persistent action of the wind.

"These wide ramparts are a peculiarity of this city..." said a voice
close to her ear, "at times of peace they form an agreeable promenade
under the shade of the trees, and a delightful meeting-place for
lovers... or enemies...."

The sound brought her back to the ugly realities of the present: the
rose-scented garden at Richmond, the lazily flowing river, the tender
memories which for that brief moment had confronted her from out a happy
past, suddenly vanished from her ken. Instead of these the brine-laden
sea-air struck her quivering nostrils, the echo of the old Beffroi died
away in her ear, and now from out one of the streets or open places of
the sleeping city there came the sound of a raucous voice, shooting in
monotonous tones a string of words, the meaning of which failed to reach
her brain.

Not many feet below the window, the southern ramparts of the town
stretched away into the darkness. She felt unaccountably cold suddenly
as she looked down upon them and, with aching eyes, tried to pierce the
gloom. She was shivering in spite of the mildness of this early
autumnal night: her overwrought fancy was peopling the lonely walls
with unearthly shapes strolling along, discussing in spectral language a
strange duel which was to take place here between a noted butcher of men
and a mad Englishman overfond of adventure.

The ghouls seemed to pass and repass along in front of her and to be
laughing audibly because that mad Englishman had been offered his life
in exchange for his honour. They laughed and laughed, no doubt because
he refused the bargain--Englishmen were always eccentric, and in these
days of equality and other devices of a free and glorious revolution,
honour was such a very marketable commodity that it seemed ridiculous to
prize it quite so highly. Then they strolled away again and disappeared,
whilst Marguerite distinctly heard the scrunching of the path beneath
their feet. She leant forward to peer still further into the darkness,
for this sound had seemed so absolutely real, but immediately a
detaining hand was place upon her arm and a sarcastic voice murmured at
her elbow:

"The result, fair lady, would only be a broken leg or arm; the height is
not great enough for picturesque suicides, and believe me these ramparts
are only haunted by ghosts."

She drew back as if a viper had stung her; for the moment she had become
oblivious of Chauvelin's presence. However, she would not take notice
of his taunt, and, after a slight pause, he asked her if she could hear
the town crier over in the public streets.

"Yes," she replied.

"What he says at this present moment is of vast importance to your
ladyship," he remarked drily.

"How so?"

"Your ladyship is a precious hostage. We are taking measures to guard
our valuable property securely."

Marguerite thought of the Abbe Foucquet, who no doubt was still quietly
telling his beads, even if in his heart he had begun to wonder what had
become of her. She thought of Francois, who was the breadwinner, and of
Felicite, who was blind.

"Methinks you and your colleagues have done that already," she said.

"Not as completely as we would wish. We know the daring of the Scarlet
Pimpernel. We are not even ashamed to admit that we fear his luck, his
impudence and his marvellous ingenuity.... Have I not told you that I
have the greatest possible respect for that mysterious English hero....
An old priest and two young children might be spirited away by that
enigmatical adventurer, even whilst Lady Blakeney herself is made to
vanish from our sight."

"Ah! I see your ladyship is taking my simple words as a confession
of weakness," he continued, noting the swift sigh of hope which had
involuntarily escaped her lips. "Nay! and it please you, you shall
despise me for it. But a confession of weakness is the first sign of
strength. The Scarlet Pimpernel is still at large, and whilst we guard
our hostage securely, he is bound to fall into our hands."

"Aye! still at large!" she retorted with impulsive defiance. "Think
you that all your bolts and bars, the ingenuity of yourself and your
colleagues, the collaboration of the devil himself, would succeed in
outwitting the Scarlet Pimpernel, now that his purpose will be to try
and drag ME from out your clutches."

She felt hopeful and proud. Now that she had the pure air of heaven in
her lungs, that from afar she could smell the sea, and could feel
that perhaps in a straight line of vision from where she stood, the
"Day-Dream" with Sir Percy on board, might be lying out there in the
roads, it seemed impossible that he should fail in freeing her and those
poor people--an old man and two children--whose lives depended on her
own.

But Chauvelin only laughed a dry, sarcastic laugh and said:

"Hm! perhaps not!... It of course will depend on you and your
personality... your feelings in such matters... and whether an English
gentleman likes to save his own skin at the expense of others."

Marguerite shivered as if from cold.

"Ah! I see," resumed Chauvelin quietly, "that your ladyship has not
quite grasped the position. That public crier is a long way off: the
words have lingered on the evening breeze and have failed to reach your
brain. Do you suppose that I and my colleagues do not know that all the
ingenuity of which the Scarlet Pimpernel is capable will now be directed
in piloting Lady Blakeney, and incidentally the Abbe Foucquet with his
nephew and niece, safely across the Channel! Four people!... Bah! a
bagatelle, for this mighty conspirator, who but lately snatched twenty
aristocrats from the prisons of Lyons.... Nay! nay! two children and
an old man were not enough to guard our precious hostage, and I was not
thinking of either the Abbe Foucquet or of the two children, when I
said that an English gentleman would not save himself at the expense of
others."

"Of whom then were you thinking, Monsieur Chauvelin? Whom else have you
set to guard the prize which you value so highly?"

"The whole city of Boulogne," he replied simply.

"I do not understand."

"Let me make my point clear. My colleague, Citizen Collot d'Herbois,
rode over from Paris yesterday; like myself he is a member of the
Committee of Public Safety whose duty it is to look after the welfare
of France by punishing all those who conspire against her laws and the
liberties of the people. Chief among these conspirators, whom it is our
duty to punish is, of course, that impudent adventurer who calls himself
the Scarlet Pimpernel. He has given the government of France a great
deal of trouble through his attempts--mostly successful, as I have
already admitted,--at frustrating the just vengeance which an oppressed
country has the right to wreak on those who have proved themselves to be
tyrants and traitors."

"Is it necessary to recapitulate all this, Monsieur Chauvelin?" she
asked impatiently.

"I think so," he replied blandly. "You see, my point is this. We feel
that in a measure now the Scarlet Pimpernel is in our power. Within the
next few hours he will land at Boulogne... Boulogne, where he has agreed
to fight a duel with me... Boulogne, where Lady Blakeney happens to
be at this present moment... as you see, Boulogne has a great
responsibility to bear: just now she is to a certain extent the proudest
city in France, since she holds within her gates a hostage for the
appearance on our shores of her country's most bitter enemy. But she
must not fall from that high estate. Her double duty is clear before
her: she must guard Lady Blakeney and capture the Scarlet Pimpernel;
if she fail in the former she must be punished, if she succeed in the
latter she shall be rewarded."

He paused and leaned out of the window again, whilst she watched him,
breathless and terrified. She was beginning to understand.

"Hark!" he said, looking straight at her. "Do you hear the crier now? He
is proclaiming the punishment and the reward. He is making it clear
to the citizens of Boulogne that on the day when the Scarlet Pimpernel
falls into the hands of the Committee of Public Safety a general amnesty
will be granted to all natives of Boulogne who are under arrest at the
present time, and a free pardon to all those who, born within these
city walls, are to-day under sentence of death.... A noble reward, eh?
well-deserved you'll admit.... Should you wonder then if the whole town
of Boulogne were engaged just now in finding that mysterious hero, and
delivering him into our hands?... How many mothers, sisters, wives,
think you, at the present moment, would fail to lay hands on the English
adventurer, if a husband's or a son's life or freedom happened to be
at stake?... I have some records there," he continued, pointing in the
direction of the table, "which tell me that there are five and thirty
natives of Boulogne in the local prisons, a dozen more in the prisons
of Paris; of these at least twenty have been tried already and are
condemned to death. Every hour that the Scarlet Pimpernel succeeds in
evading his captors so many deaths lie at his door. If he succeeds in
once more reaching England safely three score lives mayhap will be the
price of his escape.... Nay! but I see your ladyship is shivering with
cold..." he added with a dry little laugh, "shall I close the window? or
do you wish to hear what punishment will be meted out to Boulogne, if on
the day that the Scarlet Pimpernel is captured, Lady Blakeney happens to
have left the shelter of these city walls?"

"I pray you proceed, Monsieur," she rejoined with perfect calm.

"The Committee of Public Safety," he resumed, "would look upon this city
as a nest of traitors if on the day that the Scarlet Pimpernel becomes
our prisoner Lady Blakeney herself, the wife of that notorious English
spy, had already quitted Boulogne. The whole town knows by now that you
are in our hands--you, the most precious hostage we can hold for the
ultimate capture of the man whom we all fear and detest. Virtually the
town-crier is at the present moment proclaiming to the inhabitants of
this city: 'We want that man, but we already have his wife, see to it,
citizens, that she does not escape! for if she do, we shall summarily
shoot the breadwinner in every family in the town!'"

A cry of horror escaped Marguerite's parched lips.

"Are you devils then, all of you," she gasped, "that you should think of
such things?"

"Aye! some of us are devils, no doubt," said Chauvelin drily; "but why
should you honour us in this case with so flattering an epithet? We are
mere men striving to guard our property and mean no harm to the citizens
of Boulogne. We have threatened them, true! but is it not for you
and that elusive Pimpernel to see that the threat is never put into
execution?"

"You would not do it!" she repeated, horror-stricken.

"Nay! I pray you, fair lady, do not deceive yourself. At present the
proclamation sounds like a mere threat, I'll allow, but let me assure
you that if we fail to capture the Scarlet Pimpernel and if you on
the other hand are spirited out of this fortress by that mysterious
adventurer we shall undoubtedly shoot or guillotine every able-bodied
man and woman in this town."

He had spoken quietly and emphatically, neither with bombast, nor with
rage, and Marguerite saw in his face nothing but a calm and ferocious
determination, the determination of an entire nation embodied in this
one man, to be revenged at any cost. She would not let him see the depth
of her despair, nor would she let him read in her face the unutterable
hopelessness which filled her soul. It were useless to make an appeal
to him: she knew full well that from him she could obtain neither
gentleness nor mercy.

"I hope at last I have made the situation quite clear to your ladyship?"
he was asking quite pleasantly now. "See how easy is your position: you
have but to remain quiescent in room No. 6, and if any chance of escape
be offered you ere the Scarlet Pimpernel is captured, you need but to
think of all the families of Boulogne, who would be deprived of their
breadwinner--fathers and sons mostly, but there are girls too, who
support their mothers or sisters; the fish curers of Boulogne are mostly
women, and there are the net-makers and the seamstresses, all would
suffer if your ladyship were no longer to be found in No. 6 room of this
ancient fort, whilst all would be included in the amnesty if the Scarlet
Pimpernel fell into our hands..."

He gave a low, satisfied chuckle which made Marguerite think of the evil
spirits in hell exulting over the torments of unhappy lost souls.

"I think, Lady Blakeney," he added drily and making her an ironical bow,
"that your humble servant hath outwitted the elusive hero at last."

Quietly he turned on his heel and went back into the room, Marguerite
remaining motionless beside the open window, where the soft, brine-laden
air, the distant murmur of the sea, the occasional cry of a sea-mew, all
seemed to mock her agonizing despair.

The voice of the town-crier came nearer and nearer now: she could hear
the words he spoke quite distinctly: something about "amnesty" and
pardon, the reward for the capture of the Scarlet Pimpernel, the lives
of men, women and children in exchange for his.

Oh! she knew what all that meant! that Percy would not hesitate one
single instant to throw his life into the hands of his enemies, in
exchange for that of others. Others! others! always others! this
sigh that had made her heart ache so often in England, what terrible
significance it bore now!

And how he would suffer in his heart and in his pride, because of her
whom he could not even attempt to save since it would mean the death of
others! of others, always of others!

She wondered if he had already landed in Boulogne! Again she remembered
the vision on the landing stage: his massive figure, the glimpse she had
of the loved form, in the midst of the crowd!

The moment he entered the town he would hear the proclamation read, see
it posted up no doubt on every public building, and realize that she had
been foolish enough to follow him, that she was a prisoner and that he
could do nothing to save her.

What would he do? Marguerite at the thought instinctively pressed her
hands to her heart, the agony of it all had become physically painful.
She hoped that perhaps this pain meant approaching death! oh! how easy
would this simple solution be!

The moon peered out from beneath the bank of clouds which had obscured
her for so long; smiling, she drew her pencilled silver lines along the
edge of towers and pinnacles, the frowning Beffroi and those stony walls
which seemed to Marguerite as if they encircled a gigantic graveyard.

The town-crier had evidently ceased to read the proclamation. One by
one the windows in the public square were lighted up from within. The
citizens of Boulogne wanted to think over the strange events which had
occurred without their knowledge, yet which were apparently to have such
direful or such joyous consequences for them.

A man to be captured! the mysterious English adventurer of whom they
had all heard, but whom nobody had seen. And a woman--his wife--to be
guarded until the man was safely under lock and key.

Marguerite felt as if she could almost hear them talking it over and
vowing that she should not escape, and that the Scarlet Pimpernel should
soon be captured.

A gentle wind stirred the old gnarled trees on the southern ramparts, a
wind that sounded like the sigh of swiftly dying hope.

What could Percy do now? His hands were tied, and he was inevitably
destined to endure the awful agony of seeing the woman he loved die a
terrible death beside him.

Having captured him, they would not keep him long; no necessity for a
trial, for detention, for formalities of any kind. A summary execution
at dawn on the public place, a roll of drums, a public holiday to mark
the joyful event, and a brave man will have ceased to live, a noble
heart have stilled its beatings forever, whilst a whole nation gloried
over the deed.

"Sleep, citizens of Boulogne! all is still!"

The night watchman had replaced the town-crier. All was quiet within
the city walls: the inhabitants could sleep in peace, a beneficent
government was wakeful and guarding their rest.

But many of the windows of the town remained lighted up, and at a little
distance below her, round the corner so that she could not see it, a
small crowd must have collected in front of the gateway which led into
the courtyard of the Gayole Fort. Marguerite could hear a persistent
murmur of voices, mostly angry and threatening, and once there were loud
cries of: "English spies," and "a la lanterne!"

"The citizens of Boulogne are guarding the treasures of France!"
commented Chauvelin drily, as he laughed again, that cruel, mirthless
laugh of his.

Then she roused herself from her torpor: she did not know how long she
had stood beside the open window, but the fear seized her that that man
must have seen and gloated over the agony of her mind. She straightened
her graceful figure, threw back her proud head defiantly, and quietly
walked up to the table, where Chauvelin seemed once more absorbed in the
perusal of his papers.

"Is this interview over?" she asked quietly, and without the slightest
tremor in her voice. "May I go now?"

"As soon as you wish," he replied with gentle irony.

He regarded her with obvious delight, for truly she was beautiful: grand
in this attitude of defiant despair. The man, who had spent the last
half-hour in martyrizing her, gloried over the misery which he had
wrought, and which all her strength of will could not entirely banish
from her face.

"Will you believe me, Lady Blakeney?" he added, "that there is no
personal animosity in my heart towards you or your husband? Have I not
told you that I do not wish to compass his death?"

"Yet you propose to send him to the guillotine as soon as you have laid
hands on him."

"I have explained to you the measures which I have taken in order to
make sure that we DO lay hands on the Scarlet Pimpernel. Once he is in
our power, it will rest with him to walk to the guillotine or to embark
with you on board his yacht."

"You propose to place an alternative before Sir Percy Blakeney?"

"Certainly."

"To offer him his life?"

"And that of his charming wife."

"In exchange for what?"

"His honour."

"He will refuse, Monsieur."

"We shall see."

Then he touched a handbell which stood on the table, and within a few
seconds the door was opened and the soldier who had led Marguerite
hither, re-entered the room.

The interview was at an end. It had served its purpose. Marguerite knew
now that she must not even think of escape for herself, or hope for
safety for the man she loved. Of Chauvelin's talk of a bargain which
would touch Percy's honour she would not even think: and she was too
proud to ask anything further from him.

Chauvelin stood up and made her a deep bow, as she crossed the room and
finally went out of the door. The little company of soldiers closed in
around her and she was once more led along the dark passages, back to
her own prison cell.




Chapter XXIV: Colleagues



As soon as the door had closed behind Marguerite, there came from
somewhere in the room the sound of a yawn, a grunt and a volley of
oaths.

The flickering light of the tallow candles had failed to penetrate into
all the corners, and now from out one of these dark depths, a certain
something began to detach itself, and to move forward towards the table
at which Chauvelin had once more resumed his seat.

"Has the damned aristocrat gone at last?" queried a hoarse voice, as a
burly body clad in loose-fitting coat and mud-stained boots and breeches
appeared within the narrow circle of light.

"Yes," replied Chauvelin curtly.

"And a cursed long time you have been with the baggage," grunted the
other surlily. "Another five minutes and I'd have taken the matter in my
own hands.

"An assumption of authority," commented Chauvelin quietly, "to which
your position here does not entitle you, Citizen Collot."

Collot d'Herbois lounged lazily forward, and presently he threw his
ill-knit figure into the chair lately vacated by Marguerite. His heavy,
square face bore distinct traces of the fatigue endured in the past
twenty-four hours on horseback or in jolting market waggons. His temper
too appeared to have suffered on the way, and, at Chauvelin's curt and
dictatorial replies, he looked as surly as a chained dog.

"You were wasting your breath over that woman," he muttered, bringing a
large and grimy fist heavily down on the table, "and your measures are
not quite so sound as your fondly imagine, Citizen Chauvelin."

"They were mostly of your imagining, Citizen Collot," rejoined the other
quietly, "and of your suggestion."

"I added a touch of strength and determination to your mild
milk-and-water notions, Citizen," snarled Collot spitefully. "I'd have
knocked that intriguing woman's brains out at the very first possible
opportunity, had I been consulted earlier than this."

"Quite regardless of the fact that such violent measures would
completely damn all our chances of success as far as the capture of
the Scarlet Pimpernel is concerned," remarked Chauvelin drily, with
a contemptuous shrug of the shoulders. "Once his wife is dead, the
Englishman will never run his head into the noose which I have so
carefully prepared for him."

"So you say, Chauvelin; and therefore I suggested to you certain
measures to prevent the woman escaping which you will find adequate, I
hope."

"You need have no fear, Citizen Collot," said Chauvelin curtly, "this
woman will make no attempt at escape now."

"If she does..." and Collot d'Herbois swore an obscene oath.

"I think she understands that we mean to put our threat in execution."

"Threat?... It was no empty threat, Citizen.... Sacre tonnerre! if that
woman escapes now, by all the devils in hell I swear that I'll wield the
guillotine myself and cut off the head of every able-bodied man or woman
in Boulogne, with my own hands."

As he said this his face assumed such an expression of inhuman cruelty,
such a desire to kill, such a savage lust for blood, that instinctively
Chauvelin shuddered and shrank away from his colleague. All through
his career there is no doubt that this man, who was of gentle birth,
of gentle breeding, and who had once been called M. le Marquis de
Chauvelin, must have suffered in his susceptibilities and in his pride
when in contact with the revolutionaries with whom he had chosen to cast
his lot. He could not have thrown off all his old ideas of refinement
quite so easily, as to feel happy in the presence of such men as Collot
d'Herbois, or Marat in his day--men who had become brute beasts, more
ferocious far than any wild animal, more scientifically cruel than any
feline prowler in jungle or desert.

One look in Collot's distorted face was sufficient at this moment to
convince Chauvelin that it were useless for him to view the proclamation
against the citizens of Boulogne merely as an idle threat, even if he
had wished to do so. That Marguerite would not, under the circumstances,
attempt to escape, that Sir Percy Blakeney himself would be forced
to give up all thoughts of rescuing her, was a foregone conclusion
in Chauvelin's mind, but if this high-born English gentleman had not
happened to be the selfless hero that he was, if Marguerite Blakeney
were cast in a different, a rougher mould--if, in short, the Scarlet
Pimpernel in the face of the proclamation did succeed in dragging his
wife out of the clutches of the Terrorists, then it was equally certain
that Collot d'Herbois would carry out his rabid and cruel reprisals
to the full. And if in the course of the wholesale butchery of the
able-bodied and wage-earning inhabitants of Boulogne, the headsman
should sink worn out, then would this ferocious sucker of blood put his
own hand to the guillotine, with the same joy and lust which he had
felt when he ordered one hundred and thirty-eight women of Nantes to
be stripped naked by the soldiery before they were flung helter-skelter
into the river.

A touch of strength and determination! Aye! Citizen Collot d'Herbois had
plenty of that. Was it he, or Carriere who at Arras commanded mothers to
stand by while their children were being guillotined? And surely it was
Maignet, Collot's friend and colleague, who at Bedouin, because the Red
Flag of the Republic had been mysteriously torn down over night, burnt
the entire little village down to the last hovel and guillotined every
one of the three hundred and fifty inhabitants.

And Chauvelin knew all that. Nay, more! he was himself a member of that
so-called government which had countenanced these butcheries, by giving
unlimited powers to men like Collot, like Maignet and Carriere. He
was at one with them in their republican ideas and he believed in the
regeneration and the purification of France, through the medium of the
guillotine, but he propounded his theories and carried out his most
bloodthirsty schemes with physically clean hands and in an immaculately
cut coat.

Even now when Collot d'Herbois lounged before him, with mud-bespattered
legs stretched out before him, with dubious linen at neck and wrists,
and an odour of rank tobacco and stale, cheap wine pervading his whole
personality, the more fastidious man of the world, who had consorted
with the dandies of London and Brighton, winced at the enforced
proximity.

But it was the joint characteristic of all these men who had turned
France into a vast butchery and charnel-house, that they all feared
and hated one another, even more whole-heartedly than they hated the
aristocrats and so-called traitors whom they sent to the guillotine.
Citizen Lebon is said to have dipped his sword into the blood which
flowed from the guillotine, whilst exclaiming: "Comme je l'aime ce sang
coule de traitre!" but he and Collot and Danton and Robespierre, all of
them in fact would have regarded with more delight still the blood of
any one of their colleagues.

At this very moment Collot d'Herbois and Chauvelin would with utmost
satisfaction have denounced, one the other, to the tender mercies of the
Public Prosecutor. Collot made no secret of his hatred for Chauvelin,
and the latter disguised it but thinly under the veneer of contemptuous
indifference.

"As for that dammed Englishman," added Collot now, after a slight pause,
and with another savage oath, "if 'tis my good fortune to lay hands on
him, I'd shoot him then and there like a mad dog, and rid France once
and forever of this accursed spy."

"And think you, Citizen Collot," rejoined Chauvelin with a shrug of the
shoulders, "that France would be rid of all English adventurers by the
summary death of this one man?"

"He is the ringleader, at any rate..."

"And has at least nineteen disciples to continue his traditions of
conspiracy and intrigue. None perhaps so ingenuous as himself, none
with the same daring and good luck perhaps, but still a number of ardent
fools only too ready to follow in the footsteps of their chief. Then
there's the halo of martyrdom around the murdered hero, the enthusiasm
created by his noble death... Nay! nay, Citizen, you have not lived
among these English people, you do not understand them, or you would not
talk of sending their popular hero to an honoured grave."

But Collot d'Herbois only shook his powerful frame like some big, sulky
dog, and spat upon the floor to express his contempt of this wild talk
which seemed to have no real tangible purpose.

"You have not caught your Scarlet Pimpernel yet, Citizen," he said with
a snort.

"No, but I will, after sundown to-morrow."

"How do you know?"

"I have ordered the Angelus to be rung at one of the closed churches,
and he agreed to fight a duel with me on the southern ramparts at that
hour and on that day," said Chauvelin simply.

"You take him for a fool?" sneered Collot.

"No, only for a foolhardy adventurer."

"You imagine that with his wife as hostage in our hands, and the whole
city of Boulogne on the lookout for him for the sake of the amnesty,
that the man would be fool enough to walk on those ramparts at a given
hour, for the express purpose of getting himself caught by you and your
men?"

"I am quite sure that if we do not lay hands on him before that given
hour, that he will be on the ramparts at the Angelus to-morrow," said
Chauvelin emphatically.

Collot shrugged his broad shoulders.

"Is the man mad?" he asked with an incredulous laugh.

"Yes, I think so," rejoined the other with a smile.

"And having caught your hare," queried Collot, "how do you propose to
cook him?"

"Twelve picked men will be on the ramparts ready to seize him the moment
he appears."

"And to shoot him at sight, I hope."

"Only as a last resource, for the Englishman is powerful and may cause
our half-famished men a good deal of trouble. But I want him alive, if
possible..."

"Why? a dead lion is safer than a live one any day."

"Oh! we'll kill him right enough, Citizen. I pray you have no fear. I
hold a weapon ready for that meddlesome Scarlet Pimpernel, which will be
a thousand times more deadly and more effectual than a chance shot, or
even a guillotine."

"What weapon is that, Citizen Chauvelin?"

Chauvelin leaned forward across the table and rested his chin in his
hands; instinctively Collot too leaned towards him, and both men peered
furtively round them as if wondering if prying eyes happened to be
lurking round. It was Chauvelin's pale eyes which now gleamed with
hatred and with an insatiable lust for revenge at least as powerful as
Collot's lust for blood; the unsteady light of the tallow candles threw
grotesque shadows across his brows, and his mouth was set in such rigid
lines of implacable cruelty that the brutish sot beside him gazed on him
amazed, vaguely scenting here a depth of feeling which was beyond his
power to comprehend. He repeated his question under his breath:

"What weapon do you mean to use against that accursed spy, Citizen
Chauvelin?"

"Dishonour and ridicule!" replied the other quietly.

"Bah!"

"In exchange for his life and that of his wife."

"As the woman told you just now... he will refuse."

"We shall see, Citizen."

"You are mad to think such things, Citizen, and ill serve the Republic
by sparing her bitterest foe."

A long, sarcastic laugh broke from Chauvelin's parted lips.

"Spare him?--spare the Scarlet Pimpernel!..." he ejaculated. "Nay,
Citizen, you need have no fear of that. But believe me, I have schemes
in my head by which the man whom we all hate will be more truly
destroyed than your guillotine could ever accomplish: schemes, whereby
the hero who is now worshipped in England as a demi-god will suddenly
become an object of loathing and of contempt.... Ah! I see you
understand me now... I wish to so cover him with ridicule that the very
name of the small wayside flower will become a term of derision and of
scorn. Only then shall we be rid of these pestilential English spies,
only then will the entire League of the Scarlet Pimpernel become a thing
of the past when its whilom leader, now thought akin to a god, will have
found refuge in a suicide's grave, from the withering contempt of the
entire world."

Chauvelin had spoken low, hardly above a whisper, and the echo of his
last words died away in the great, squalid room like a long-drawn-out
sigh. There was dead silence for a while save for the murmur in the
wind outside and from the floor above the measured tread of the sentinel
guarding the precious hostage in No. 6.

Both men were staring straight in front of them. Collot d'Herbois
incredulous, half-contemptuous, did not altogether approve of these
schemes which seemed to him wild and uncanny: he liked the direct
simplicity of a summary trial, of the guillotine, or of his own well
stage-managed "Noyades." He did not feel that any ridicule or dishonour
would necessarily paralyze a man in his efforts at intrigue, and would
have liked to set Chauvelin's authority aside, to behead the woman
upstairs and then to take his chances of capturing the man later on.

But the orders of the Committee of Public Safety had been peremptory: he
was to be Chauvelin's help--not his master, and to obey in all things.
He did not dare to take any initiative in the matter, for in that case,
if he failed, the reprisals against him would indeed be terrible.

He was fairly satisfied now that Chauvelin had accepted his suggestion
of summarily sending to the guillotine one member of every family
resident in Boulogne, if Marguerite succeeded in effecting an escape,
and, of a truth, Chauvelin had hailed the fiendish suggestion with
delight. The old abbe with his nephew and niece were undoubtedly
not sufficient deterrents against the daring schemes of the Scarlet
Pimpernel, who, as a matter of fact, could spirit them out of Boulogne
just as easily as he would his own wife.

Collot's plan tied Marguerite to her own prison cell more completely
than any other measure could have done, more so indeed than the
originator thereof knew or believed.... A man like this d'Herbois--born
in the gutter, imbued with every brutish tradition, which generations of
jail-birds had bequeathed to him,--would not perhaps fully realize the
fact that neither Sir Percy nor Marguerite Blakeney would ever save
themselves at the expense of others. He had merely made the suggestion,
because he felt that Chauvelin's plans were complicated and obscure,
and above all insufficient, and that perhaps after all the English
adventurer and his wife would succeed in once more outwitting him, when
there would remain the grand and bloody compensation of a wholesale
butchery in Boulogne.

But Chauvelin was quite satisfied. He knew that under present
circumstances neither Sir Percy nor Marguerite would make any attempt to
escape. The ex-ambassador had lived in England: he understood the class
to which these two belonged, and was quite convinced that no attempt
would be made on either side to get Lady Blakeney away whilst the
present ferocious order against the bread-winner of every family in the
town held good.

Aye! the measures were sound enough. Chauvelin was easy in his
mind about that. In another twenty-four hours he would hold the man
completely in his power who had so boldly outwitted him last year;
to-night he would sleep in peace: an entire city was guarding the
precious hostage.

"We'll go to bed now, Citizen," he said to Collot, who, tired and sulky,
was moodily fingering the papers on the table. The scraping sound which
he made thereby grated on Chauvelin's overstrung nerves. He wanted to
be alone, and the sleepy brute's presence here jarred on his own solemn
mood.

To his satisfaction, Collot grunted a surly assent. Very leisurely he
rose from his chair, stretched out his loose limbs, shook himself like
a shaggy cur, and without uttering another word he gave his colleague a
curt nod, and slowly lounged out of the room.




Chapter XXV: The Unexpected



Chauvelin heaved a deep sigh of satisfaction when Collot d'Herbois
finally left him to himself. He listened for awhile until the heavy
footsteps died away in the distance, then leaning back in his chair, he
gave himself over to the delights of the present situation.

Marguerite in his power. Sir Percy Blakeney compelled to treat for her
rescue if he did not wish to see her die a miserable death.

"Aye! my elusive hero," he muttered to himself, "methinks that we shall
be able to cry quits at last."

Outside everything had become still. Even the wind in the trees out
there on the ramparts had ceased their melancholy moaning. The man was
alone with his thoughts. He felt secure and at peace, sure of victory,
content to await the events of the next twenty-four hours. The other
side of the door the guard which he had picked out from amongst the more
feeble and ill-fed garrison of the little city for attendance on his own
person were ranged ready to respond to his call.

"Dishonour and ridicule! Derision and scorn!" he murmured, gloating
over the very sound of these words, which expressed all that he hoped to
accomplish, "utter abjections, then perhaps a suicide's grave..."

He loved the silence around him, for he could murmur these words and
hear them echoing against the bare stone walls like the whisperings of
all the spirits of hate which were waiting to lend him their aid.

How long he had remained thus absorbed in his meditations, he could not
afterwards have said; a minute or two perhaps at most, whilst he leaned
back in his chair with eyes closed, savouring the sweets of his own
thoughts, when suddenly the silence was interrupted by a loud and
pleasant laugh and a drawly voice speaking in merry accents:

"The lud live you, Monsieur Chaubertin, and pray how do you propose to
accomplish all these pleasant things?"

In a moment Chauvelin was on his feet and with eyes dilated, lips parted
in awed bewilderment, he was gazing towards the open window, where
astride upon the sill, one leg inside the room, the other out, and with
the moon shining full on his suit of delicate-coloured cloth, his wide
caped coat and elegant chapeau-bras, sat the imperturbable Sir Percy.

"I heard you muttering such pleasant words, Monsieur," continued
Blakeney calmly, "that the temptation seized me to join in the
conversation. A man talking to himself is ever in a sorry plight... he
is either a mad man or a fool..."

He laughed his own quaint and inane laugh and added apologetically:

"Far be if from me, sir, to apply either epithet to you... demmed bad
form calling another fellow names... just when he does not quite feel
himself, eh?... You don't feel quite yourself, I fancy just now... eh,
Monsieur Chauberin... er... beg pardon, Chauvelin..."

He sat there quite comfortably, one slender hand resting on the
gracefully-fashioned hilt of his sword--the sword of Lorenzo Cenci,--the
other holding up the gold-rimed eyeglass through which he was regarding
his avowed enemy; he was dressed as for a ball, and his perpetually
amiable smile lurked round the corners of his firm lips.

Chauvelin had undoubtedly for the moment lost his presence of mind. He
did not even think of calling to his picked guard, so completely taken
aback was he by this unforeseen move on the part of Sir Percy. Yet,
obviously, he should have been ready for this eventuality. Had he not
caused the town-crier to loudly proclaim throughout the city that if
ONE female prisoner escaped from Fort Gayole the entire able-bodied
population of Boulogne would suffer?

The moment Sir Percy entered the gates of the town, he could not help
but hear the proclamation, and hear at the same time that this one
female prisoner who was so precious a charge, was the wife of the
English spy: the Scarlet Pimpernel.

Moreover, was it not a fact that whenever or wherever the Scarlet
Pimpernel was least expected there and then would he surely appear?
Having once realized that it was his wife who was incarcerated in Fort
Gayole, was it not natural that he would go and prowl around the prison,
and along the avenue on the summit of the southern ramparts, which was
accessible to every passer-by? No doubt he had lain in hiding among
the trees, had perhaps caught snatches of Chauvelin's recent talk with
Collot.

Aye! it was all so natural, so simple! Strange that it should have been
so unexpected!

Furious at himself for his momentary stupor, he now made a vigorous
effort to face his impudent enemy with the same sang-froid of which the
latter had so inexhaustible a fund.

He walked quietly towards the window, compelling his nerves to perfect
calm and his mood to indifference. The situation had ceased to astonish
him; already his keen mind had seen its possibilities, its grimness and
its humour, and he was quite prepared to enjoy these to the full.

Sir Percy now was dusting the sleeve of his coat with a lace-edged
handkerchief, but just as Chauvelin was about to come near him, he
stretched out one leg, turning the point of a dainty boot towards the
ex-ambassador.

"Would you like to take hold of me by the leg, Monsieur Chaubertin?" he
said gaily. "'Tis more effectual than a shoulder, and your picked guard
of six stalwart fellows can have the other leg.... Nay! I pray you,
sir, do not look at me like that.... I vow that it is myself and not my
ghost.... But if you still doubt me, I pray you call the guard... ere I
fly out again towards that fitful moon..."

"Nay, Sir Percy," said Chauvelin, with a steady voice, "I have no
thought that you will take flight just yet.... Methinks you desire
conversation with me, or you had not paid me so unexpected a visit."

"Nay, sir, the air is too oppressive for lengthy conversation... I was
strolling along these ramparts, thinking of our pleasant encounter at
the hour of the Angelus to-morrow... when this light attracted me....
feared I had lost my way and climbed the window to obtain information."

"As to your way to the nearest prison cell, Sir Percy?" queried
Chauvelin drily.

"As to anywhere, where I could sit more comfortably than on this demmed
sill.... It must be very dusty, and I vow 'tis terribly hard..."

"I presume, Sir Percy, that you did my colleague and myself the honour
of listening to our conversation?"

"An you desired to talk secrets, Monsieur... er... Chaubertin... you
should have shut this window... and closed this avenue of trees against
the chance passer-by."

"What we said was no secret, Sir Percy. It is all over the town
to-night."

"Quite so... you were only telling the devil your mind... eh?"

"I had also been having conversation with Lady Blakeney.... Pray did you
hear any of that, sir?"

But Sir Percy had evidently not heard the question, for he seemed quite
absorbed in the task of removing a speck of dust from his immaculate
chapeau-bras.

"These hats are all the rage in England just now," he said airily, "but
they have had their day, do you not think so, Monsieur? When I return
to town, I shall have to devote my whole mind to the invention of a new
headgear..."

"When will you return to England, Sir Percy?" queried Chauvelin with
good-natured sarcasm.

"At the turn of the tide to-morrow eve, Monsieur," replied Blakeney.

"In company with Lady Blakeney?"

"Certainly, sir... and yours if you will honour us with your company."

"If you return to England to-morrow, Sir Percy, Lady Blakeney, I fear
me, cannot accompany you."

"You astonish me, sir," rejoined Blakeney with an exclamation of genuine
and unaffected surprise. "I wonder now what would prevent her?"

"All those whose death would be the result of her flight, if she
succeeded in escaping from Boulogne..."

But Sir Percy was staring at him, with wide open eyes expressive of
utmost amazement.

"Dear, dear, dear.... Lud! but that sounds most unfortunate..."

"You have not heard of the measures which I have taken to prevent Lady
Blakeney quitting this city without our leave?"

"No, Monsieur Chaubertin... no... I have heard nothing..." rejoined Sir
Percy blandly. "I lead a very retired life when I come abroad and..."

"Would you wish to hear them now?"

"Quite unnecessary, sir, I assure you... and the hour is getting
late..."

"Sir Percy, are you aware of the fact that unless you listen to what I
have to say, your wife will be dragged before the Committee of Public
Safety in Paris within the next twenty-four hours?" said Chauvelin
firmly.

"What swift horses you must have, sir," quoth Blakeney pleasantly. "Lud!
to think of it!... I always heard that these demmed French horses would
never beat ours across country."

But Chauvelin now would not allow himself to be ruffled by Sir Percy's
apparent indifference. Keen reader of emotions as he was, he had
not failed to note a distinct change in the drawly voice, a sound
of something hard and trenchant in the flippant laugh, ever since
Marguerite's name was first mentioned. Blakeney's attitude was
apparently as careless, as audacious as before, but Chauvelin's keen
eyes had not missed the almost imperceptible tightening of the jaw and
the rapid clenching of one hand on the sword hilt even whilst the other
toyed in graceful idleness with the filmy Mechlin lace cravat.

Sir Percy's head was well thrown back, and the pale rays of the moon
caught the edge of the clear-cut profile, the low massive brow, the
drooping lids through which the audacious plotter was lazily regarding
the man who held not only his own life, but that of the woman who was
infinitely dear to him, in the hollow of his hand.

"I am afraid, Sir Percy," continued Chauvelin drily, "that you are under
the impression that bolts and bars will yield to your usual good luck,
now that so precious a life is at stake as that of Lady Blakeney."

"I am a greater believer in impressions, Monsieur Chauvelin."

"I told her just now that if she quitted Boulogne ere the Scarlet
Pimpernel is in our hands, we should summarily shoot one member of every
family in the town--the bread-winner."

"A pleasant conceit, Monsieur... and one that does infinite credit to
your inventive faculties."

"Lady Blakeney, therefore, we hold safely enough," continued Chauvelin,
who no longer heeded the mocking observations of his enemy; "as for the
Scarlet Pimpernel..."

"You have but to ring a bell, to raise a voice, and he too will be under
lock and key within the next two minutes, eh?... Passons, Monsieur...
you are dying to say something further... I pray you proceed... your
engaging countenance is becoming quite interesting in its seriousness."

"What I wish to say to you, Sir Percy, is in the nature of a proposed
bargain."

"Indeed?... Monsieur, you are full of surprises... like a pretty
woman.... And pray what are the terms of this proposed bargain?"

"Your side of the bargain, Sir Percy, or mine? Which will you hear
first?"

"Oh yours, Monsieur... yours, I pray you.... Have I not said that you
are like a pretty woman?... Place aux dames, sir! always!"

"My share of the bargain, sir, is simple enough: Lady Blakeney, escorted
by yourself and any of your friends who might be in this city at
the time, shall leave Boulogne harbour at sunset to-morrow, free and
unmolested, if you on the other hand will do your share..."

"I don't yet know what my share in this interesting bargain is to be,
sir... but for the sake of argument let us suppose that I do not carry
it out.... What then?..."

"Then, Sir Percy... putting aside for the moment the question of the
Scarlet Pimpernel altogether... then, Lady Blakeney will be taken to
Paris, and will be incarcerated in the prison of the Temple lately
vacated by Marie Antoinette--there she will be treated in exactly the
same was as the ex-queen is now being treated in the Conciergerie.... Do
you know what that means, Sir Percy?... It does not mean a summary trial
and a speedy death, with the halo and glory of martyrdom thrown in... it
means days, weeks, nay, months, perhaps, of misery and humiliation...
it means, that like Marie Antoinette, she will never be allowed solitude
for one single instant of the day or night... it means the constant
proximity of soldiers, drunk with cruelty and with hate... the insults,
the shame..."

"You hound!... you dog!... you cur!... do you not see that I must
strangle you for this!..."

The attack had been so sudden and so violent that Chauvelin had not the
time to utter the slightest call for help. But a second ago, Sir Percy
Blakeney had been sitting on the window-sill, outwardly listening with
perfect calm to what his enemy had to say; now he was at the latter's
throat, pressing with long and slender hands the breath out of the
Frenchman's body, his usually placid face distorted into a mask of hate.

"You cur!... you cur!..." he repeated, "am I to kill you or will you
unsay those words?"

Then suddenly he relaxed his grip. The habits of a lifetime would not
be gainsaid even now. A second ago his face had been livid with rage
and hate, now a quick flush overspread it, as if he were ashamed of this
loss of self-control. He threw the little Frenchman away from him like
he would a beast which had snarled, and passed his hand across his brow.

"Lud forgive me!" he said quaintly, "I had almost lost my temper."

Chauvelin was not slow in recovering himself. He was plucky and alert,
and his hatred for this man was so great that he had actually ceased to
fear him. Now he quietly readjusted his cravat, made a vigorous effort
to re-conquer his breath, and said firmly as soon as he could contrive
to speak at all:

"And if you did strangle me, Sir Percy, you would do yourself no
good. The fate which I have mapped out for Lady Blakeney, would then
irrevocably be hers, for she is in our power and none of my colleagues
are disposed to offer you a means of saving her from it, as I am ready
to do."

Blakeney was now standing in the middle of the room, with his hands
buried in the pockets of his breeches, his manner and attitude once more
calm, debonnair, expressive of lofty self-possession and of absolute
indifference. He came quite close to the meagre little figure of his
exultant enemy, thereby forcing the latter to look up at him.

"Oh!... ah!... yes!" he said airily, "I had nigh forgotten... you were
talking of a bargain... my share of it... eh?... Is it me you want?...
Do you wish to see me in your Paris prisons?... I assure you, sir, that
the propinquity of drunken soldiers may disgust me, but it would in no
way disturb the equanimity of my temper."

"I am quite sure of that, Sir Percy--and I can but repeat what I had the
honour of saying to Lady Blakeney just now--I do not desire the death of
so accomplished a gentleman as yourself."

"Strange, Monsieur," retorted Blakeney, with a return of his accustomed
flippancy. "Now I do desire your death very strongly indeed--there would
be so much less vermin on the face of the earth.... But pardon me--I was
interrupting you.... Will you be so kind as to proceed?"

Chauvelin had not winced at the insult. His enemy's attitude now left
him completely indifferent. He had seen that self-possessed man of
the world, that dainty and fastidious dandy, in the throes of an
overmastering passion. He had very nearly paid with his life for the
joy of having roused that supercilious and dormant lion. In fact he was
ready to welcome any insults from Sir Percy Blakeney now, since these
would be only additional evidences that the Englishman's temper was not
yet under control.

"I will try to be brief, Sir Percy," he said, setting himself the
task of imitating his antagonist's affected manner. "Will you not sit
down?... We must try and discuss these matters like two men of the
world.... As for me, I am always happiest beside a board littered with
papers.... I am not an athlete, Sir Percy... and serve my country with
my pen rather than with my fists."

Whilst he spoke he had reached the table and once more took the chair
whereon he had been sitting lately, when he dreamed the dreams which
were so near realization now. He pointed with a graceful gesture to the
other vacant chair, which Blakeney took without a word.

"Ah!" said Chauvelin with a sigh of satisfaction, "I see that we are
about to understand one another.... I have always felt it was a pity,
Sir Percy, that you and I could not discuss certain matters pleasantly
with one another.... Now, about this unfortunate incident of Lady
Blakeney's incarceration, I would like you to believe that I had no part
in the arrangements which have been made for her detention in Paris. My
colleagues have arranged it all... and I have vainly tried to protest
against the rigorous measures which are to be enforced against her in
the Temple prison.... But these are answering so completely in the
case of the ex-queen, they have so completely broken her spirit and her
pride, that my colleagues felt that they would prove equally useful in
order to bring the Scarlet Pimpernel--through his wife--to an humbler
frame of mind."

He paused a moment, distinctly pleased with his peroration, satisfied
that his voice had been without a tremor and his face impassive, and
wondering what effect this somewhat lengthy preamble had upon Sir
Percy, who through it all had remained singularly quiet. Chauvelin was
preparing himself for the next effect which he hoped to produce, and
was vaguely seeking for the best words with which to fully express his
meaning, when he was suddenly startled by a sound as unexpected as it
was disconcerting.

It was the sound of a loud and prolonged snore. He pushed the candle
aside, which somewhat obstructed his line of vision, and casting a rapid
glance at the enemy, with whose life he was toying even as a cat doth
with that of a mouse, he saw that the aforesaid mouse was calmly and
unmistakably asleep.

An impatient oath escaped Chauvelin's lips, and he brought his fist
heavily down on the table, making the metal candlesticks rattle and
causing Sir Percy to open one sleepy eye.

"A thousand pardons, sir," said Blakeney with a slight yawn. "I am so
demmed fatigued, and your preface was unduly long.... Beastly bad form,
I know, going to sleep during a sermon... but I haven't had a wink of
sleep all day.... I pray you to excuse me..."

"Will you condescend to listen, Sir Percy?" queried Chauvelin
peremptorily, "or shall I call the guard and give up all thoughts of
treating with you?"

"Just whichever you demmed well prefer, sir," rejoined Blakeney
impatiently.

And once more stretching out his long limbs, he buried his hands in
the pockets of his breeches and apparently prepared himself for another
quiet sleep. Chauvelin looked at him for a moment, vaguely wondering
what to do next. He felt strangely irritated at what he firmly believed
was mere affectation on Blakeney's part, and although he was burning
with impatience to place the terms of the proposed bargain before this
man, yet he would have preferred to be interrogated, to deliver his
"either-or" with becoming sternness and decision, rather than to take
the initiative in this discussion, where he should have been calm and
indifferent, whilst his enemy should have been nervous and disturbed.

Sir Percy's attitude had disconcerted him, a touch of the grotesque had
been given to what should have been a tense moment, and it was terribly
galling to the pride of the ex-diplomatist that with this elusive
enemy and in spite of his own preparedness for any eventuality, it was
invariably the unforeseen that happened.

After a moment's reflection, however, he decided upon a fresh course of
action. He rose and crossed the room, keeping as much as possible an eye
upon Sir Percy, but the latter sat placid and dormant and evidently
in no hurry to move. Chauvelin having reached the door, opened it
noiselessly, and to the sergeant in command of his bodyguard who stood
at attention outside, he whispered hurriedly:

"The prisoner from No. 6.... Let two of the men bring her hither back to
me at once."




Chapter XXVI: The Terms of the Bargain



Less than three minutes later, there came to Chauvelin's expectant ears
the soft sound made by a woman's skirts against the stone floor. During
those three minutes, which had seemed an eternity to his impatience, he
had sat silently watching the slumber--affected or real--of his enemy.

Directly he heard the word: "Halt!" outside the door, he jumped to his
feet. The next moment Marguerite had entered the room.

Hardly had her foot crossed the threshold than Sir Percy rose, quietly
and without haste but evidently fully awake, and turning towards her,
made her a low obeisance.

She, poor woman, had of course caught sight of him at once. His presence
here, Chauvelin's demand for her reappearance, the soldiers in a small
compact group outside the door, all these were unmistakable proofs that
the awful cataclysm had at last occurred.

The Scarlet Pimpernel, Percy Blakeney, her husband, was in the hands of
the Terrorists of France, and though face to face with her now, with
an open window close to him, and an apparently helpless enemy under
his hand, he could not--owing to the fiendish measures taken by
Chauvelin--raise a finger to save himself and her.

Mercifully for her, nature--in the face of this appalling
tragedy--deprived her of the full measure of her senses. She could move
and speak and see, she could hear and in a measure understand what was
said, but she was really an automaton or a sleep-walker, moving and
speaking mechanically and without due comprehension.

Possibly, if she had then and there fully realized all that the future
meant, she would have gone mad with the horror of it all.

"Lady Blakeney," began Chauvelin after he had quickly dismissed the
soldiers from the room, "when you and I parted from one another just
now, I had no idea that I should so soon have the pleasure of a personal
conversation with Sir Percy.... There is no occasion yet, believe me,
for sorrow or fear.... Another twenty-four hours at most, and you will
be on board the 'Day-Dream' outward bound for England. Sir Percy himself
might perhaps accompany you; he does not desire that you should journey
to Paris, and I may safely say, that in his mind, he has already
accepted certain little conditions which I have been forced to impose
upon him ere I sign the order for your absolute release."

"Conditions?" she repeated vaguely and stupidly, looking in bewilderment
from one to the other.

"You are tired, m'dear," said Sir Percy quietly, "will you not sit
down?"

He held the chair gallantly for her. She tried to read his face,
but could not catch even a flash from beneath the heavy lids which
obstinately veiled his eyes.

"Oh! it is a mere matter of exchanging signatures," continued Chauvelin
in response to her inquiring glance and toying with the papers which
were scattered on the table. "Here you see is the order to allow Sir
Percy Blakeney and his wife, nee Marguerite St. Just, to quit the town
of Boulogne unmolested."

He held a paper out towards Marguerite, inviting her to look at it. She
caught sight of an official-looking document, bearing the motto and
seal of the Republic of France, and of her own name and Percy's written
thereon in full.

"It is perfectly en regle, I assure you," continued Chauvelin, "and only
awaits my signature."

He now took up another paper which looked like a long closely-written
letter. Marguerite watched his every movement, for instinct told her
that the supreme moment had come. There was a look of almost superhuman
cruelty and malice in the little Frenchman's eyes as he fixed them on
the impassive figure of Sir Percy, the while with slightly trembling
hands he fingered that piece of paper and smoothed out its creases with
loving care.

"I am quite prepared to sign the order for your release, Lady Blakeney,"
he said, keeping his gaze still keenly fixed upon Sir Percy. "When it
is signed you will understand that our measures against the citizens of
Boulogne will no longer hold good, and that on the contrary, the general
amnesty and free pardon will come into force."

"Yes, I understand that," she replied.

"And all that will come to pass, Lady Blakeney, the moment Sir Percy
will write me in his own hand a letter, in accordance with the draft
which I have prepared, and sign it with his name.

"Shall I read it to you?" he asked.

"If you please."

"You will see how simple it all is.... A mere matter of form.... I pray
you do not look upon it with terror, but only as the prelude to that
general amnesty and free pardon, which I feel sure will satisfy the
philanthropic heart of the noble Scarlet Pimpernel, since three score at
least of the inhabitants of Boulogne will owe their life and freedom to
him."

"I am listening, Monsieur," she said calmly.

"As I have already had the honour of explaining, this little document
is in the form of a letter addressed personally to me and of course in
French," he said finally, and then he looked down on the paper and began
to read:

Citizen Chauvelin--

In consideration of a further sum of one million francs and on the
understanding that this ridiculous charge brought against me of
conspiring against the Republic of France is immediately withdrawn, and
I am allowed to return to England unmolested, I am quite prepared to
acquaint you with the names and whereabouts of certain persons who under
the guise of the League of the Scarlet Pimpernel are even now conspiring
to free the woman Marie Antoinette and her son from prison and to place
the latter upon the throne of France. You are quite well aware that
under the pretence of being the leader of a gang of English adventurers,
who never did the Republic of France and her people any real harm, I
have actually been the means of unmasking many a royalist plot before
you, and of bringing many persistent conspirators to the guillotine. I
am surprised that you should cavil at the price I am asking this time
for the very important information with which I am able to furnish you,
whilst you have often paid me similar sums for work which was a
great deal less difficult to do. In order to serve your government
effectually, both in England and in France, I must have a sufficiency of
money, to enable me to live in a costly style befitting a gentleman of
my rank. Were I to alter my mode of life I could not continue to mix in
that same social milieu to which all my friends belong and wherein, as
you are well aware, most of the royalist plots are hatched.

Trusting therefore to receive a favourable reply to my just demands
within the next twenty-four hours, whereupon the names in question shall
be furnished you forthwith,

I have the honour to remain, Citizen,

Your humble and obedient servant,

When he had finished reading, Chauvelin quietly folded the paper up
again, and then only did he look at the man and the woman before him.

Marguerite sat very erect, her head thrown back, her face very pale
and her hands tightly clutched in her lap. She had not stirred whilst
Chauvelin read out the infamous document, with which he desired to brand
a brave man with the ineradicable stigma of dishonour and of shame.
After she heard the first words, she looked up swiftly and questioningly
at her husband, but he stood at some little distance from her, right
out of the flickering circle of yellowish light made by the burning
tallow-candle. He was as rigid as a statue, standing in his usual
attitude with legs apart and hands buried in his breeches pockets.

She could not see his face.

Whatever she may have felt with regard to the letter, as the meaning of
it gradually penetrated into her brain, she was, of course, convinced
of one thing, and that was that never for a moment would Percy dream
of purchasing his life or even hers at such a price. But she would have
liked some sign from him, some look by which she could be guided as to
her immediate conduct: as, however, he gave neither look nor sign, she
preferred to assume an attitude of silent contempt.

But even before Chauvelin had had time to look from one face to the
other, a prolonged and merry laugh echoed across the squalid room.

Sir Percy, with head thrown back, was laughing whole-heartedly.

"A magnificent epistle, sir," he said gaily, "Lud love you, where
did you wield the pen so gracefully?... I vow that if I signed this
interesting document no one will believe I could have expressed myself
with perfect ease.. and in French too..."

"Nay, Sir Percy," rejoined Chauvelin drily, "I have thought of all that,
and lest in the future there should be any doubt as to whether your own
hand had or had not penned the whole of this letter, I also make it a
condition that you write out every word of it yourself, and sign it here
in this very room, in the presence of Lady Blakeney, of myself, of
my colleagues and of at least half a dozen other persons whom I will
select."

"It is indeed admirably thought out, Monsieur," rejoined Sir Percy,
"and what is to become of the charming epistle, may I ask, after I
have written and signed it?... Pardon my curiosity.... I take a natural
interest in the matter... and truly your ingenuity passes belief..."

"Oh! the fate of this letter will be as simple as was the writing
thereof.... A copy of it will be published in our 'Gazette de Paris'
as a bait for enterprising English journalists.... They will not be
backward in getting hold of so much interesting matter.... Can you not
see the attractive headlines in 'The London Gazette,' Sir Percy? 'The
League of the Scarlet Pimpernel unmasked! A gigantic hoax! The origin
of the Blakeney millions!'... I believe that journalism in England has
reached a high standard of excellence... and even the 'Gazette de Paris'
is greatly read in certain towns of your charming country.... His Royal
Highness the Prince of Wales, and various other influential gentlemen
in London, will, on the other hand, be granted a private view of the
original through the kind offices of certain devoted friends whom we
possess in England.... I don't think that you need have any fear, Sir
Percy, that your caligraphy will sink into oblivion. It will be our
business to see that it obtains the full measure of publicity which it
deserves..."

He paused a moment, then his manner suddenly changed: the sarcastic tone
died out of his voice, and there came back into his face that look of
hatred and cruelty which Blakeney's persiflage had always the power to
evoke.

"You may rest assured of one thing, Sir Percy," he said with a harsh
laugh, "that enough mud will be thrown at that erstwhile glorious
Scarlet Pimpernel... some of it will be bound to stick..."

"Nay, Monsieur... er... Chaubertin," quoth Blakeney lightly, "I have no
doubt that you and your colleagues are past masters in the graceful art
of mud-throwing.... But pardon me... er.... I was interrupting you....
Continue, Monsieur... continue, I pray. 'Pon my honour, the matter is
vastly diverting."

"Nay, sir, after the publication of this diverting epistle, meseems your
honour will ceased to be a marketable commodity."

"Undoubtedly, sir," rejoined Sir Percy, apparently quite unruffled,
"pardon a slip of the tongue... we are so much the creatures of
habit.... As you were saying...?"

"I have but little more to say, sir.... But lest there should even now
be lurking in your mind a vague hope that, having written this letter,
you could easily in the future deny its authorship, let me tell you
this: my measures are well taken, there will be witnesses to your
writing of it.... You will sit here in this room, unfettered, uncoerced
in any way, and the money spoken of in the letter will be handed over to
you by my colleague, after a few suitable words spoken by him, and you
will take the money from him, Sir Percy... and the witnesses will
see you take it after having seen you write the letter... they will
understand that you are being PAID by the French government for giving
information anent royalist plots in this country and in England... they
will understand that your identity as the leader of that so-called band
is not only known to me and to my colleague, but that it also covers
your real character and profession as the paid spy of France."

"Marvellous, I call it... demmed marvellous," quoth Sir Percy blandly.

Chauvelin had paused, half-choked by his own emotion, his hatred and
prospective revenge. He passed his handkerchief over his forehead, which
was streaming with perspiration.

"Warm work, this sort of thing... eh... Monsieur... er...
Chaubertin?..." queried his imperturbable enemy.

Marguerite said nothing; the whole thing was too horrible for words,
but she kept her large eyes fixed upon her husband's face... waiting
for that look, that sign from him which would have eased the agonizing
anxiety in her heart, and which never came.

With a great effort now, Chauvelin pulled himself together and, though
his voice still trembled, he managed to speak with a certain amount of
calm:

"Probably, Sir Percy, you know," he said, "that throughout the whole of
France we are inaugurating a series of national fetes, in honour of the
new religion which the people are about to adopt.... Demoiselle Desiree
Candeille, whom you know, will at these festivals impersonate the
Goddess of Reason, the only deity whom we admit now in France.... She
has been specially chosen for this honour, owing to the services which
she has rendered us recently... and as Boulogne happens to be the lucky
city in which we have succeeded in bringing the Scarlet Pimpernel to
justice, the national fete will begin within these city walls, with
Demoiselle Candeille as the thrice-honoured goddess."

"And you will be very merry here in Boulogne, I dare swear..."

"Aye, merry, sir," said Chauvelin with an involuntary and savage snarl,
as he placed a long claw-like finger upon the momentous paper before
him, "merry, for we here in Boulogne will see that which will fill the
heart of every patriot in France with gladness.... Nay! 'twas not the
death of the Scarlet Pimpernel we wanted... not the noble martyrdom of
England's chosen hero... but his humiliation and defeat... derision
and scorn... contumely and contempt. You asked me airily just now, Sir
Percy, how I proposed to accomplish this object... Well! you know it
now--by forcing you... aye, forcing--to write and sign a letter and
to take money from my hands which will brand you forever as a liar and
informer, and cover you with the thick and slimy mud of irreclaimable
infamy..."

"Lud! sir," said Sir Percy pleasantly, "what a wonderful command you
have of our language.... I wish I could speak French half as well..."

Marguerite had risen like an automaton from her chair. She felt that she
could no longer sit still, she wanted to scream out at the top of her
voice, all the horror she felt for this dastardly plot, which surely
must have had its origin in the brain of devils. She could not
understand Percy. This was one of those awful moments, which she
had been destined to experience once or twice before, when the whole
personality of her husband seemed to become shadowy before her, to slip,
as it were, past her comprehension, leaving her indescribably lonely and
wretched, trusting yet terrified.

She thought that long ere this he would have flung back every insult in
his opponent's teeth; she did not know what inducements Chauvelin had
held out in exchange for the infamous letter, what threats he had used.
That her own life and freedom were at stake, was, of course, evident,
but she cared nothing for life, and he should know that certainly she
would care still less if such a price had to be paid for it.

She longed to tell him all that was in her heart, longed to tell him how
little she valued her life, how highly she prized his honour! but how
could she, before this fiend who snarled and sneered in his anticipated
triumph, and surely, surely Percy knew!

And knowing all that, why did he not speak? Why did he not tear that
infamous paper from out that devil's hands and fling it in his face?
Yet, though her loving ear caught every intonation of her husband's
voice, she could not detect the slightest harshness in his airy laugh;
his tone was perfectly natural and he seemed to be, indeed, just as he
appeared--vastly amused.

Then she thought that perhaps he would wish her to go now, that he felt
desire to be alone with this man, who had outraged him in everything
that he held most holy and most dear, his honour and his wife... that
perhaps, knowing that his own temper was no longer under control, he did
not wish her to witness the rough and ready chastisement which he was
intending to mete out to this dastardly intriguer.

Yes! that was it no doubt! Herein she could not be mistaken; she knew
his fastidious notions of what was due and proper in the presence of a
woman, and that even at a moment like this, he would wish the manners of
London drawing-rooms to govern his every action.

Therefore she rose to go, and as she did so, once more tried to read the
expression in his face... to guess what was passing in his mind.

"Nay, Madam," he said, whilst he bowed gracefully before her, "I fear me
this lengthy conversation hath somewhat fatigued you.... This merry jest
'twixt my engaging friend and myself should not have been prolonged so
far into the night.... Monsieur, I pray you, will you not give orders
that her ladyship be escorted back to her room?"

He was still standing outside the circle of light, and Marguerite
instinctively went up to him. For this one second she was oblivious
of Chauvelin's presence, she forgot her well-schooled pride, her
firm determination to be silent and to be brave: she could no longer
restrain the wild beatings of her heart, the agony of her soul, and
with sudden impulse she murmured in a voice broken with intense love and
subdued, passionate appeal:

"Percy!"

He drew back a step further into the gloom: this made her realize the
mistake she had made in allowing her husband's most bitter enemy to
get this brief glimpse into her soul. Chauvelin's thin lips curled with
satisfaction, the brief glimpse had been sufficient for him, the rapidly
whispered name, the broken accent had told him what he had not known
hitherto: namely, that between this man and woman there was a bond far
more powerful that that which usually existed between husband and wife,
and merely made up of chivalry on the one side and trustful reliance on
the other.

Marguerite having realized her mistake, ashamed of having betrayed
her feelings even for a moment, threw back her proud head and gave her
exultant foe a look of defiance and of scorn. He responded with one of
pity, not altogether unmixed with deference. There was something almost
unearthly and sublime in this beautiful woman's agonizing despair.

He lowered his head and made her a deep obeisance, lest she should see
the satisfaction and triumph which shone through his pity.

As usual Sir Percy remained quite imperturbable, and now it was he, who,
with characteristic impudence, touched the hand-bell on the table:

"Excuse this intrusion, Monsieur," he said lightly, "her ladyship is
overfatigued and would be best in her room."

Marguerite threw him a grateful look. After all she was only a woman
and was afraid of breaking down. In her mind there was no issue to the
present deadlock save in death. For this she was prepared and had but
one great hope that she could lie in her husband's arms just once again
before she died. Now, since she could not speak to him, scarcely dared
to look into the loved face, she was quite ready to go.

In answer to the bell, the soldier had entered.

"If Lady Blakeney desires to go..." said Chauvelin.

She nodded and Chauvelin gave the necessary orders: two soldiers stood
at attention ready to escort Marguerite back to her prison cell. As she
went towards the door she came to within a couple of steps from where
her husband was standing, bowing to her as she passed. She stretched
out an icy cold hand towards him, and he, in the most approved London
fashion, with the courtly grace of a perfect English gentleman, took
the little hand in his and stooping very low kissed the delicate
finger-tips.

Then only did she notice that the strong, nervy hand which held hers
trembled perceptibly, and that his lips--which for an instant rested on
her fingers--were burning hot.




Chapter XXVII: The Decision



Once more the two men were alone.

As far as Chauvelin was concerned he felt that everything was not yet
settled, and until a moment ago he had been in doubt as to whether Sir
Percy would accept the infamous conditions which had been put before
him, or allow his pride and temper to get the better of him and throw
the deadly insults back into his adversary's teeth.

But now a new secret had been revealed to the astute diplomatist. A
name, softly murmured by a broken-hearted woman, had told him a tale of
love and passion, which he had not even suspected before.

Since he had made this discovery he knew that the ultimate issue was no
longer in doubt. Sir Percy Blakeney, the bold adventurer, ever ready
for a gamble where lives were at stake, might have demurred before
he subscribed to his own dishonour, in order to save his wife from
humiliation and the shame of the terrible fate that had been mapped
out for her. But the same man passionately in love with such a woman as
Marguerite Blakeney would count the world well lost for her sake.

One sudden fear alone had shot through Chauvelin's heart when he stood
face to face with the two people whom he had so deeply and cruelly
wronged, and that was that Blakeney, throwing aside all thought of the
scores of innocent lives that were at stake, might forget everything,
risk everything, dare everything, in order to get his wife away there
and then.

For the space of a few seconds Chauvelin had felt that his own life
was in jeopardy, and that the Scarlet Pimpernel would indeed make
a desperate effort to save himself and his wife. But the fear was
short-lived: Marguerite--as he had well foreseen--would never save
herself at the expense of others, and she was tied! tied! tied! That was
his triumph and his joy!

When Marguerite finally left the room, Sir Percy made no motion to
follow her, but turned once more quietly to his antagonist.

"As you were saying, Monsieur?..." he queried lightly.

"Oh! there is nothing more to say, Sir Percy," rejoined Chauvelin; "my
conditions are clear to you, are they not? Lady Blakeney's and your own
immediate release in exchange for a letter written to me by your own
hand, and signed here by you--in this room--in my presence and that of
sundry other persons whom I need not name just now. Also certain money
passing from my hand to yours. Failing the letter, a long, hideously
humiliating sojourn in the Temple prison for your wife, a prolonged
trial and the guillotine as a happy release!... I would add, the same
thing for yourself, only that I will do you the justice to admit that
you probably do not care."

"Nay! a grave mistake, Monsieur.... I do care... vastly care, I assure
you ... and would seriously object to ending my life on your demmed
guillotine... a nasty, uncomfortable thing, I should say... and I am
told that an inexperienced barber is deputed to cut one's hair....
Brrr!... Now, on the other hand, I like the idea of a national fete...
that pretty wench Candeille, dressed as a goddess... the boom of the
cannon when your amnesty comes into force.... You WILL boom the cannon,
will you not, Monsieur?... Cannon are demmed noisy, but they are
effective sometimes, do you not think so, Monsieur?"

"Very effective certainly, Sir Percy," sneered Chauvelin, "and we will
certainly boom the cannon from this very fort, an it so please you...."

"At what hour, Monsieur, is my letter to be ready?"

"Why! at any hour you please, Sir Percy."

"The 'Day-Dream' could weigh anchor at eight o'clock... would an hour
before that be convenient to yourself?"

"Certainly, Sir Percy... if you will honour me by accepting my
hospitality in these uncomfortable quarters until seven o'clock
to-morrow eve?..."

"I thank you, Monsieur..."

"Then am I to understand, Sir Percy, that..."

A loud and ringing laugh broke from Blakeney's lips.

"That I accept your bargain, man!... Zounds! I tell you I accept... I'll
write the letter, I'll sign it... an you have our free passes ready for
us in exchange.... At seven o'clock to-morrow eve, did you say?... Man!
do not look so astonished.... The letter, the signature, the money...
all your witnesses... have everything ready.... I accept, I say....
And now, in the name of all the evil spirits in hell, let me have some
supper and a bed, for I vow that I am demmed fatigued."

And without more ado Sir Percy once more rang the handbell, laughing
boisterously the while: then suddenly, with quick transition of mood,
his laugh was lost in a gigantic yawn, and throwing his long body onto
a chair, he stretched out his legs, buried his hands in his pockets, and
the next moment was peacefully asleep.




Chapter XXVIII: The Midnight Watch



Boulogne had gone through many phases, in its own languid and sleepy
way, whilst the great upheaval of a gigantic revolution shook other
cities of France to their very foundations.

At first the little town had held somnolently aloof, and whilst Lyons
and Tours conspired and rebelled, whilst Marseilles and Toulon opened
their ports to the English and Dunkirk was ready to surrender to
the allied forces, she had gazed through half-closed eyes at all the
turmoil, and then quietly turned over and gone to sleep again.

Boulogne fished and mended nets, built boats and manufactured boots
with placid content, whilst France murdered her king and butchered her
citizens.

The initial noise of the great revolution was only wafted on the
southerly breezes from Paris to the little seaport towns of Northern
France, and lost much of its volume and power in this aerial transit:
the fisher folk were too poor to worry about the dethronement of kings:
the struggle for daily existence, the perils and hardships of deep-sea
fishing engrossed all the faculties they possessed.

As for the burghers and merchants of the town, they were at first
content with reading an occasional article in the "Gazette de Paris" or
the "Gazette des Tribunaux," brought hither by one or other of the many
travellers who crossed the city on their way to the harbour. They were
interested in these articles, at times even comfortably horrified at the
doings in Paris, the executions and the tumbrils, but on the whole they
liked the idea that the country was in future to be governed by duly
chosen representatives of the people, rather than be a prey to the
despotism of kings, and they were really quite pleased to see the
tricolour flag hoisted on the old Beffroi, there where the snow-white
standard of the Bourbons had erstwhile flaunted its golden fleur-de-lis
in the glare of the midday sun.

The worthy burgesses of Boulogne were ready to shout: "Vive la
Republique!" with the same cheerful and raucous Normandy accent as they
had lately shouted "Dieu protege le Roi!"

The first awakening from this happy torpor came when that tent was put
up on the landing stage in the harbour. Officials, dressed in shabby
uniforms and wearing tricolour cockades and scarves, were now quartered
in Town Hall, and repaired daily to that roughly erected tent,
accompanied by so many soldiers from the garrison.

There installed, they busied themselves with examining carefully
the passports of all those who desired to leave or enter Boulogne.
Fisher-folk who had dwelt in the city--father and son and grandfather
and many generations before that--and had come and gone in and out of
their own boats as they pleased, were now stopped as they beached their
craft and made to give an account of themselves to these officials from
Paris.

It was, of a truth, more than ridiculous, that these strangers should
ask of Jean-Marie who he was, or of Pierre what was his business, or
of Desire Francois whither he was going, when Jean-Marie and Pierre
and Desire Francois had plied their nets in the roads outside Boulogne
harbour for more years than they would care to count.

It also caused no small measure of annoyance that fishermen were
ordered to wear tricolour cockades on their caps. They had no special
ill-feeling against tricolour cockades, but they did not care about
them. Jean-Marie flatly refused to have one pinned on, and being
admonished somewhat severely by one of the Paris officials, he became
obstinate about the whole thing and threw the cockade violently on the
ground and spat upon it, not from any sentiment of anti-republicanism,
but just from a feeling of Norman doggedness.

He was arrested, shut up in Fort Gayole, tried as a traitor and publicly
guillotined.

The consternation in Boulogne was appalling.

The one little spark had found its way to a barrel of blasting
powder and caused a terrible explosion. Within twenty-four hours
of Jean-Marie's execution the whole town was in the throes of
the Revolution. What the death of King Louis, the arrest of Marie
Antoinette, the massacres of September had failed to do, that the arrest
and execution of an elderly fisherman accomplished in a trice.

People began to take sides in politics. Some families realized that they
came from ancient lineage, and that their ancestors had helped to build
up the throne of the Bourbons. Others looked up ancient archives and
remembered past oppressions at the hands of the aristocrats.

Thus some burghers of Boulogne became ardent reactionaries, whilst
others secretly nursed enthusiastic royalist convictions: some were
ready to throw in their lot with the anarchists, to deny the religion
of their fathers, to scorn the priests and close the places of worship;
others adhered strictly still to the usages and practices of the Church.

Arrest became frequent: the guillotine, erected in the Place de la
Senechaussee, had plenty of work to do. Soon the cathedral was closed,
the priests thrown into prison, whilst scores of families hoped to
escape a similar fate by summary flight.

Vague rumours of a band of English adventurers soon reached the little
sea-port town. The Scarlet Pimpernel--English spy or hero, as he was
alternately called--had helped many a family with pronounced royalist
tendencies to escape the fury of the blood-thirsty Terrorists.

Thus gradually the anti-revolutionaries had been weeded out of the city:
some by death and imprisonment, others by flight. Boulogne became the
hotbed of anarchism: the idlers and loafers, inseparable from any town
where there is a garrison and a harbour, practically ruled the city now.
Denunciations were the order of the day. Everyone who owned any money,
or lived with any comfort was accused of being a traitor and suspected
of conspiracy. The fisher folk wandered about the city, surly and
discontented: their trade was at a standstill, but there was a trifle
to be earned by giving information: information which meant the arrest,
ofttimes the death of men, women and even children who had tried to seek
safety in flight, and to denounce whom--as they were trying to hire a
boat anywhere along the coast--meant a good square meal for a starving
family.

Then came the awful cataclysm.

A woman--a stranger--had been arrested and imprisoned in the Fort Gayole
and the town-crier publicly proclaimed that if she escaped from jail,
one member of every family in the town--rich or poor, republican or
royalist, Catholic or free-thinker--would be summarily guillotined.

That member, the bread-winner!

"Why, then, with the Duvals it would be young Francois-Auguste. He keeps
his old mother with his boot-making..."

"And it would be Marie Lebon, she has her blind father dependent on her
net-mending."

"And old Mother Laferriere, whose grandchildren were left penniless...
she keeps them from starvation by her wash-tub."

"But Francois-Auguste is a real Republican; he belongs to the Jacobin
Club."

"And look at Pierre, who never meets a calotin but he must needs spit on
him."

"Is there no safety anywhere?... are we to be butchered like so many
cattle?..."

Somebody makes the suggestion:

"It is a threat... they would not dare!..."

"Would not dare?..."

'Tis old Andre Lemoine who has spoken, and he spits vigorously on the
ground. Andre Lemoine has been a soldier; he was in La Vendee. He was
wounded at Tours... and he knows!

"Would not dare?..." he says in a whisper. "I tell you, friends, that
there's nothing the present government would not dare. There was the
Plaine Saint Mauve... Did you ever hear about that?... little children
fusilladed by the score... little ones, I say, and women with babies at
their breasts ... weren't they innocent?... Five hundred innocent people
butchered in La Vendee... until the Headsman sank--worn not... I could
tell worse than that... for I know.... There's nothing they would not
dare!..."

Consternation was so great that the matter could not even be discussed.

"We'll go to Gayole and see this woman at any rate."

Angry, sullen crowds assembled in the streets. The proclamation had been
read just as the men were leaving the public houses, preparing to go
home for the night.

They brought the news to the women, who, at home, were setting the soup
and bread on the table for their husbands' supper. There was no thought
of going to bed or of sleeping that night. The bread-winner in every
family and all those dependent on him for daily sustenance were
trembling for their lives.

Resistance to the barbarous order would have been worse than useless,
nor did the thought of it enter the heads of these humble and ignorant
fisher folk, wearied out with the miserable struggle for existence.
There was not sufficient spirit left in this half-starved population
of a small provincial city to suggest open rebellion. A regiment of
soldiers come up from the South were quartered in the Chateau, and the
natives of Boulogne could not have mustered more than a score of disused
blunderbusses between them.

Then they remembered tales which Andre Lemoine had told, the fate of
Lyons, razed to the ground, of Toulon burnt to ashes, and they did not
dare rebel.

But brothers, fathers, sons trooped out towards Gayole, in order to
have a good look at the frowning pile, which held the hostage for their
safety. It looked dark and gloomy enough, save for one window which gave
on the southern ramparts. This window was wide open and a feeble light
flickered from the room beyond, and as the men stood about, gazing at
the walls in sulky silence, they suddenly caught the sound of a loud
laugh proceeding from within, and of a pleasant voice speaking quite
gaily in a language which they did not understand, but which sounded
like English.

Against the heavy oaken gateway, leading to the courtyard of the prison,
the proclamation written on stout parchment had been pinned up. Beside
it hung a tiny lantern, the dim light of which flickered in the evening
breeze, and brought at times into sudden relief the bold writing and
heavy signature, which stood out, stern and grim, against the yellowish
background of the paper, like black signs of approaching death.

Facing the gateway and the proclamation, the crowd of men took its
stand. The moon, from behind them, cast fitful, silvery glances at the
weary heads bent in anxiety and watchful expectancy: on old heads and
young heads, dark, curly heads and heads grizzled with age, on backs
bent with toil, and hands rough and gnarled like seasoned timber.

All night the men stood and watched.

Sentinels from the town guard were stationed at the gates, but these
might prove inattentive or insufficient, they had not the same price
at stake, so the entire able-bodied population of Boulogne watched the
gloomy prison that night, lest anyone escaped by wall or window.

They were guarding the precious hostage whose safety was the stipulation
for their own.

There was dead silence among them, and dead silence all around, save for
that monotonous tok-tok-tok of the parchment flapping in the breeze. The
moon, who all along had been capricious and chary of her light, made
a final retreat behind a gathering bank of clouds, and the crowd, the
soldiers and the great grim walls were all equally wrapped in gloom.

Only the little lantern on the gateway now made a ruddy patch of light,
and tinged that fluttering parchment with the colour of blood. Every now
and then an isolated figure would detach itself from out the watching
throng, and go up to the heavy, oaken door, in order to gaze at the
proclamation. Then the light of the lantern illumined a dark head or a
grey one, for a moment or two: black or white locks were stirred gently
in the wind, and a sigh of puzzlement and disappointment would be
distinctly heard.

At times a group of three or four would stand there for awhile, not
speaking, only sighing and casting eager questioning glances at one
another, whilst trying vainly to find some hopeful word, some turn of
phrase of meaning that would be less direful, in that grim and ferocious
proclamation. Then a rough word from the sentinel, a push from the
butt-end of a bayonet would disperse the little group and send the men,
sullen and silent, back into the crowd.

Thus they watched for hours whilst the bell of the Beffroi tolled all
the hours of that tedious night. A thin rain began to fall in the small
hours of the morning, a wetting, soaking drizzle which chilled the weary
watchers to the bone.

But they did not care.

"We must not sleep, for the woman might escape."

Some of them squatted down in the muddy road, the luckier ones managed
to lean their backs against the slimy walls.

Twice before the hour of midnight they heard that same quaint and merry
laugh proceeding from the lighted room, through the open window. Once it
sounded very low and very prolonged, as if in response to a delightful
joke.

Anon the heavy gateway of Gayole was opened from within, and half a
dozen soldiers came walking out of the courtyard. They were dressed in
the uniform of the town-guard, but had evidently been picked out of the
rank and file, for all six were exceptionally tall and stalwart, and
towered above the sentinel, who saluted and presented arms as they
marched out of the gate.

In the midst of them walked a slight, dark figure, clad entirely in
black, save for the tricolour scarf round his waist.

The crowd of watchers gazed on the little party with suddenly awakened
interest.

"Who is it?" whispered some of the men.

"The citizen-governor," suggested one.

"The new public executioner," ventured another.

"No! no!" quoth Pierre Maxime, the doyen of Boulogne fishermen, and a
great authority on every matter public or private with the town; "no, no
he is the man who has come down from Paris, the friend of Robespierre.
He makes the laws now, the citizen-governor even must obey him. 'Tis he
who made the law that if the woman up yonder should escape..."

"Hush!... sh!... sh!..." came in frightened accents from the crowd.

"Hush, Pierre Maxine!... the Citizen might hear thee," whispered the man
who stood closest to the old fisherman; "the Citizen might hear thee,
and think that we rebelled...."

"What are these people doing here?' queried Chauvelin as he passed out
into the street.

"They are watching the prison, Citizen," replied the sentinel, whom he
had thus addressed, "lest the female prisoner should attempt to escape."

With a satisfied smile, Chauvelin turned toward the Town Hall, closely
surrounded by his escort. The crowd watched him and the soldiers as
they quickly disappeared in the gloom, then they resumed the stolid,
wearisome vigil of the night.

The old Beffroi now tolled the midnight hour, the one solitary light in
the old Fort was extinguished, and after that the frowning pile remained
dark and still.




Chapter XXIX: The National Fete



"Citizens of Boulogne, awake!"

They had not slept, only some of them had fallen into drowsy somnolence,
heavy and nerve-racking, worse indeed than any wakefulness.

Within the houses, the women too had kept the tedious vigil, listening
for every sound, dreading every bit of news, which the wind might waft
in through the small, open windows.

If one prisoner escaped, every family in Boulogne would be deprived of
the bread-winner. Therefore the women wept, and tried to remember those
Paters and Aves which the tyranny of liberty, fraternity and equality
had ordered them to forget.

Broken rosaries were fetched out from neglected corners, and knees stiff
with endless, thankless toil were bent once more in prayer.

"Oh God! Good God! Do not allow that woman to flee!"

"Holy Virgin! Mother of God! Make that she should not escape!"

Some of the women went out in the early dawn to take hot soup and coffee
to their men who were watching outside the prison.

"Has anything been seen?"

"Have ye seen the woman?"

"Which room is she in?"

"Why won't they let us see her?"

"Are you sure she hath not already escaped?"

Questions and surmises went round in muffled whispers as the steaming
cans were passed round. No one had a definite answer to give, although
Desire Melun declared that he had, once during the night, caught sight
of a woman's face at one of the windows above: but as he could not
describe the woman's face, nor locate with any degree of precision the
particular window at which she was supposed to have appeared, it was
unanimously decided that Desire must have been dreaming.

"Citizens of Boulogne, awake!"

The cry came first from the Town Hall, and therefore from behind the
crowd of men and women, whose faces had been so resolutely set for all
these past hours towards the Gayole prison.

They were all awake! but too tired and cramped to move as yet, and to
turn in the direction whence arose that cry.

"Citizens of Boulogne, awake!"

It was just the voice of Auguste Moleux, the town-crier of Boulogne,
who, bell in hand, was trudging his way along the Rue Daumont, closely
followed by two fellows of the municipal guard.

Auguste was in the very midst of the sullen crowd, before the men even
troubled about his presence here, but now with many a vigorous "Allons
donc!" and "Voyez-moi ca, fais donc place, voyons!" he elbowed his way
through the throng.

He was neither tired nor cramped; he served the Republic in comfort
and ease, and had slept soundly on his paillasse in the little garret
allotted to him in the Town Hall.

The crowd parted in silence, to allow him to pass. Auguste was lean and
powerful, the scanty and meagre food, doled out to him by a paternal
government, had increased his muscular strength whilst reducing his fat.
He had very hard elbows, and soon he managed, by dint of pushing and
cursing to reach the gateway of Gayole.

"Voyons! enlevez-moi ca," he commanded in stentorian tones, pointing to
the proclamation.

The fellows of the municipal guard fell to and tore the parchment away
from the door whilst the crowd looked on with stupid amazement.

What did it all mean?

Then Auguste Moleux turned and faced the men.

"Mes enfants," he said, "my little cabbages! wake up! the government of
the Republic has decreed that to-day is to be a day of gaiety and public
rejoicings!"

"Gaiety?... Public rejoicings forsooth, when the bread-winner of every
family..."

"Hush! Hush! Be silent, all of you," quoth Auguste impatiently, "you do
not understand!... All that is at an end... There is no fear that the
woman shall escape.... You are all to dance and rejoice.... The Scarlet
Pimpernel has been captured in Boulogne, last night..."

"Qui ca the Scarlet Pimpernel?"

"Mais! 'tis that mysterious English adventurer who rescued people from
the guillotine!"

"A hero? quoi?"

"No! no! only an English spy, a friend of aristocrats... he would have
cared nothing for the bread-winners of Boulogne..."

"He would not have raised a finger to save them."

"Who knows?" sighed a feminine voice, "perhaps he came to Boulogne to
help them."

"And he has been caught anyway," concluded Auguste Moleux sententiously,
"and, my little cabbages, remember this, that so great is the pleasure
of the all-powerful Committee of Public Safety at this capture, that
because he has been caught in Boulogne, therefore Boulogne is to be
specially rewarded!"

"Holy Virgin, who'd have thought it?"

"Sh... Jeanette, dost not know that there's no Holy Virgin now?"

"And dost know, Auguste, how we are to be rewarded?"

It is a difficult matter for the human mind to turn very quickly from
despair to hope, and the fishermen of Boulogne had not yet grasped the
fact that they were to make merry and that thoughts of anxiety must be
abandoned for those of gaiety.

Auguste Moleux took out a parchment from the capacious pocket of his
coat; he put on his most solemn air of officialdom, and pointing with
extended forefinger to the parchment, he said:

"A general amnesty to all natives of Boulogne who are under arrest at
the present moment: a free pardon to all natives of Boulogne who are
under sentence of death: permission to all natives of Boulogne to quit
the town with their families, to embark on any vessel they please, in
or out of the harbour, and to go whithersoever they choose, without
passports, formalities or questions of any kind."

Dead silence followed this announcement. Hope was just beginning to
crowd anxiety and sullenness out of the way.

"Then poor Andre Legrand will be pardoned," whispered a voice suddenly;
"he was to have been guillotined to-day."

"And Denise Latour! she was innocent enough, the gentle pigeon."

"And they'll let poor Abbe Foucquet out of prison too."

"And Francois!"

"And poor Felicite, who is blind!"

"M. l'Abbe would be wise to leave Boulogne with the children."

"He will too: thou canst be sure of that!"

"It is not good to be a priest just now!"

"Bah! calotins are best dead than alive."

But some in the crowd were silent, others whispered eagerly.

"Thinkest thou it would be safer for us to get out of the country whilst
we can?" said one of the men in a muffled tone, and clutching nervously
at a woman's wrist.

"Aye! aye! it might leak out about that boat we procured for..."

"Sh!... I was thinking of that..."

"We can go to my aunt Lebrun in Belgium..."

Others talked in whispers of England or the New Land across the seas:
they were those who had something to hide, money received from refugee
aristocrats, boats sold to would-be emigres, information withheld,
denunciations shirked: the amnesty would not last long, 'twas best to be
safely out of the way.

"In the meanwhile, my cabbages," quoth Auguste sententiously, "are you
not grateful to Citizen Robespierre, who has sent this order specially
down from Paris?"

"Aye! aye!" assented the crowd cheerfully.

"Hurrah for Citizen Robespierre!"

"Viva la Republique!"

"And you will enjoy yourselves to-day?"

"That we will!"

"Processions?"

"Aye! with music and dancing."

Out there, far away, beyond the harbour, the grey light of dawn was
yielding to the crimson glow of morning. The rain had ceased and heavy
slaty clouds parted here and there, displaying glints of delicate
turquoise sky, and tiny ethereal vapours in the dim and remote distance
of infinity, flecked with touches of rose and gold.

The towers and pinnacles of old Boulogne detached themselves one by one
from the misty gloom of night. The old bell of the Beffroi tolled the
hour of six. Soon the massive cupola of Notre Dame was clothed in purple
hues, and the gilt cross on St. Joseph threw back across the square a
blinding ray of gold.

The town sparrows began to twitter, and from far out at sea in the
direction of Dunkirk there came the muffled boom of cannon.

"And remember, my pigeons," admonished Auguste Moleux solemnly, "that in
this order which Robespierre has sent from Paris, it also says that from
to-day onwards le bon Dieu has ceased to be!"

Many faces were turned towards the East just then, for the rising
sun, tearing with one gigantic sweep the banks of cloud asunder, now
displayed his magnificence in a gorgeous immensity of flaming crimson.
The sea, in response, turned to liquid fire beneath the glow, whilst the
whole sky was irradiated with the first blush of morning.

Le bon Dieu has ceased to be!

"There is only one religion in France now," explained Auguste Moleux,
"the religion of Reason! We are all citizens! We are all free and all
able to think for ourselves. Citizen Robespierre has decreed that there
is no good God. Le bon Dieu was a tyrant and an aristocrat, and, like
all tyrants and aristocrats, He has been deposed. There is no good God,
there is no Holy Virgin and no Saints, only Reason, who is a goddess and
whom we all honour."

And the townsfolk of Boulogne, with eyes still fixed on the gorgeous
East, shouted with sullen obedience:

"Hurrah! for the Goddess of Reason!"

"Hurrah for Robespierre!"

Only the women, trying to escape the town-crier's prying eyes, or the
soldiers' stern gaze, hastily crossed themselves behind their husbands'
backs, terrified lest le bon Dieu had, after all, not altogether ceased
to exist at the bidding of Citizen Robespierre.

Thus the worthy natives of Boulogne, forgetting their anxieties and
fears, were ready enough to enjoy the national fete ordained for them by
the Committee of Public Safety, in honour of the capture of the Scarlet
Pimpernel. They were even willing to accept this new religion which
Robespierre had invented: a religion which was only a mockery, with an
actress to represent its supreme deity.

Mais, que voulez-vous? Boulogne had long ago ceased to have faith in
God: the terrors of the Revolution, which culminated in that agonizing
watch of last night, had smothered all thoughts of worship and of
prayer.

The Scarlet Pimpernel must indeed be a dangerous spy that his arrest
should cause so much joy in Paris!

Even Boulogne had learned by experience that the Committee of Public
Safety did not readily give up a prey, once its vulture-like claws had
closed upon it. The proportion of condemnations as against acquittals
was as a hundred to one.

But because this one man was taken, scores to-day were to be set free!

In the evening at a given hour--seven o'clock had Auguste Moleux, the
town-crier, understood--the boom of the cannon would be heard, the gates
of the town would be opened, the harbour would become a free port.

The inhabitants of Boulogne were ready to shout:

"Vive the Scarlet Pimpernel!"

Whatever he was--hero or spy--he was undoubtedly the primary cause of
all their joy.

By the time Auguste Moleux had cried out the news throughout the town,
and pinned the new proclamation of mercy up on every public building,
all traces of fatigue and anxiety had vanished. In spite of the fact
that wearisome vigils had been kept in every home that night, and that
hundreds of men and women had stood about for hours in the vicinity of
the Gayole Fort, no sooner was the joyful news known, than all lassitude
was forgotten and everyone set to with a right merry will to make the
great fete-day a complete success.

There is in every native of Normandy, be he peasant or gentleman, an
infinite capacity for enjoyment, and at the same time a marvellous
faculty for co-ordinating and systematizing his pleasures.

In a trice the surly crowds had vanished. Instead of these, there were
groups of gaily-visaged men pleasantly chattering outside every eating
and drinking place in the town. The national holiday had come upon
these people quite unawares, so the early part of it had to be spent
in thinking out a satisfactory programme for it. Sipping their beer
or coffee, or munching their cherries a l'eau-de-vie, the townsfolk
of Boulogne, so lately threatened with death, were quietly organizing
processions.

There was to be a grand muster on the Place de la Senechaussee, then
a torchlight and lanthorn-light march, right round the Ramparts,
culminating in a gigantic assembly outside the Town Hall, where the
Citizen Chauvelin, representing the Committee of Public Safety, would
receive an address of welcome from the entire population of Boulogne.

The procession was to be in costume! There were to be Pierrots and
Pierettes, Harlequins and English clowns, aristocrats and goddesses! All
day the women and girls were busy contriving travesties of all sorts,
and the little tumbledown shops in the Rue de Chateau and the Rue
Frederic Sauvage--kept chiefly by Jews and English traders--were
ransacked for old bits of finery, and for remnants of costumes, worn
in the days when Boulogne was still a gay city and Carnivals were held
every year.

And then, of course, there would be the Goddess of Reason, in her
triumphal car! the apotheosis of the new religion, which was to make
everybody happy, rich and free.

Forgotten were the anxieties of the night, the fears of death, the
great and glorious Revolution, which for this one day would cease her
perpetual demand for the toll of blood.

Nothing was remembered save the pleasures and joys of the moment, and at
times the name of that Englishman--spy, hero or adventurer--the cause of
all this bounty: the Scarlet Pimpernel.




Chapter XXX: The Procession



The grandfathers of the present generation of Boulonnese remembered
the great day of the National Fete, when all Boulogne, for twenty-four
hours, went crazy with joy. So many families had fathers, brothers,
sons, languishing in prison under some charge of treason, real or
imaginary; so many had dear ones for whom already the guillotine loomed
ahead, that the feast on this memorable day of September, 1793, was one
of never-to-be-forgotten relief and thanksgiving.

The weather all day had been exceptionally fine. After that glorious
sunrise, the sky had remained all day clad in its gorgeous mantle of
blue and the sun had continued to smile benignly on the many varied
doings of this gay, little seaport town. When it began to sink slowly
towards the West a few little fluffy clouds appeared on the horizon,
and from a distance, although the sky remained clear and blue, the sea
looked quite dark and slaty against the brilliance of the firmament.

Gradually, as the splendour of the sunset gave place to the delicate
purple and grey tints of evening, the little fluffy clouds merged
themselves into denser masses, and these too soon became absorbed in the
great, billowy banks which the southwesterly wind was blowing seawards.

By the time that the last grey streak of dusk vanished in the West, the
whole sky looked heavy with clouds, and the evening set in, threatening
and dark.

But this by no means mitigated the anticipation of pleasure to come. On
the contrary, the fast-gathering gloom was hailed with delight, since it
would surely help to show off the coloured lights of the lanthorns, and
give additional value to the glow of the torches.

Of a truth 'twas a motley throng which began to assemble on the Place de
la Senechaussee, just as the old bell of the Beffroi tolled the hour of
six. Men, women and children in ragged finery, Pierrots with neck frills
and floured faces, hideous masks of impossible beasts roughly besmeared
in crude colours. There were gaily-coloured dominoes, blue, green, pink
and purple, harlequins combining all the colours of the rainbow in
one tight-fitting garment, and Columbines with short, tarlatan skirts,
beneath which peeped bare feet and ankles. There were judges' perruqes,
and soldiers' helmets of past generations, tall Normandy caps adorned
with hundreds of streaming ribbons, and powdered headgear which recalled
the glories of Versailles.

Everything was torn and dirty, the dominoes were in rags, the Pierrot
frills, mostly made up of paper, already hung in strips over the
wearers' shoulders. But what mattered that?

The crowd pushed and jolted, shouted and laughed, the girls screamed as
the men snatched a kiss here and there from willing or unwilling lips,
or stole an arm round a gaily accoutred waist. The spirit of Old King
Carnival was in the evening air--a spirit just awakened from a long Rip
van Winkle-like sleep.

In the centre of the Place stood the guillotine, grim and gaunt with
long, thin arms stretched out towards the sky, the last glimmer of
waning light striking the triangular knife, there, where it was not
rusty with stains of blood.

For weeks now Madame Guillotine had been much occupied plying her
gruesome trade; she now stood there in the gloom, passive and immovable,
seeming to wait placidly for the end of this holiday, ready to begin her
work again on the morrow. She towered above these merrymakers, hoisted
up on the platform whereon many an innocent foot had trodden, the
tattered basket beside her, into which many an innocent head had rolled.

What cared they to-night for Madame Guillotine and the horrors of
which she told? A crowd of Pierrots with floured faces and tattered
neck-frills had just swarmed up the wooden steps, shouting and laughing,
chasing each other round and round on the platform, until one of them
lost his footing and fell into the basket, covering himself with bran
and staining his clothes with blood.

"Ah! vogue la galere! We must be merry to-night!"

And all these people who for weeks past had been staring death and the
guillotine in the face, had denounced each other with savage callousness
in order to save themselves, or hidden for days in dark cellars to
escape apprehension, now laughed, and danced and shrieked with gladness
in a sudden, hysterical outburst of joy.

Close beside the guillotine stood the triumphal car of the Goddess of
Reason, the special feature of this great national fete. It was only a
rough market cart, painted by an unpractised hand with bright, crimson
paint and adorned with huge clusters of autumn-tinted leaves, and the
scarlet berries of mountain ash and rowan, culled from the town gardens,
or the country side outside the city walls.

In the cart the goddess reclined on a crimson-draped seat, she, herself,
swathed in white, and wearing a gorgeous necklace around her neck.
Desiree Candeille, a little pale, a little apprehensive of all this
noise, had obeyed the final dictates of her taskmaster. She had been the
means of bringing the Scarlet Pimpernel to France and vengeance, she was
to be honoured therefore above every other woman in France.

She sat in the car, vaguely thinking over the events of the past few
days, whilst watching the throng of rowdy merrymakers seething around
her. She thought of the noble-hearted, proud woman whom she had helped
to bring from her beautiful English home to sorrow and humiliation in
a dank French prison, she thought of the gallant English gentleman with
his pleasant voice and courtly, debonnair manners.

Chauvelin had roughly told her, only this morning, that both were now
under arrest as English spies, and that their fate no longer concerned
her. Later on the governor of the city had come to tell her that Citizen
Chauvelin desired her to take part in the procession and the national
fete, as the Goddess of Reason, and that the people of Boulogne were
ready to welcome her as such. This had pleased Candeille's vanity, and
all day, whilst arranging the finery which she meant to wear for the
occasion, she had ceased to think of England and of Lady Blakeney.

But now, when she arrived on the Place de la Senechaussee, and mounting
her car, found herself on a level with the platform of the guillotine,
her memory flew back to England, to the lavish hospitality of Blakeney
Manor, Marguerite's gentle voice, the pleasing grace of Sir Percy's
manners, and she shuddered a little when that cruel glint of evening
light caused the knife of the guillotine to glisten from out the gloom.

But anon her reflections were suddenly interrupted by loud and prolonged
shouts of joy. A whole throng of Pierrots had swarmed into the Place
from every side, carrying lighted torches and tall staves, on which were
hung lanthorns with many-coloured lights.

The procession was ready to start. A stentorian voice shouted out in
resonant accents:

"En avant, la grosse caisse!"

A man now, portly and gorgeous in scarlet and blue, detached himself
from out the crowd. His head was hidden beneath the monstrous mask of
a cardboard lion, roughly painted in brown and yellow, with crimson
for the widely open jaws and the corners of the eyes, to make them seem
ferocious and bloodshot. His coat was of bright crimson cloth, with cuts
and slashings in it, through which bunches of bright blue paper were
made to protrude, in imitation of the costume of mediaeval times.

He had blue stockings on and bright scarlet slippers, and behind him
floated a large strip of scarlet flannel, on which moons and suns and
stars of gold had been showered in plenty.

Upon his portly figure in front he was supporting the big drum, which
was securely strapped round his shoulders with tarred cordages, the
spoil of some fishing vessel.

There was a merciful slit in the jaw of the cardboard lion, through
which the portly drummer puffed and spluttered as he shouted lustily:

"En avant!"

And wielding the heavy drumstick with a powerful arm, he brought it
crashing down against the side of the mighty instrument.

"Hurrah! Hurrah! en avant les trompettes!"

A fanfare of brass instruments followed, lustily blown by twelve
young men in motley coats of green, and tall, peaked hats adorned with
feathers.

The drummer had begun to march, closely followed by the trumpeters.
Behind them a bevy of Columbines in many-coloured tarlatan skirts and
hair flying wildly in the breeze, giggling, pushing, exchanging ribald
jokes with the men behind, and getting kissed or slapped for their
pains.

Then the triumphal car of the goddess, with Demoiselle Candeille
standing straight up in it, a tall gold wand in one hand, the other
resting in a mass of scarlet berries. All round the car, helter-skelter,
tumbling, pushing, came Pierrots and Pierrettes, carrying lanthorns, and
Harlequins bearing the torches.

And after the car the long line of more sober folk, the older fisherman,
the women in caps and many-hued skirts, the serious townfolk who had
scorned the travesty, yet would not be left out of the procession. They
all began to march, to the tune of those noisy brass trumpets which were
thundering forth snatches from the newly composed "Marseillaise."

Above the sky became more heavy with clouds. Anon a few drops of rain
began to fall, making the torches sizzle and splutter, and scatter
grease and tar around and wetting the lightly-covered shoulders
of tarlatan-clad Columbines. But no one cared! The glow of so much
merrymaking kept the blood warm and the skin dry.

The flour all came off the Pierrots' faces, the blue paper slashings of
the drummer-in-chief hung in pulpy lumps against his gorgeous scarlet
cloak. The trumpeters' feathers became streaky and bedraggled.

But in the name of that good God who had ceased to exist, who in the
world or out of it cared if it rained, or thundered and stormed! This
was a national holiday, for an English spy was captured, and all natives
of Boulogne were free of the guillotine to-night.

The revellers were making the circuit of the town, with lanthorns
fluttering in the wind, and flickering torches held up aloft illumining
laughing faces, red with the glow of a drunken joy, young faces that
only enjoyed the moment's pleasure, serious ones that withheld a frown
at thought of the morrow. The fitful light played on the grotesque
masques of beasts and reptiles, on the diamond necklace of a very
earthly goddess, on God's glorious spoils from gardens and country-side,
on smothered anxiety and repressed cruelty.

The crowd had turned its back on the guillotine, and the trumpets
now changed the inspiriting tune of the "Marseillaise" to the ribald
vulgarity of the "Ca ira!"

Everyone yelled and shouted. Girls with flowing hair produced
broomsticks, and astride on these, broke from the ranks and danced a mad
and obscene saraband, a dance of witches in the weird glow of sizzling
torches, to the accompaniment of raucous laughter and of coarse jokes.

Thus the procession passed on, a sight to gladden the eyes of those who
had desired to smother all thought of the Infinite, of Eternity and of
God in the minds of those to whom they had nothing to offer in return.
A threat of death yesterday, misery, starvation and squalor! all the
hideousness of a destroying anarchy, that had nothing to give save a
national fete, a tinsel goddess, some shallow laughter and momentary
intoxication, a travesty of clothes and of religion and a dance on the
ashes of the past.

And there along the ramparts where the massive walls of the city
encircled the frowning prisons of Gayole and the old Chateau, dark
groups were crouching, huddled together in compact masses, which in
the gloom seemed to vibrate with fear. Like hunted quarry seeking for
shelter, sombre figures flattened themselves in the angles of the
dank walls, as the noisy carousers drew nigh. Then as the torches and
lanthorns detached themselves from out the evening shadows, hand would
clutch hand and hearts would beat with agonized suspense, whilst the
dark and shapeless forms would try to appear smaller, flatter, less
noticeable than before.

And when the crowd had passed noisily along, leaving behind it a trail
of torn finery, of glittering tinsel and of scarlet berries, when the
boom of the big drum and the grating noise of the brass trumpets had
somewhat died away, wan faces, pale with anxiety, would peer from out
the darkness, and nervous hands would grasp with trembling fingers the
small bundles of poor belongings tied up hastily in view of flight.

At seven o'clock, so 'twas said, the cannon would boom from the old
Beffroi. The guard would throw open the prison gates, and those who had
something or somebody to hide, and those who had a great deal to fear,
would be free to go whithersoever they chose.

And mothers, sisters, sweethearts stood watching by the gates, for
loved ones to-night would be set free, all along of the capture of that
English spy, the Scarlet Pimpernel.




Chapter XXXI: Final Dispositions



To Chauvelin the day had been one of restless inquietude and nervous
apprehension.

Collot d'Herbois harassed him with questions and complaints intermixed
with threats but thinly veiled. At his suggestion Gayole had been
transformed into a fully-manned, well-garrisoned fortress. Troops
were to be seen everywhere, on the stairs and in the passages, the
guard-rooms and offices: picked men from the municipal guard, and the
company which had been sent down from Paris some time ago.

Chauvelin had not resisted these orders given by his colleague. He knew
quite well that Marguerite would make no attempt at escape, but he had
long ago given up all hope of persuading a man of the type of Collot
d'Herbois that a woman of her temperament would never think of saving
her own life at the expense of others, and that Sir Percy Blakeney, in
spite of his adoration for his wife, would sooner see her die before
him, than allow the lives of innocent men and women to be the price of
hers.

Collot was one of those brutish sots--not by any means infrequent among
the Terrorists of that time--who, born in the gutter, still loved to
wallow in his native element, and who measured all his fellow-creatures
by the same standard which he had always found good enough for
himself. In this man there was neither the enthusiastic patriotism of
a Chauvelin, nor the ardent selflessness of a Danton. He served the
revolution and fostered the anarchical spirit of the times only because
these brought him a competence and a notoriety, which an orderly and
fastidious government would obviously have never offered him.

History shows no more despicable personality than that of Collot
d'Herbois, one of the most hideous products of that utopian Revolution,
whose grandly conceived theories of a universal levelling of mankind
only succeeded in dragging into prominence a number of half-brutish
creatures who, revelling in their own abasement, would otherwise have
remained content in inglorious obscurity.

Chauvelin tolerated and half feared Collot, knowing full well that if
now the Scarlet Pimpernel escaped from his hands, he could expect no
mercy from his colleagues.

The scheme by which he hoped to destroy not only the heroic leader but
the entire League by bringing opprobrium and ridicule upon them, was
wonderfully subtle in its refined cruelty, and Chauvelin, knowing by now
something of Sir Percy Blakeney's curiously blended character, was never
for a moment in doubt but that he would write the infamous letter, save
his wife by sacrificing his honour, and then seek oblivion and peace in
suicide.

With so much disgrace, so much mud cast upon their chief, the League of
the Scarlet Pimpernel would cease to be. THAT had been Chauvelin's plan
all along. For the end he had schemed and thought and planned, from the
moment that Robespierre had given him the opportunity of redeeming his
failure of last year. He had built up the edifice of his intrigue, bit
by bit, from the introduction of his tool, Candeille, to Marguerite at
the Richmond gala, to the arrest of Lady Blakeney in Boulogne. All that
remained for him to see now, would be the attitude of Sir Percy Blakeney
to-night, when, in exchange for the stipulated letter, he would see his
wife set free.

All day Chauvelin had wondered how it would all go off. He had
stage-managed everything, but he did not know how the chief actor would
play his part.

From time to time, when his feeling of restlessness became quite
unendurable, the ex-ambassador would wander round Fort Gayole and on
some pretext or other demand to see one or the other of his prisoners.
Marguerite, however, observed complete silence in his presence: she
acknowledged his greeting with a slight inclination of the head, and
in reply to certain perfunctory queries of his--which he put to her
in order to justify his appearance--she either nodded or gave curt
monosyllabic answers through partially closed lips.

"I trust that everything is arranged for your comfort, Lady Blakeney."

"I thank you, sir."

"You will be rejoining the 'Day-Dream' to-night. Can I send a messenger
over to the yacht for you?"

"I thank you. No."

"Sir Percy is well. He is fast asleep, and hath not asked for your
ladyship. Shall I let him know that you are well?"

A nod of acquiescence from Marguerite and Chauvelin's string of queries
was at an end. He marvelled at her quietude and thought that she should
have been as restless as himself.

Later on in the day, and egged on by Collot d'Herbois and by his own
fears, he had caused Marguerite to be removed from No. 6.

This change he heralded by another brief visit to her, and his attitude
this time was one of deferential apology.

"A matter of expediency, Lady Blakeney," he explained, "and I trust that
the change will be for your comfort."

Again the same curt nod of acquiescence on her part, and a brief:

"As you command, Monsieur!"

But when he had gone, she turned with a sudden passionate outburst
towards the Abbe Foucquet, her faithful companion through the past long,
weary hours. She fell on her knees beside him and sobbed in an agony of
grief.

"Oh! if I could only know... if I could only see him!... for a minute...
a second!... if I could only know!..."

She felt as if the awful uncertainty would drive her mad.

If she could only know! If she could only know what he meant to do.

"The good God knows!" said the old man, with his usual simple
philosophy, "and perhaps it is all for the best."

The room which Chauvelin had now destined for Marguerite was one which
gave from the larger one, wherein last night he had had his momentous
interview with her and with Sir Percy.

It was small, square and dark, with no window in it: only a small
ventilating hole high up in the wall and heavily grated. Chauvelin,
who desired to prove to her that there was no wish on his part to add
physical discomfort to her mental tortures, had given orders that the
little place should be made as habitable as possible. A thick, soft
carpet had been laid on the ground; there was an easy chair and a
comfortable-looking couch with a couple of pillows and a rug upon it,
and oh, marvel! on the round central table, a vase with a huge bunch
of many-coloured dahlias which seemed to throw a note as if of gladness
into this strange and gloomy little room.

At the furthest corner, too, a construction of iron uprights and
crossway bars had been hastily contrived and fitted with curtains,
forming a small recess, behind which was a tidy washstand, fine clean
towels and plenty of fresh water. Evidently the shops of Boulogne had
been commandeered in order to render Marguerite's sojourn here outwardly
agreeable.

But as the place was innocent of window, so was it innocent of doors.
The one that gave into the large room had been taken out of its hinges,
leaving only the frame, on each side of which stood a man from the
municipal guard with fixed bayonet.

Chauvelin himself had conducted Marguerite to her new prison. She
followed him--silent and apathetic--with not a trace of that awful
torrent of emotion which had overwhelmed her but half-an-hour ago when
she had fallen on her knees beside the old priest and sobbed her heart
out in a passionate fit of weeping. Even the sight of the soldiers
left her outwardly indifferent. As she stepped across the threshold she
noticed that the door itself had been taken away: then she gave another
quick glance at the soldiers, whose presence there would control her
every movement.

The thought of Queen Marie Antoinette in the Conciergerie prison with
the daily, hourly humiliation and shame which this constant watch
imposed upon her womanly pride and modesty, flashed suddenly across
Marguerite's mind, and a deep blush of horror rapidly suffused her pale
cheeks, whilst an almost imperceptible shudder shook her delicate frame.

Perhaps, as in a flash, she had at this moment received an inkling
of what the nature of that terrible "either--or" might be, with which
Chauvelin was trying to force an English gentleman to dishonour. Sir
Percy Blakeney's wife had been threatened with Marie Antoinette's fate.

"You see, Madame," said her cruel enemy's unctuous voice close to her
ear, "that we have tried our humble best to make your brief sojourn here
as agreeable as possible. May I express a hope that you will be quite
comfortable in this room, until the time when Sir Percy will be ready to
accompany you to the 'Day-Dream.'"

"I thank you, sir," she replied quietly.

"And if there is anything you require, I pray you to call. I shall be in
the next room all day and entirely at your service."

A young orderly now entered bearing a small collation--eggs, bread, milk
and wine--which he set on the central table. Chauvelin bowed low before
Marguerite and withdrew. Anon he ordered the two sentinels to stand the
other side of the doorway, against the wall of his own room, and well
out of sight of Marguerite, so that, as she moved about her own narrow
prison, if she ate or slept, she might have the illusion that she was
unwatched.

The sight of the soldiers had had the desired effect on her. Chauvelin
had seen her shudder and knew that she understood of that she guessed.
He was now satisfied and really had no wish to harass her beyond
endurance.

Moreover, there was always the proclamation which threatened the
bread-winners of Boulogne with death if Marguerite Blakeney escaped,
and which would be in full force until Sir Percy had written, signed and
delivered into Chauvelin's hands the letter which was to be the signal
for the general amnesty.

Chauvelin had indeed cause to be satisfied with his measures. There was
no fear that his prisoners would attempt to escape.

Even Collot d'Herbois had to admit everything was well done. He had read
the draft of the proposed letter and was satisfied with its contents.
Gradually now into his loutish brain there had filtrated the conviction
that Citizen Chauvelin was right, that that accursed Scarlet Pimpernel
and his brood of English spies would be more effectually annihilated
by all the dishonour and ridicule which such a letter written by the
mysterious hero would heap upon them all, than they could ever be
through the relentless work of the guillotine. His only anxiety now was
whether the Englishman would write that letter.

"Bah! he'll do it," he would say whenever he thought the whole matter
over: "Sacre tonnerre! but 'tis an easy means to save his own skin."

"You would sign such a letter without hesitation, eh, Citizen Collot,"
said Chauvelin, with well-concealed sarcasm, on one occasion when his
colleague discussed the all-absorbing topic with him; "you would show
no hesitation, if your life were at stake, and you were given the choice
between writing that letter and... the guillotine?"

"Parbleu!" responded Collot with conviction.

"More especially," continued Chauvelin drily, "if a million francs were
promised you as well?"

"Sacre Anglais!" swore Collot angrily, "you don't propose giving him that
money, do you?"

"We'll place it ready to his hand, at any rate, so that it should appear
as if he had actually taken it."

Collot looked up at his colleague in ungrudging admiration. Chauvelin
had indeed left nothing undone, had thought everything out in this
strangely conceived scheme for the destruction of the enemy of France.

"But in the name of all the dwellers in hell, Citizen," admonished
Collot, "guard that letter well, once it is in your hands."

"I'll do better than that," said Chauvelin, "I will hand it over to you,
Citizen Collot, and you shall ride with it to Paris at once."

"To-night!" assented Collot with a shout of triumph, as he brought his
grimy fist crashing down on the table, "I'll have a horse ready saddled
at this very gate, and an escort of mounted men... we'll ride like
hell's own furies and not pause to breathe until that letter is in
Citizen Robespierre's hands."

"Well thought of, Citizen," said Chauvelin approvingly. "I pray you
give the necessary orders, that the horses be ready saddled, and the
men booted and spurred, and waiting at the Gayole gate, at seven o'clock
this evening."

"I wish the letter were written and safely in our hands by now."

"Nay! the Englishman will have it ready by this evening, never fear. The
tide is high at half-past seven, and he will be in haste for his wife to
be aboard his yacht, ere the turn, even if he..."

He paused, savouring the thoughts which had suddenly flashed across his
mind, and a look of intense hatred and cruel satisfaction for a moment
chased away the studied impassiveness of his face.

"What do you mean, Citizen?" queried Collot anxiously, "even if he...
what?..."

"Oh! nothing, nothing! I was only trying to make vague guesses as to
what the Englishman will do AFTER he has written the letter," quoth
Chauvelin reflectively.

"Morbleu! he'll return to his own accursed country... glad enough to
have escaped with his skin.... I suppose," added Collot with sudden
anxiety, "you have no fear that he will refuse at the last moment to
write that letter?"

The two men were sitting in the large room, out of which opened the one
which was now occupied by Marguerite. They were talking at the further
end of it, close to the window, and though Chauvelin had mostly spoken
in a whisper, Collot had ofttimes shouted, and the ex-ambassador was
wondering how much Marguerite had heard.

Now at Collot's anxious query he gave a quick furtive glance in the
direction of the further room wherein she sat, so silent and so still,
that it seemed almost as if she must be sleeping.

"You don't think that the Englishman will refuse to write the letter?"
insisted Collot with angry impatience.

"No!" replied Chauvelin quietly.

"But if he does?" persisted the other.

"If he does, I send the woman to Paris to-night and have him hanged as
a spy in this prison yard without further formality or trial..." replied
Chauvelin firmly; "so either way, you see, Citizen," he added in a
whisper, "the Scarlet Pimpernel is done for.... But I think that he will
write the letter."

"Parbleu! so do I!..." rejoined Collot with a coarse laugh.




Chapter XXXII: The Letter



Later on, when his colleague left him in order to see to the horses and
to his escort for to-night, Chauvelin called Sergeant Hebert, his old
and trusted familiar, to him and gave him some final orders.

"The Angelus must be rung at the proper hour, friend Hebert," he began
with a grim smile.

"The Angelus, Citizen?" quoth the Sergeant, with complete stupefaction,
"'tis months now since it has been rung. It was forbidden by a decree of
the Convention, and I doubt me if any of our men would know how to set
about it."

Chauvelin's eyes were fixed before him in apparent vacancy, while the
same grim smile still hovered round his thin lips. Something of that
irresponsible spirit of adventure which was the mainspring of all Sir
Percy Blakeney's actions, must for the moment have pervaded the mind of
his deadly enemy.

Chauvelin had thought out this idea of having the Angelus rung to-night,
and was thoroughly pleased with the notion. This was the day when the
duel was to have been fought; seven o'clock would have been the very
hour, and the sound of the Angelus to have been the signal for combat,
and there was something very satisfying in the thought, that that same
Angelus should be rung, as a signal that the Scarlet Pimpernel was
withered and broken at last.

In answer to Hebert's look of bewilderment Chauvelin said quietly:

"We must have some signal between ourselves and the guard at the
different gates, also with the harbour officials: at a given moment the
general amnesty must take effect and the harbour become a free port. I
have a fancy that the signal shall be the ringing of the Angelus: the
cannons at the gates and the harbour can boom in response; then the
prisons can be thrown open and prisoners can either participate in
the evening fete or leave the city immediately, as they choose. The
Committee of Public Safety has promised the amnesty: it will carry out
its promise to the full, and when Citizen Collot d'Herbois arrives in
Paris with the joyful news, all natives of Boulogne in the prisons there
will participate in the free pardon too."

"I understand all that, Citizen," said Hebert, still somewhat
bewildered, "but not the Angelus."

"A fancy, friend Hebert, and I mean to have it."

"But who is to ring it, Citizen?"

"Morbleu! haven't you one calotin left in Boulogne whom you can press
into doing this service?"

"Aye! calotins enough! there's the Abbe Foucquet in this very
building... in No. 6 cell..."

"Sacre tonnerre!" ejaculated Chauvelin exultingly, "the very man! I
know his dossier well! Once he is free, he will make straightway for
England... he and his family... and will help to spread the glorious
news of the dishonour and disgrace of the much-vaunted Scarlet
Pimpernel!... The very man, friend Hebert!... Let him be stationed
here... to see the letter written... to see the money handed over--for
we will go through with that farce--and make him understand that the
moment I give him the order, he can run over to his old church St.
Joseph and ring the Angelus. ... The old fool will be delighted... more
especially when he knows that he will thereby be giving the very signal
which will set his own sister's children free.... You understand?..."

"I understand, Citizen."

"And you can make the old calotin understand?"

"I think so, Citizen.... You want him in this room.... At what time?"

"A quarter before seven."

"Yes. I'll bring him along myself, and stand over him, lest he play any
pranks."

"Oh! he'll not trouble you," sneered Chauvelin, "he'll be deeply
interested in the proceedings. The woman will be here too, remember," he
added with a jerky movement of the hand in the direction of Marguerite's
room, "the two might be made to stand together, with four of your
fellows round them."

"I understand, Citizen. Are any of us to escort the Citizen Foucquet
when he goes to St. Joseph?"

"Aye! two men had best go with him. There will be a crowd in the streets
by then... How far is it from here to the church?"

"Less than five minutes."

"Good. See to it that the doors are opened and the bell ropes easy of
access."

"It shall be seen to, Citizen. How many men will you have inside this
room to-night?"

"Let the walls be lined with men whom you can trust. I anticipate
neither trouble nor resistance. The whole thing is a simple formality to
which the Englishman has already intimated his readiness to submit. If
he changes his mind at the last moment there will be no Angelus rung, no
booming of the cannons or opening of the prison doors: there will be
no amnesty, and no free pardon. The woman will be at once conveyed
to Paris, and... But he'll not change his mind, friend Hebert," he
concluded in suddenly altered tones, and speaking quite lightly, "he'll
not change his mind."

The conversation between Chauvelin and his familiar had been carried on
in whispers: not that the Terrorist cared whether Marguerite overheard
or not, but whispering had become a habit with this man, whose tortuous
ways and subtle intrigues did not lend themselves to discussion in a
loud voice.

Chauvelin was sitting at the central table, just where he had been
last night when Sir Percy Blakeney's sudden advent broke in on his
meditations. The table had been cleared of the litter of multitudinous
papers which had encumbered it before. On it now there were only a
couple of heavy pewter candlesticks, with the tallow candles fixed ready
in them, a leather-pad, an ink-well, a sand-box and two or three quill
pens: everything disposed, in fact, for the writing and signing of the
letter.

Already in imagination, Chauvelin saw his impudent enemy, the bold and
daring adventurer, standing there beside that table and putting his name
to the consummation of his own infamy. The mental picture thus evoked
brought a gleam of cruel satisfaction and of satiated lust into the
keen, ferret-like face, and a smile of intense joy lit up the narrow,
pale-coloured eyes.

He looked round the room where the great scene would be enacted: two
soldiers were standing guard outside Marguerite's prison, two more at
attention near the door which gave on the passage: his own half-dozen
picked men were waiting his commands in the corridor. Presently the
whole room would be lined with troops, himself and Collot standing with
eyes fixed on the principal actor of the drama! Hebert with specially
selected troopers standing on guard over Marguerite!

No, no! he had left nothing to chance this time, and down below the
horses would be ready saddled, that were to convey Collot and the
precious document to Paris.

No! nothing was left to chance, and in either case he was bound to win.
Sir Percy Blakeney would either write the letter in order to save
his wife, and heap dishonour on himself, or he would shrink from the
terrible ordeal at the last moment and let Chauvelin and the Committee
of Public Safety work their will with her and him.

"In that case the pillory as a spy and summary hanging for you, my
friend," concluded Chauvelin in his mind, "and for your wife... Bah,
once you are out of the way, even she will cease to matter."

He left Hebert on guard in the room. An irresistible desire seized him
to go and have a look at his discomfited enemy, and from the latter's
attitude make a shrewd guess as to what he meant to do to-night.

Sir Percy had been given a room on one of the upper floors of the old
prison. He had in no way been closely guarded, and the room itself
had been made as comfortable as may be. He had seemed quite happy and
contented when he had been conducted hither by Chauvelin, the evening
before.

"I hope you quite understand, Sir Percy, that you are my guest here
to-night," Chauvelin had said suavely, "and that you are free to come
and go, just as you please."

"Lud love you, sir," Sir Percy had replied gaily, "but I verily believe
that I am."

"It is only Lady Blakeney whom we have cause to watch until to-morrow,"
added Chauvelin with quiet significance. "Is that not so, Sir Percy?"

But Sir Percy seemed, whenever his wife's name was mentioned, to lapse
into irresistible somnolence. He yawned now with his usual affectation,
and asked at what hour gentlemen in France were wont to breakfast.

Since then Chauvelin had not seen him. He had repeatedly asked how the
English prisoner was faring, and whether he seemed to be sleeping and
eating heartily. The orderly in charge invariably reported that the
Englishman seemed well, but did not eat much. On the other hand, he
had ordered, and lavishly paid for, measure after measure of brandy and
bottle after bottle of wine.

"Hm! how strange these Englishmen are!" mused Chauvelin; "this so-called
hero is nothing but a wine-sodden brute, who seeks to nerve himself for
a trying ordeal by drowning his faculties in brandy... Perhaps after all
he doesn't care!..."

But the wish to have a look at that strangely complex creature--hero,
adventurer or mere lucky fool--was irresistible, and Chauvelin in the
latter part of the afternoon went up to the room which had been allotted
to Sir Percy Blakeney.

He never moved now without his escort, and this time also two of his
favourite bodyguards accompanied him to the upper floor. He knocked at
the door, but received no answer, and after a second or two he bade his
men wait in the corridor and, gently turning the latch, walked in.

There was an odour of brandy in the air; on the table two or three empty
bottles of wine and a glass half filled with cognac testified to the
truth of what the orderly had said, whilst sprawling across the camp
bedstead, which obviously was too small for his long limbs, his head
thrown back, his mouth open for a vigorous snore, lay the imperturbable
Sir Percy fast asleep.

Chauvelin went up to the bedstead and looked down upon the reclining
figure of the man who had oft been called the most dangerous enemy of
Republican France.

Of a truth, a fine figure of a man, Chauvelin was ready enough to admit
that; the long, hard limbs, the wide chest, and slender, white hands,
all bespoke the man of birth, breeding and energy: the face too looked
strong and clearly-cut in repose, now that the perpetually inane smile
did not play round the firm lips, nor the lazy, indolent expression
mar the seriousness of the straight brow. For one moment--it was a mere
flash--Chauvelin felt almost sorry that so interesting a career should
be thus ignominiously brought to a close.

The Terrorist felt that if his own future, his own honour and integrity
were about to be so hopelessly crushed, he would have wandered up and
down this narrow room like a caged beast, eating out his heart with
self-reproach and remorse, and racking his nerves and brain for an issue
out of the terrible alternative which meant dishonour or death.

But this man drank and slept.

"Perhaps he doesn't care!"

And as if in answer to Chauvelin's puzzled musing a deep snore escaped
the sleeping adventurer's parted lips.

Chauvelin sighed, perplexed and troubled. He looked round the little
room, then went up to a small side table which stood against the wall
and on which were two or three quill pens and an ink-well, also some
loosely scattered sheets of paper. These he turned over with a careless
hand and presently came across a closely written page. ---- "Citizen
Chauvelin:--In consideration of a further sum of one million francs..."

It was the beginning of the letter!... only a few words so far... with
several corrections of misspelt words... and a line left out here and
there which confused the meaning... a beginning made by the unsteady
hand of that drunken fool... an attempt only at present....

But still... a beginning.

Close by was the draft of it as written out by Chauvelin, and which Sir
Percy had evidently begun to copy.

He had made up his mind then.... He meant to subscribe with his own hand
to his lasting dishonour... and meaning it, he slept!

Chauvelin felt the paper trembling in his hand. He felt strangely
agitated and nervous, now that the issue was so near... so sure!...

"There's no demmed hurry for that, is there... er... Monsieur
Chaubertin?..." came from the slowly wakening Sir Percy in somewhat
thick, heavy accents, accompanied by a prolonged yawn. "I haven't got
the demmed thing quite ready..."

Chauvelin had been so startled that the paper dropped from his hand. He
stooped to pick it up.

"Nay! why should you be so scared, sir?" continued Sir Percy lazily,
"did you think I was drunk?... I assure you, sir, on my honour, I am not
so drunk as you think I am."

"I have no doubt, Sir Percy," replied Chauvelin ironically, "that you
have all your marvellous faculties entirely at your command.... I
must apologize for disturbing your papers," he added, replacing the
half-written page on the table, "I thought perhaps that if the letter
was ready ..."

"It will be, sir... it will be... for I am not drunk, I assure you....
and can write with a steady hand... and do honour to my signature...."

"When will you have the letter ready, Sir Percy?"

"The 'Day-Dream' must leave the harbour at the turn of the tide," quoth
Sir Percy thickly. "It'll be demmed well time by then... won't it,
sir?..."

"About sundown, Sir Percy... not later..."

"About sundown... not later..." muttered Blakeney, as he once more
stretched his long limbs along the narrow bed.

He gave a loud and hearty yawn.

"I'll not fail you..." he murmured, as he closed his eyes, and gave a
final struggle to get his head at a comfortable angle, "the letter will
be written in my best cali... calig.... Lud! but I'm not so drunk as you
think I am. ..."

But as if to belie his own oft-repeated assertion, hardly was the last
word out of his mouth than his stertorous and even breathing proclaimed
the fact that he was once more fast asleep.

With a shrug of the shoulders and a look of unutterable contempt at
his broken-down enemy, Chauvelin turned on his heel and went out of the
room.

But outside in the corridor he called the orderly to him and gave strict
commands that no more wine or brandy was to be served to the Englishman
under any circumstances whatever.

"He has two hours in which to sleep off the effects of all that brandy
which he had consumed," he mused as he finally went back to his own
quarters, "and by that time he will be able to write with a steady
hand."




Chapter XXXIII: The English Spy



And now at last the shades of evening were drawing in thick and fast.
Within the walls of Fort Gayole the last rays of the setting sun had
long ago ceased to shed their dying radiance, and through the thick
stone embrasures and the dusty panes of glass, the grey light of dusk
soon failed to penetrate.

In the large ground-floor room with its window opened upon the wide
promenade of the southern ramparts, a silence reigned which was
oppressive. The air was heavy with the fumes of the two tallow candles
on the table, which smoked persistently.

Against the walls a row of figures in dark blue uniforms with scarlet
facings, drab breeches and heavy riding boots, silent and immovable,
with fixed bayonets like so many automatons lining the room all round;
at some little distance from the central table and out of the immediate
circle of light, a small group composed of five soldiers in the same
blue and scarlet uniforms. One of these was Sergeant Hebert. In the
centre of this group two persons were sitting: a woman and an old man.

The Abbe Foucquet had been brought down from his prison cell a few
minutes ago, and told to watch what would go on around him, after which
he would be allowed to go to his old church of St. Joseph and ring the
Angelus once more before he and his family left Boulogne forever.

The Angelus would be the signal for the opening of all the prison gates
in the town. Everyone to-night could come and go as they pleased, and
having rung the Angelus, the abbe would be at liberty to join Francois
and Felicite and their old mother, his sister, outside the purlieus of
the town.

The Abbe Foucquet did not quite understand all this, which was very
rapidly and roughly explained to him. It was such a very little while
ago that he had expected to see the innocent children mounting up those
awful steps which lead to the guillotine, whilst he himself was looking
death quite near in the face, that all this talk of amnesty and of
pardon had not quite fully reached his brain.

But he was quite content that it had all been ordained by le bon Dieu,
and very happy at the thought of ringing the dearly-loved Angelus in his
own old church once again. So when he was peremptorily pushed into the
room and found himself close to Marguerite, with four or five soldiers
standing round them, he quietly pulled his old rosary from his pocket
and began murmuring gentle "Paters" and "Aves" under his breath.

Beside him sat Marguerite, rigid as a statue: her cloak thrown over her
shoulders, so that its hood might hide her face. She could not now have
said how that awful day had passed, how she had managed to survive the
terrible, nerve-racking suspense, the agonizing doubt as to what was
going to happen. But above all, what she had found most unendurable was
the torturing thought that in this same grim and frowning building her
husband was there... somewhere... how far or how near she could not
say... but she knew that she was parted from him and perhaps would not
see him again, not even at the hour of death.

That Percy would never write that infamous letter and LIVE, she knew.
That he might write it in order to save her, she feared was possible,
whilst the look of triumph on Chauvelin's face had aroused her most
agonizing terrors.

When she was summarily ordered to go into the next room, she realized
at once that all hope now was more than futile. The walls lined with
troops, the attitude of her enemies, and above all that table with
paper, ink and pens ready as it were for the accomplishment of the
hideous and monstrous deed, all made her very heart numb, as if it were
held within the chill embrace of death.

"If the woman moves, speaks or screams, gag her at once!" said Collot
roughly the moment she sat down, and Sergeant Hebert stood over her,
gag and cloth in hand, whilst two soldiers placed heavy hands on her
shoulders.

But she neither moved nor spoke, not even presently when a loud and
cheerful voice came echoing from a distant corridor, and anon the door
opened and her husband came in, accompanied by Chauvelin.

The ex-ambassador was very obviously in a state of acute nervous
tension; his hands were tightly clasped behind his back, and his
movements were curiously irresponsible and jerky. But Sir Percy Blakeney
looked a picture of calm unconcern: the lace bow at his throat was tied
with scrupulous care, his eyeglass upheld at quite the correct angle,
and his delicate-coloured caped coat was thrown back just sufficiently
to afford a glimpse of the dainty cloth suit and exquisitely embroidered
waistcoat beneath.

He was the perfect presentation of a London dandy, and might have
been entering a royal drawing-room in company with an honoured guest.
Marguerite's eyes were riveted on him as he came well within the circle
of light projected by the candles, but not even with that acute sixth
sense of a passionate and loving woman could she detect the slightest
tremor in the aristocratic hands which held the gold-rimmed eyeglass,
nor the faintest quiver of the firmly moulded lips.

This had occurred just as the bell of the old Beffroi chimed
three-quarters after six. Now it was close on seven, and in the centre
of the room and with his face and figure well lighted up by the candles,
at the table pen in hand sat Sir Percy writing.

At his elbow just behind him stood Chauvelin on the one side and Collot
d'Herbois on the other, both watching with fixed and burning eyes the
writing of that letter.

Sir Percy seemed in no hurry. He wrote slowly and deliberately,
carefully copying the draft of the letter which was propped up in front
of him. The spelling of some of the French words seemed to have
troubled him at first, for when he began he made many facetious
and self-deprecatory remarks anent his own want of education, and
carelessness in youth in acquiring the gentle art of speaking so elegant
a language.

Presently, however, he appeared more at his ease, or perhaps less
inclined to talk, since he only received curt monosyllabic answers to
his pleasant sallies. Five minutes had gone by without any other sound,
save the spasmodic creak of Sir Percy's pen upon the paper, the while
Chauvelin and Collot watched every word he wrote.

But gradually from afar there had arisen in the stillness of evening a
distant, rolling noise like that of surf breaking against the cliffs.
Nearer and louder it grew, and as it increased in volume, so it gained
now in diversity. The monotonous, roll-like, far-off thunder was just as
continuous as before, but now shriller notes broke out from amongst
the more remote sounds, a loud laugh seemed ever and anon to pierce the
distance and to rise above the persistent hubbub, which became the mere
accompaniment to these isolated tones.

The merrymakers of Boulogne, having started from the Place de la
Senechaussee, were making the round of the town by the wide avenue which
tops the ramparts. They were coming past the Fort Gayole, shouting,
singing, brass trumpets in front, big drum ahead, drenched, hot, and
hoarse, but supremely happy.

Sir Percy looked up for a moment as the noise drew neared, then turned
to Chauvelin and pointing to the letter, he said:

"I have nearly finished!"

The suspense in the smoke-laden atmosphere of this room was becoming
unendurable, and four hearts at least were beating wildly with
overpowering anxiety. Marguerite's eyes were fixed with tender intensity
on the man she so passionately loved. She did not understand his actions
or his motives, but she felt a wild longing in her, to drink in every
line of that loved face, as if with this last, long look she was bidding
an eternal farewell to all hopes of future earthly happiness.

The old priest had ceased to tell his beads. Feeling in his kindly heart
the echo of the appalling tragedy which was being enacted before him, he
had put out a fatherly, tentative hand towards Marguerite, and given her
icy fingers a comforting pressure.

And in the hearts of Chauvelin and his colleague there was satisfied
revenge, eager, exultant triumph and that terrible nerve-tension which
immediately precedes the long-expected climax.

But who can say what went on within the heart of that bold adventurer,
about to be brought to the lowest depths of humiliation which it is in
the power of man to endure? What behind that smooth unruffled brow still
bent laboriously over the page of writing?

The crowd was now on the Place Daumont; some of the foremost in
the ranks were ascending the stone steps which lead to the southern
ramparts. The noise had become incessant: Pierrots and Pierrettes,
Harlequins and Columbines had worked themselves up into a veritable
intoxication of shouts and laughter.

Now as they all swarmed up the steps and caught sight of the open window
almost on a level with the ground, and of the large dimly-lighted room,
they gave forth one terrific and voluminous "Hurrah!" for the paternal
government up in Paris, who had given them cause for all this joy. Then
they recollected how the amnesty, the pardon, the national fete, this
brilliant procession had come about, and somebody in the crowd shouted:

"Allons! les us have a look at that English spy!..."

"Let us see the Scarlet Pimpernel!"

"Yes! yes! let us see what he is like!"

They shouted and stamped and swarmed round the open window, swinging
their lanthorns and demanding in a loud tone of voice that the English
spy be shown to them.

Faces wet with rain and perspiration tried to peep in at the window.
Collot gave brief orders to the soldiers to close the shutters at once
and to push away the crowd, but the crowd would not be pushed. It would
not be gainsaid, and when the soldiers tried to close the window, twenty
angry fists broke the panes of glass.

"I can't finish this writing in your lingo, sir, whilst this demmed row
is going on," said Sir Percy placidly.

"You have not much more to write, Sir Percy," urged Chauvelin with
nervous impatience, "I pray you, finish the matter now, and get you gone
from out this city."

"Send that demmed lot away, then," rejoined Sir Percy calmly.

"They won't go.... They want to see you..."

Sir Percy paused a moment, pen in hand, as if in deep reflection.

"They want to see me," he said with a laugh. "Why, demn it all... then,
why not let em?..."

And with a few rapid strokes of the pen, he quickly finished the letter,
adding his signature with a bold flourish, whilst the crowd, pushing,
jostling, shouting and cursing the soldiers, still loudly demanded to
see the Scarlet Pimpernel.

Chauvelin felt as if his heart would veritably burst with the wildness
of its beating.

Then Sir Percy, with one hand lightly pressed on the letter, pushed his
chair away and with his pleasant ringing voice, said once again:

"Well! demn it... let 'em see me!..."

With that he sprang to his feet and up to his full height, and as he did
so he seized the two massive pewter candlesticks, one in each hand, and
with powerful arms well outstretched he held them high above his head.

"The letter..." murmured Chauvelin in a hoarse whisper.

But even as he was quickly reaching out a hand, which shook with the
intensity of his excitement, towards the letter on the table, Blakeney,
with one loud and sudden shout, threw the heavy candlesticks onto
the floor. They rattled down with a terrific crash, the lights were
extinguished, and the whole room was immediately plunged in utter
darkness.

The crowd gave a wild yell of fear: they had only caught sight for
one instant of that gigantic figure--which, with arms outstretched had
seemed supernaturally tall--weirdly illumined by the flickering light of
the tallow candles and the next moment disappearing into utter darkness
before their very gaze. Overcome with sudden superstitious fear,
Pierrots and Pierrettes, drummer and trumpeters turned and fled in every
direction.

Within the room all was wild confusion. The soldiers had heard a cry:

"La fenetre! La fenetre!"

Who gave it no one knew, no one could afterwards recollect: certain it
is that with one accord the majority of the men made a rush for the open
window, driven thither partly by the wild instinct of the chase after
an escaping enemy, and partly by the same superstitious terror which had
caused the crowd to flee. They clambered over the sill and dropped down
on to the ramparts below, then started in wild pursuit.

But when the crash came, Chauvelin had given one frantic shout:

"The letter!!!... Collot!!... A moi.... In his hand.... The letter!..."

There was the sound of a heavy thud, of a terrible scuffle there on the
floor in the darkness and then a yell of victory from Collot d'Herbois.

"I have the letter! A Paris!"

"Victory!" echoed Chauvelin, exultant and panting, "victory!! The
Angelus, friend Hebert! Take the calotin to ring the Angelus!!!"

It was instinct which caused Collot d'Herbois to find the door; he tore
it open, letting in a feeble ray of light from the corridor. He stood in
the doorway one moment, his slouchy, ungainly form distinctly outlined
against the lighter background beyond, a look of exultant and malicious
triumph, of deadly hate and cruelty distinctly imprinted on his face and
with upraised hand wildly flourishing the precious document, the brand
of dishonour for the enemy of France.

"A Paris!" shouted Chauvelin to him excitedly. "Into Robespierre's
hands. ... The letter!..."

Then he fell back panting, exhausted on the nearest chair.

Collot, without looking again behind him, called wildly for the men
who were to escort him to Paris. They were picked troopers, stalwart
veterans from the old municipal guard. They had not broken their ranks
throughout the turmoil, and fell into line in perfect order as they
followed Citizen Collot out of the room.

Less than five minutes later there was the noise of stamping and
champing of bits in the courtyard below, a shout from Collot, and the
sound of a cavalcade galloping at break-neck speed towards the distant
Paris gate.




Chapter XXXIV: The Angelus



And gradually all noises died away around the old Fort Gayole. The
shouts and laugher of the merrymakers, who had quickly recovered from
their fright, now came only as the muffled rumble of a distant storm,
broken here and there by the shrill note of a girl's loud laughter, or a
vigorous fanfare from the brass trumpets.

The room where so much turmoil had taken place, where so many hearts had
beaten with torrent-like emotions, where the awesome tragedy of revenge
and hate, of love and passion had been consummated, was now silent and
at peace.

The soldiers had gone: some in pursuit of the revellers, some with
Collot d'Herbois, others with Hebert and the calotin who was to ring the
Angelus.

Chauvelin, overcome with the intensity of his exultation and the agony
of the suspense which he had endured, sat, vaguely dreaming, hardly
conscious, but wholly happy and content. Fearless, too, for his triumph
was complete, and he cared not now if he lived or died.

He had lived long enough to see the complete annihilation and dishonour
of his enemy.

What had happened to Sir Percy Blakeney now, what to Marguerite, he
neither knew nor cared. No doubt the Englishman had picked himself up
and got away through the window or the door: he would be anxious to get
his wife out of the town as quickly as possible. The Angelus would
ring directly, the gates would be opened, the harbour made free to
everyone....

And Collot was a league outside Boulogne by now... a league nearer to
Paris.

So what mattered the humbled wayside English flower?--the damaged and
withered Scarlet Pimpernel?...

A slight noise suddenly caused him to start. He had been dreaming, no
doubt, having fallen into some kind of torpor, akin to sleep, after the
deadly and restless fatigue of the past four days. He certainly had been
unconscious of everything around him, of time and of place. But now he
felt fully awake.

And again he heard that slight noise, as if something or someone was
moving in the room.

He tried to peer into the darkness, but could distinguish nothing.
He rose and went to the door. It was still open, and close behind it
against the wall a small oil lamp was fixed which lit up the corridor.

Chauvelin detached the lamp and came back with it into the room. Just
as he did so there came to his ears the first sound of the little church
bell ringing the Angelus.

He stepped into the room holding the lamp high above his head; its
feeble rays fell full upon the brilliant figure of Sir Percy Blakeney.

He was smiling pleasantly, bowing slightly towards Chauvelin, and in his
hand he held the sheathed sword, the blade of which had been fashioned
in Toledo for Lorenzo Cenci, and the fellow of which was lying
now--Chauvelin himself knew not where.

"The day and hour, Monsieur, I think," said Sir Percy with courtly
grace, "when you and I are to cross swords together; those are the
southern ramparts, meseems. Will you precede, sir? and I will follow."

At sight of this man, of his impudence and of his daring, Chauvelin felt
an icy grip on his heart. His cheeks became ashen white, his thin lips
closed with a snap, and the hand which held the lamp aloft trembled
visibly. Sir Percy stood before him, still smiling and with a graceful
gesture pointing towards the ramparts.

From the Church of St. Joseph the gentle, melancholy tones of the
Angelus sounding the second Ave Maria came faintly echoing in the
evening air.

With a violent effort Chauvelin forced himself to self-control,
and tried to shake off the strange feeling of obsession which had
overwhelmed him in the presence of this extraordinary man. He walked
quite quietly up to the table and placed the lamp upon it. As in a flash
recollection had come back to him.. the past few minutes!... the letter!
and Collot well on his way to Paris!

Bah! he had nothing to fear now, save perhaps death at the hand of this
adventurer turned assassin in his misery and humiliation!

"A truce on this folly, Sir Percy," he said roughly, "as you well know,
I had never any intention of fighting you with these poisoned swords of
yours and..."

"I knew that, M. Chauvelin.... But do YOU know that I have the intention
of killing you now... as you stand... like a dog!..."

And throwing down the sword with one of those uncontrolled outbursts of
almost animal passion, which for one instant revealed the real, inner
man, he went up to Chauvelin and towering above him like a great
avenging giant, he savoured for one second the joy of looking down on
that puny, slender figure which he could crush with sheer brute force,
with one blow from his powerful hands.

But Chauvelin at this moment was beyond fear.

"And if you killed me now, Sir Percy," he said quietly and looking the
man whom he so hated fully in the eyes, "you could not destroy that
letter which my colleague is taking to Paris at this very moment."

As he had anticipated, his words seemed to change Sir Percy's mood in
an instant. The passion in the handsome, aristocratic face faded in
a trice, the hard lines round the jaw and lips relaxed, the fire of
revenge died out from the lazy blue eyes, and the next moment a long,
loud, merry laugh raised the dormant echoes of the old fort.

"Nay, Monsieur Chaubertin," said Sir Percy gaily, "but this is
marvellous... demmed marvellous... do you hear that, m'dear?...
Gadzooks! but 'tis the best joke I have heard this past
twelve-months.... Monsieur here thinks... Lud! but I shall die of
laughing.... Monsieur here thinks... that 'twas that demmed letter which
went to Paris... and that an English gentleman lay scuffling on the
floor and allowed a letter to be filched from him..."

"Sir Percy!..." gasped Chauvelin, as an awful thought seemed suddenly to
flash across his fevered brain.

"Lud, sir, you are astonishing!" said Sir Percy, taking a very much
crumpled sheet of paper from the capacious pocket of his elegant caped
coat, and holding it close to Chauvelin's horror-stricken gaze. "THIS is
the letter which I wrote at that table yonder in order to gain time and
in order to fool you.... But, by the Lord, you are a bigger demmed fool
than ever I took you to be, if you thought it would serve any other
purpose save that of my hitting you in the face with it."

And with a quick and violent gesture he struck Chauvelin full in the
face with the paper.

"You would like to know, Monsieur Chaubertin, would you not?..." he
added pleasantly, "what letter it is that your friend, Citizen Collot,
is taking in such hot haste to Paris for you.... Well! the letter is
not long and 'tis written in verse.... I wrote it myself upstairs to-day
whilst you thought me sodden with brandy and three-parts asleep. But
brandy is easily flung out of the window.... Did you think I drank it
all?... Nay! as you remember, I told you that I was not so drunk as you
thought?... Aye! the letter is writ in English verse, Monsieur, and it
reads thus:

"We seek him here! we seek him there! Those Frenchies seek him
everywhere! Is he in heaven? is he in hell? That demmed elusive
Pimpernel?

"A neat rhyme, I fancy, Monsieur, and one which will, if rightly
translated, greatly please your friend and ruler, Citizen
Robespierre.... Your colleague Citizen Collot is well on his way to
Paris with it by now. ... No, no, Monsieur... as you rightly said just
now... I really could not kill you... God having blessed me with the
saving sense of humour..."

Even as he spoke the third Ave Maria of the Angelus died away on the
morning air. From the harbour the old Chateau there came the loud boom
of cannon.

The hour of the opening of the gates, of the general amnesty and free
harbour was announced throughout Boulogne.

Chauvelin was livid with rage, fear and baffled revenge. He made a
sudden rush for the door in a blind desire to call for help, but Sir
Percy had toyed long enough with his prey. The hour was speeding on:
Hebert and some of the soldiers might return, and it was time to think
of safety and of flight. Quick as a hunted panther, he had interposed
his tall figure between his enemy and the latter's chance of calling for
aid, then, seizing the little man by the shoulders, he pushed him back
into that portion of the room where Marguerite and the Abbe Foucquet had
been lately sitting.

The gag, with cloth and cord, which had been intended for a woman were
lying on the ground close by, just where Hebert had dropped them, when
he marched the old Abbe off to the Church.

With quick and dexterous hands, Sir Percy soon reduced Chauvelin to
an impotent and silent bundle. The ex-ambassador after four days of
harrowing nerve-tension, followed by so awful a climax, was weakened
physically and mentally, whilst Blakeney, powerful, athletic and always
absolutely unperturbed, was fresh in body and spirit. He had slept
calmly all the afternoon, having quietly thought out all his plans, left
nothing to chance, and acted methodically and quickly, and invariably
with perfect repose.

Having fully assured himself that the cords were well fastened, the gag
secure and Chauvelin completely helpless, he took the now inert mass up
in his arms and carried it into the adjoining room, where Marguerite for
twelve hours had endured a terrible martyrdom.

He laid his enemy's helpless form upon the couch, and for one moment
looked down on it with a strange feeling of pity quite unmixed with
contempt. The light from the lamp in the further room struck vaguely
upon the prostrate figure of Chauvelin. He seemed to have lost
consciousness, for the eyes were closed, only the hands, which were tied
securely to his body, had a spasmodic, nervous twitch in them.

With a good-natured shrug of the shoulders the imperturbable Sir Percy
turned to go, but just before he did so, he took a scrap of paper from
his waistcoat pocket, and slipped it between Chauvelin's trembling
fingers. On the paper were scribbled the four lines of verse which in
the next four and twenty hours Robespierre himself and his colleagues
would read.

Then Blakeney finally went out of the room.




Chapter XXXV: Marguerite



As he re-entered the large room, she was standing beside the table,
with one dainty hand resting against the back of the chair, her whole
graceful figure bent forward as if in an agony of ardent expectation.

Never for an instant, in that supreme moment when his precious life was
at stake, did she waver in courage or presence of mind. From the moment
that he jumped up and took the candlesticks in his hands, her sixth
sense showed her as in a flash what he meant to do and how he would wish
her to act.

When the room was plunged in darkness she stood absolutely still;
when she heard the scuffle on the floor she never trembled, for her
passionate heart had already told her that he never meant to deliver
that infamous letter into his enemies' hands. Then, when there was the
general scramble, when the soldiers rushed away, when the room became
empty and Chauvelin alone remained, she shrank quietly into the darkest
corner of the room, hardly breathing, only waiting.... Waiting for a
sign from him!

She could not see him, but she felt the beloved presence there,
somewhere close to her, and she knew that he would wish her to wait....
She watched him silently... ready to help if he called... equally ready
to remain still and to wait.

Only when the helpless body of her deadly enemy was well out of the
way did she come from out the darkness, and now she stood with the full
light of the lamp illumining her ruddy golden hair, the delicate blush
on her cheek, the flame of love dancing in her glorious eyes.

Thus he saw her as he re-entered the room, and for one second he paused
at the door, for the joy of seeing her there seemed greater than he
could bear.

Forgotten was the agony of mind which he had endured, the humiliations
and the dangers which still threatened: he only remembered that she
loved him and that he worshipped her.

The next moment she lay clasped in his arms. All was still around
them, save for the gentle patter-patter of the rain on the trees of the
ramparts: and from very far away the echo of laughter and music from the
distant revellers.

And then the cry of the sea-mew thrice repeated from just beneath the
window.

Blakeney and Marguerite awoke from their brief dream: once more the
passionate lover gave place to the man of action.

"'Tis Tony, an I mistake not," he said hurriedly, as with loving fingers
still slightly trembling with suppressed passion, he readjusted the hood
over her head.

"Lord Tony?" she murmured.

"Aye! with Hastings and one or two others. I told them to be ready for
us to-night as soon as the place was quiet."

"You were so sure of success then, Percy?" she asked in wonderment.

"So sure," he replied simply.

Then he led her to the window, and lifted her onto the sill. It was not
high from the ground and two pairs of willing arms were there ready to
help her down.

Then he, too, followed, and quietly the little party turned to walk
toward the gate. The ramparts themselves now looked strangely still
and silent: the merrymakers were far away, only one or two passers-by
hurried swiftly past here and there, carrying bundles, evidently bent on
making use of that welcome permission to leave this dangerous soil.

The little party walked on in silence, Marguerite's small hand resting
on her husband's arm. Anon they came upon a group of soldiers who were
standing somewhat perfunctorily and irresolutely close by the open gate
of the Fort.

"Tiens c'est l'Anglais!" said one.

"Morbleu! he is on his way back to England," commented another lazily.

The gates of Boulogne had been thrown open to everyone when the Angelus
was rung and the cannon boomed. The general amnesty had been proclaimed,
everyone had the right to come and go as they pleased, the sentinels had
been ordered to challenge no one and to let everyone pass.

No one knew that the great and glorious plans for the complete
annihilation of the Scarlet Pimpernel and his League had come to naught,
that Collot was taking a mighty hoax to Paris, and that the man who had
thought out and nearly carried through the most fiendishly cruel plan
ever conceived for the destruction of an enemy, lay helpless, bound and
gagged, within his own stronghold.

And so the little party, consisting of Sir Percy and Marguerite, Lord
Anthony Dewhurst and my Lord Hastings, passed unchallenged through the
gates of Boulogne.

Outside the precincts of the town they met my Lord Everingham and Sir
Philip Glynde, who had met the Abbe Foucquet outside his little church
and escorted him safely out of the city, whilst Francois and Felicite
with their old mother had been under the charge of other members of the
League.

"We were all in the procession, dressed up in all sorts of ragged
finery, until the last moment," explained Lord Tony to Marguerite as the
entire party now quickly made its way to the harbour. "We did not know
what was going to happen.... All we knew was that we should be wanted
about this time--the hour when the duel was to have been fought--and
somewhere near here on the southern ramparts... and we always have
strict orders to mix with the crowd if there happens to be one. When we
saw Blakeney raise the candlesticks we guessed what was coming, and we
each went to our respective posts. It was all quite simple."

The young man spoke gaily and lightly, but through the easy banter of
his tone, there pierced the enthusiasm and pride of the soldier in the
glory and daring of his chief.

Between the city walls and the harbour there was much bustle and
agitation. The English packet-boat would lift anchor at the turn of the
tide, and as every one was free to get aboard without leave or passport,
there were a very large number of passengers, bound for the land of
freedom.

Two boats from the "Day-Dream" were waiting in readiness for Sir Percy
and my lady and those whom they would bring with them.

Silently the party embarked, and as the boats pushed off and the sailors
from Sir Percy's yacht bent to their oars, the old Abbe Foucquet began
gently droning a Pater and Ave to the accompaniment of his beads.

He accepted joy, happiness and safety with the same gentle philosophy
as he would have accepted death, but Marguerite's keen and loving ears
caught at the end of each "Pater" a gently murmured request to le bon
Dieu to bless and protect our English rescuer.



Only once did Marguerite make allusion to that terrible time which had
become the past.

They were wandering together down the chestnut alley in the beautiful
garden at Richmond. It was evening, and the air was heavy with the
rich odour of wet earth, of belated roses and dying mignonette. She had
paused in the alley, and placed a trembling hand upon his arm, whilst
raising her eyes filled with tears of tender passion up to his face.

"Percy!" she murmured, "have you forgiven me?"

"What, m'dear?"

"That awful evening in Boulogne... what that fiend demanded... his awful
'either--or'... I brought it all upon you... it was all my fault."

"Nay, my dear, for that 'tis I should thank you..."

"Thank me?"

"Aye," he said, whilst in the fast-gathering dusk she could only just
perceive the sudden hardening of his face, the look of wild passion in
his eyes, "but for that evening in Boulogne, but for that alternative
which that devil placed before me, I might never have known how much you
meant to me."

Even the recollection of all the sorrow, the anxiety, the torturing
humiliations of that night seemed completely to change him; the voice
became trenchant, the hands were tightly clenched. But Marguerite drew
nearer to him; her two hands were on his breast; she murmured gently:

"And now?..."

He folded her in his arms, with an agony of joy, and said earnestly:

"Now I know."





End of Project Gutenberg's The Elusive Pimpernel, by Baroness Emmuska Orczy

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ELUSIVE PIMPERNEL ***

***** This file should be named 2785.txt or 2785.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/7/8/2785/

Produced by J.C. Byers and L.M. Shaf

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
